
1. Zoological Lett. 2016 Mar 21;2:6. doi: 10.1186/s40851-016-0043-6. eCollection
2016.

Mode of reduction in the number of pharyngeal segments within the
sarcopterygians.

Shone V(1), Oulion S(2), Casane D(2), Laurenti P(2), Graham A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Kings College London, London, SE1
1UL UK. (2)Laboratoire Évolution, génomes, comportement, écologie, CNRS
université Paris-Sud UMR 9191, IRD UMR 247, Avenue de la Terrasse, bâtiment 13,
boîte postale 1, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Pharyngeal segmentation is a defining feature of vertebrate embryos
and is apparent as a series of bulges found on the lateral surface of the
embryonic head, the pharyngeal arches. The ancestral condition for gnathostomes
is to have seven pharyngeal segments: jaw, hyoid, and five posterior branchial
arches. However, within the sarcopterygians, the pharyngeal region has undergone 
extensive remodelling that resulted in a reduction in the number of pharyngeal
segments, such that amniotes have only five pharyngeal arches. The aim of this
study is to probe the developmental basis of this loss of pharyngeal segments.
RESULTS: We have therefore compared the development of the pharyngeal arches in
an amniote, the chick, which has five segments, with those of a chondrichthyan,
the catshark, which has seven segments. We have analysed the early phase of
pharyngeal segmentation and we find that in both the most anterior segments form 
first with the posterior segments being added sequentially. We also documented
the patterns of innervation of the pharynx in several vertebrates and note that
the three most anterior segments receive distinct innervation: the first arch
being innervated by the Vth nerve, the second by the VIIth and the third by the
IXth. Finally, we have analysed Hox gene expression, and show that the anterior
limit of Hoxa2 aligns with the second pouch and arch in both chick and catshark, 
while Hoxa3 is transiently associated with the third arch and pouch.
Surprisingly, we have found that Hoxb1 expression is spatially and temporally
dynamic and that it is always associated with the last most recently formed pouch
and that this domains moves caudally as additional pouches are generated.
CONCLUSION: We propose that the first three pharyngeal segments are homologous,
as is the posterior limit of the pharynx, and that the loss of segments occurred 
between these two points. We suggest that this loss results from a curtailment of
the posterior expansion of the pharyngeal endoderm in amniotes at relatively
earlier time point, and thus the generation of fewer segments.

PMCID: PMC4802614
PMID: 27006783  [PubMed]


2. eNeuro. 2015 Dec 26;2(6). pii: ENEURO.0096-15.2015. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0096-15.2015.

Loss of Projections, Functional Compensation, and Residual Deficits in the
Mammalian Vestibulospinal System of Hoxb1-Deficient Mice.

Di Bonito M(1), Boulland JL(2), Krezel W(3), Setti E(1), Studer M(1), Glover
JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Valrose, UMR 7277, University of Nice Sophia Antipolis,
06108 Nice, France; Institute of Biology Valrose, INSERM, U1091, 06108 Nice,
France; Institute of Biology Valrose, CNRS, UMR 7277, 06108 Nice, France.
(2)Division of Physiology, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Oslo, 
0317 Oslo, Norway; Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research, Oslo University
Hospital, 0317 Oslo, Norway. (3)Institut Génétique Biologie Moléculaire
Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 7104, INSERM U 964 , 67404 Illkirch Cedex, Strasbourg,
France.

The genetic mechanisms underlying the developmental and functional specification 
of brainstem projection neurons are poorly understood. Here, we use transgenic
mouse tools to investigate the role of the gene Hoxb1 in the developmental
patterning of vestibular projection neurons, with particular focus on the lateral
vestibulospinal tract (LVST). The LVST is the principal pathway that conveys
vestibular information to limb-related spinal motor circuits and arose early
during vertebrate evolution. We show that the segmental hindbrain expression
domain uniquely defined by the rhombomere 4 (r4) Hoxb1 enhancer is the origin of 
essentially all LVST neurons, but also gives rise to subpopulations of
contralateral medial vestibulospinal tract (cMVST) neurons, vestibulo-ocular
neurons, and reticulospinal (RS) neurons. In newborn mice homozygous for a
Hoxb1-null mutation, the r4-derived LVST and cMVST subpopulations fail to form
and the r4-derived RS neurons are depleted. Several general motor skills appear
unimpaired, but hindlimb vestibulospinal reflexes, which are mediated by the
LVST, are greatly reduced. This functional deficit recovers, however, during the 
second postnatal week, indicating a substantial compensation for the missing
LVST. Despite the compensatory plasticity in balance, adult Hoxb1-null mice
exhibit other behavioral deficits that manifest particularly in proprioception
and interlimb coordination during locomotor tasks. Our results provide a
comprehensive account of the developmental role of Hoxb1 in patterning the
vestibular system and evidence for a remarkable developmental plasticity in the
descending control of reflex limb movements. They also suggest an involvement of 
the lateral vestibulospinal tract in proprioception and in ensuring limb
alternation generated by locomotor circuitry.

PMCID: PMC4697082
PMID: 26730404  [PubMed - in process]


3. Brain Res. 2015 Nov 22. pii: S0006-8993(15)00867-7. doi:
10.1016/j.brainres.2015.11.023. [Epub ahead of print]

Uncovering diversity in the development of central noradrenergic neurons and
their efferents.

Robertson SD(1), Plummer NW(2), Jensen P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Program, Department of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA. (2)Neurobiology Laboratory,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA. (3)Neurobiology Laboratory, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. Electronic address:
Patricia.jensen@nih.gov.

Uncovering the mechanisms that underlie central noradrenergic neuron
heterogeneity is essential to understanding selective subtype vulnerability to
disease and environmental insult. Using recombinase-based intersectional genetic 
fate mapping we have previously demonstrated that molecularly distinct progenitor
populations give rise to mature noradrenergic neurons differing in their
anatomical location, axon morphology and efferent projection pattern. Here we
review the findings from our previous study and extend our analysis of the
noradrenergic subpopulation defined by transient developmental expression of
Hoxb1. Using a combination of intersectional genetic fate mapping and analysis of
a targeted loss of function mutation in Hoxb1, we have now uncovered additional
heterogeneity based on the requirement of some noradrenergic neurons for Hoxb1
expression. By comparing the distribution of noradrenergic neurons derived from
the Hoxb1 expression domain in wild-type and mutant mice, we demonstrate that
Hoxb1 expression is required by a subset of neurons in the pons. Additional fate 
mapping, using a Hoxb1 enhancer element that drives Cre recombinase expression
exclusively in rhombomere 4 of the hindbrain, reveals the existence of a
subpopulation of noradrenergic neurons in the pons with more restricted axonal
targets than the full Hoxb1-derived subpopulation. The unique projection profile 
of this newly defined subpopulation suggests that it may be functionally
distinct. These analyses shed new light on the molecular determinants of
noradrenergic identity in the pons and the overall complexity of the central
noradrenergic system. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled SI:
Noradrenergic System.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26612521  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 13;10(11):e0142387. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142387.
eCollection 2015.

HOXB1 Is a Tumor Suppressor Gene Regulated by miR-3175 in Glioma.

Han L(1), Liu D(1), Li Z(1), Tian N(2), Han Z(2), Wang G(1), Fu Y(1), Guo Z(1),
Zhu Z(3), Du C(1), Tian Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin, China. (2)Department of Cell Biology, College of Life Science, 
Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of 
Interventional Therapy, the First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin,
China.

The HOXB1 gene plays a critical role as an oncogene in diverse tumors. However,
the functional role of HOXB1 and the mechanism regulating HOXB1 expression in
glioma are not fully understood. A preliminary bioinformatics analysis showed
that HOXB1 is ectopically expressed in glioma, and that HOXB1 is a possible
target of miR-3175. In this study, we investigated the function of HOXB1 and the 
relationship between HOXB1 and miR-3175 in glioma. We show that HOXB1 expression 
is significantly downregulated in glioma tissues and cell lines, and that its
expression may be closely associated with the degree of malignancy. Reduced HOXB1
expression promoted the proliferation and invasion of glioma cells, and inhibited
their apoptosis in vitro, and the downregulation of HOXB1 was also associated
with worse survival in glioma patients. More importantly, HOXB1 was shown
experimentally to be a direct target of miR-3175 in this study. The downregulated
expression of miR-3175 inhibited cell proliferation and invasion, and promoted
apoptosis in glioma. The oncogenicity induced by low HOXB1 expression was
prevented by an miR-3175 inhibitor in glioma cells. Our results suggest that
HOXB1 functions as a tumor suppressor, regulated by miR-3175 in glioma. These
results clarify the pathogenesis of glioma and offer a potential target for its
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4643923
PMID: 26565624  [PubMed - in process]


5. Genetics. 2015 Oct;201(2):727-36. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.178079.

Fitness Assays Reveal Incomplete Functional Redundancy of the HoxA1 and HoxB1
Paralogs of Mice.

Ruff JS(1), Saffarini RB(1), Ramoz LL(1), Morrison LC(1), Baker S(1), Laverty
SM(2), Tvrdik P(3), Potts WK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Central Oklahoma,
Edmond, Oklahoma 73034. (3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112. (4)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112 Potts@biology.utah.edu.

Gene targeting techniques have led to the phenotypic characterization of numerous
genes; however, many genes show minimal to no phenotypic consequences when
disrupted, despite many having highly conserved sequences. The standard
explanation for these findings is functional redundancy. A competing hypothesis
is that these genes have important ecological functions in natural environments
that are not needed under laboratory settings. Here we discriminate between these
hypotheses by competing mice (Mus musculus) whose Hoxb1 gene has been replaced by
Hoxa1, its highly conserved paralog, against matched wild-type controls in
seminatural enclosures. This Hoxb1(A1) swap was reported as a genetic
manipulation resulting in no discernible embryonic or physiological phenotype
under standard laboratory tests. We observed a transient decline in first litter 
size for Hoxb1(A1) homozygous mice in breeding cages, but their fitness was
consistently and more dramatically reduced when competing against controls within
seminatural populations. Specifically, males homozygous for the Hoxb1(A1) swap
acquired 10.6% fewer territories and the frequency of the Hoxb1(A1) allele
decreased from 0.500 in population founders to 0.419 in their offspring. The
decrease in Hoxb1(A1) frequency corresponded with a deficiency of both Hoxb1(A1) 
homozygous and heterozygous offspring. These data suggest that Hoxb1 and Hoxa1
are more phenotypically divergent than previously reported and support that sub- 
and/or neofunctionalization has occurred in these paralogous genes leading to a
divergence of gene function and incomplete redundancy. Furthermore, this study
highlights the importance of obtaining fitness measures of mutants in
ecologically relevant conditions to better understand gene function and
evolution.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4596679 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26447130  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 28;5:13533. doi: 10.1038/srep13533.

Dissecting the role of distinct OCT4-SOX2 heterodimer configurations in
pluripotency.

Tapia N(1,)(2), MacCarthy C(2), Esch D(2), Gabriele Marthaler A(2), Tiemann U(1),
Araúzo-Bravo MJ(3,)(4), Jauch R(5,)(6), Cojocaru V(2), Schöler HR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Heine University, Faculty of Medicine, Moorenstraße 5, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. (2)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine,
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Röntgentstraße, 20, Münster 48149, 
Germany. (3)Group of Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia
Health Research Institute, Doctor Begiristain s/n, 20014 San Sebastián, Spain.
(4)IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Alameda Urquijo 36-5, 48011 Bilbao,
Spain. (5)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem 
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. (6)Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China.

The transcription factors OCT4 and SOX2 are required for generating induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and for maintaining embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
OCT4 and SOX2 associate and bind to DNA in different configurations depending on 
the arrangement of their individual DNA binding elements. Here we have
investigated the role of the different OCT4-SOX2-DNA assemblies in regulating and
inducing pluripotency. To this end, we have generated SOX2 mutants that interfere
with specific OCT4-SOX2 heterodimer configurations and assessed their ability to 
generate iPSCs and to rescue ESC self-renewal. Our results demonstrate that the
OCT4-SOX2 configuration that dimerizes on a Hoxb1-like composite, a canonical
element with juxtaposed individual binding sites, plays a more critical role in
the induction and maintenance of pluripotency than any other OCT4-SOX2
configuration. Overall, the results of this study provide new insight into the
protein interactions required to establish a de novo pluripotent network and to
maintain a true pluripotent cell fate.

PMCID: PMC4551974
PMID: 26314899  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 15;406(2):247-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.015. Epub 2015 
Aug 15.

Hoxb1 regulates proliferation and differentiation of second heart field
progenitors in pharyngeal mesoderm and genetically interacts with Hoxa1 during
cardiac outflow tract development.

Roux M(1), Laforest B(1), Capecchi M(2), Bertrand N(1), Zaffran S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF, 13385 Marseille, France; Inserm, UMR_S910,
13385 Marseille, France. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF, 13385 Marseille,
France; Inserm, UMR_S910, 13385 Marseille, France. Electronic address:
stephane.zaffran@univ-amu.fr.

Outflow tract (OFT) anomalies are among the most common congenital heart defects 
found at birth. The embryonic OFT grows by the progressive addition of cardiac
progenitors, termed the second heart field (SHF), which originate from splanchnic
pharyngeal mesoderm. Development of the SHF is controlled by multiple
intercellular signals and transcription factors; however the relationship between
different SHF regulators remains unclear. We have recently shown that Hoxa1 and
Hoxb1 are expressed in a sub-population of the SHF contributing to the OFT. Here,
we report that Hoxb1 deficiency results in a shorter OFT and ventricular septal
defects (VSD). Mechanistically, we show that both FGF/ERK and BMP/SMAD signaling,
which regulate proliferation and differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells and 
OFT morphogenesis, are enhanced in the pharyngeal region in Hoxb1 mutants.
Absence of Hoxb1 also perturbed SHF development through premature myocardial
differentiation. Hence, the positioning and remodeling of the mutant OFT is
disrupted. Hoxa1(-/-) embryos, in contrast, have low percentage of VSD and normal
SHF development. However, compound Hoxa1(-/-); Hoxb1(+/-) embryos display OFT
defects associated with premature SHF differentiation, demonstrating redundant
roles of these factors during OFT development. Our findings provide new insights 
into the gene regulatory network controlling SHF and OFT formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26284287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Jun-Jul;58(6-7):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.05.003.
Epub 2015 May 23.

A new hereditary congenital facial palsy case supports arg5 in HOX-DNA binding
domain as possible hot spot for mutations.

Uyguner ZO(1), Toksoy G(2), Altunoglu U(2), Ozgur H(2), Basaran S(2), Kayserili
H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, 34093 Turkey. Electronic address: o.uyguner@istanbul.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, 34093 Turkey.

Moebius syndrome (MBS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by
rhombencephalic mal development, mainly presenting with facial palsy with limited
gaze abduction. Most cases are sporadic, possibly caused by a combination of
environmental and genetic factors; however, no proven specific associations have 
been yet established. Hereditary congenital facial palsy (HCFP) is an autosomal
dominant congenital dysinnervation syndrome, recognizable by the isolated
dysfunction of the seventh cranial nerve. Mutant mice for Hoxb1 were reported to 
present with facial weakness, resembling MBS. Recently a homozygous mutation
altering arg5 residue of HOXB1 homeodomain into cys5 was identified in two
families with HCFP. We screened 95 sporadic patients diagnosed as MBS or HCFP for
mutations in HOXB1. A novel homozygous alteration was identified in one HCFP
case, affecting the same residue, resulting to his5. In silico protein analysis
predicted stronger HOXB1-DNA binding properties for his5 than cys5 that resulted 
to milder phenotype. It should be noted that, inclusive of the previous report,
only two mutations revealed in HOXB1 associated with HCFP involved the same amino
acid arg5 in HOXB1 residing in HOXB1-DNA-PBX1 ternary complex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26007620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Jun-Jul;58(6-7):336-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.04.002.
Epub 2015 Apr 20.

De novo deletion of HOXB gene cluster in a patient with failure to thrive,
developmental delay, gastroesophageal reflux and bronchiectasis.

Pajusalu S(1), Reimand T(2), Uibo O(3), Vasar M(3), Talvik I(3), Zilina O(4),
Tammur P(5), Õunap K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia; Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Department of
Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Electronic address:
sander.pajusalu@kliinikum.ee. (2)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia; Institute of Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, Department of Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; Children's
Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. (4)Department of Genetics,
United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia; Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (5)Department of
Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(6)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

We report a female patient with a complex phenotype consisting of failure to
thrive, developmental delay, congenital bronchiectasis, gastroesophageal reflux
and bilateral inguinal hernias. Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a 230
kilobase deletion in chromosomal region 17q21.32 (arr[hg19]
17q21.32(46 550 362-46 784 039)×1) encompassing only 9 genes - HOXB1 to HOXB9.
The deletion was not found in her mother or father. This is the first report of a
patient with a HOXB gene cluster deletion involving only HOXB1 to HOXB9 genes. By
comparing our case to previously reported five patients with larger chromosomal
aberrations involving the HOXB gene cluster, we can suppose that HOXB gene
cluster deletions are responsible for growth retardation, developmental delay,
and specific facial dysmorphic features. Also, we suppose that bilateral inguinal
hernias, tracheo-esophageal abnormalities, and lung malformations represent
features with incomplete penetrance. Interestingly, previously published
knock-out mice with targeted heterozygous deletion comparable to our patient did 
not show phenotypic alterations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Brain Struct Funct. 2016 Apr;221(3):1223-43. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0965-8. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Systematic expression analysis of Hox genes at adulthood reveals novel patterns
in the central nervous system.

Hutlet B(1), Theys N(1), Coste C(1,)(2), Ahn MT(1), Doshishti-Agolli K(1), Lizen 
B(1), Gofflot F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology,
GIGA-Neurosciences Research Center, University of Liège, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. francoise.gofflot@uclouvain.be.

Hox proteins are key regulators of animal development, providing positional
identity and patterning information to cells along the rostrocaudal axis of the
embryo. Although their embryonic expression and function are well characterized, 
their presence and biological importance in adulthood remains poorly
investigated. We provide here the first detailed quantitative and neuroanatomical
characterization of the expression of the 39 Hox genes in the adult mouse brain. 
Using RT-qPCR we determined the expression of 24 Hox genes mainly in the
brainstem of the adult brain, with low expression of a few genes in the
cerebellum and the forebrain. Using in situ hybridization (ISH) we have
demonstrated that expression of Hox genes is maintained in territories derived
from the early segmental Hox expression domains in the hindbrain. Indeed, we show
that expression of genes belonging to paralogy groups PG2-8 is maintained in the 
hindbrain derivatives at adulthood. The spatial colinearity, which characterizes 
the early embryonic expression of Hox genes, is still observed in sequential
antero-posterior boundaries of expression. Moreover, the main mossy and climbing 
fibres precerebellar nuclei express PG2-8 Hox genes according to their migration 
origins. Second, ISH confirms the presence of Hox gene transcripts in territories
where they are not detected during development, suggesting neo-expression in
these territories in adulthood. Within the forebrain, we have mapped Hoxb1,
Hoxb3, Hoxb4, Hoxd3 and Hoxa5 expression in restricted areas of the sensory
cerebral cortices as well as in specific thalamic relay nuclei. Our data thus
suggest a requirement of Hox genes beyond their role of patterning genes,
providing a new dimension to their functional relevance in the central nervous
system.

PMID: 25527350  [PubMed - in process]


11. Stem Cells. 2015 Jan;33(1):289-300. doi: 10.1002/stem.1853.

Sall4 is essential for mouse primordial germ cell specification by suppressing
somatic cell program genes.

Yamaguchi YL(1), Tanaka SS, Kumagai M, Fujimoto Y, Terabayashi T, Matsui Y,
Nishinakamura R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kidney Development, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The Spalt-like 4 (Sall4) zinc finger protein is a critical transcription factor
for pluripotency in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). It is also involved in the
formation of a variety of organs, in mice, and humans. We report the essential
roles of Sall4 in mouse primordial germ cell (PGC) specification. PGC
specification is accompanied by the activation of the stem cell program and
repression of the somatic cell program in progenitor cells. Conditional
inactivation of Sall4 during PGC specification led to a reduction in the number
of PGCs in embryonic gonads. Sall4(del/del) PGCs failed to translocate from the
mesoderm to the endoderm and underwent apoptosis. In Sall4(del/del) PGC
progenitors, somatic cell program genes (Hoxa1 and Hoxb1) were derepressed, while
activation of the stem cell program was not impaired. We demonstrated that in
differentiated ESCs, Sall4 bound to these somatic cell program gene loci, which
are reportedly occupied by Prdm1 in embryonic carcinoma cells. Given that Sall4
and Prdm1 are known to associate with the histone deacetylase repressor complex, 
our findings suggest that Sall4 suppresses the somatic cell program possibly by
recruiting the repressor complex in conjunction with Prdm1; therefore, it is
essential for PGC specification.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25263278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1196:37-48. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1242-1_3.

Genetic lineage tracing analysis of anterior Hox expressing cells.

Laforest B(1), Bertrand N, Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, GMGF UMR_S910, Aix-Marseille Université, 13385, Marseille, France.

Cell lineage studies have been widely used in developmental biology to establish 
which cells, and how many cells, in the early embryo will give rise to a specific
structure and its derivatives. Several methods have been developed to label
progenitor cells in the early embryo. Here, we describe the genetic tracing
approach that relies on the use of the recombinase to genetically and permanently
label progenitor cells as well as their progeny through specific activation of a 
conditional reporter gene, the ROSA26 reporter mouse. Labeling of progenitor
cells is spatially controlled by the use of a tissue-specific promoter driving
Cre, the Hoxb1 (IRES-Cre/+) <U+2009>and the Hoxa1-enhIII-cre. ROSA26R mice and Hoxb1
(IRES-Cre/+)<U+2009>or Hoxa1-enhIII-cremice are crossed together to generate embryos at 
different stages of development. Embryos are collected and dissected at a
specific stage of development and fixed in paraformaldehyde. To follow Hoxb1 (+) 
and Hoxa1 (+) progeny, X-gal staining is performed to detect ß-galactosidase
activity in embryos or developing organ such as the heart. Finally,
X-gal-positive cells are observed on whole-mount embryos or dissected organ to
determine the lineage contribution of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 during development.

PMID: 25151156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. BMC Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 5;14:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-14-25.

Targeted germ line disruptions reveal general and species-specific roles for
paralog group 1 hox genes in zebrafish.

Weicksel SE, Gupta A, Zannino DA, Wolfe SA, Sagerström CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation St,/LRB815, Worcester, MA
01605-2324, USA. charles.sagerstrom@umassmed.edu.

BACKGROUND: The developing vertebrate hindbrain is transiently segmented into
rhombomeres by a process requiring Hox activity. Hox genes control specification 
of rhombomere fates, as well as the stereotypic differentiation of
rhombomere-specific neuronal populations. Accordingly, germ line disruption of
the paralog group 1 (PG1) Hox genes Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 causes defects in hindbrain
segmentation and neuron formation in mice. However, antisense-mediated
interference with zebrafish hoxb1a and hoxb1b (analogous to murine Hoxb1 and
Hoxa1, respectively) produces phenotypes that are qualitatively and
quantitatively distinct from those observed in the mouse. This suggests that PG1 
Hox genes may have species-specific functions, or that anti-sense mediated
interference may not completely inactivate Hox function in zebrafish.
RESULTS: Using zinc finger and TALEN technologies, we disrupted hoxb1a and hoxb1b
in the zebrafish germ line to establish mutant lines for each gene. We find that 
zebrafish hoxb1a germ line mutants have a more severe phenotype than reported for
Hoxb1a antisense treatment. This phenotype is similar to that observed in Hoxb1
knock out mice, suggesting that Hoxb1/hoxb1a have the same function in both
species. Zebrafish hoxb1b germ line mutants also have a more severe phenotype
than reported for hoxb1b antisense treatment (e.g. in the effect on Mauthner
neuron differentiation), but this phenotype differs from that observed in Hoxa1
knock out mice (e.g. in the specification of rhombomere 5 (r5) and r6),
suggesting that Hoxa1/hoxb1b have species-specific activities. We also
demonstrate that Hoxb1b regulates nucleosome organization at the hoxb1a promoter 
and that retinoic acid acts independently of hoxb1b to activate hoxb1a
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We generated several novel germ line mutants for zebrafish hoxb1a
and hoxb1b. Our analyses indicate that Hoxb1 and hoxb1a have comparable functions
in zebrafish and mouse, suggesting a conserved function for these genes. In
contrast, while Hoxa1 and hoxb1b share functions in the formation of r3 and r4,
they differ with regards to r5 and r6, where Hoxa1 appears to control formation
of r5, but not r6, in the mouse, whereas hoxb1b regulates formation of r6, but
not r5, in zebrafish. Lastly, our data reveal independent regulation of hoxb1a
expression by retinoic acid and Hoxb1b in zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC4061917
PMID: 24902847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Ophthalmology. 2014 Jul;121(7):1461-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.01.006. Epub
2014 Mar 6.

Diagnostic distinctions and genetic analysis of patients diagnosed with moebius
syndrome.

MacKinnon S(1), Oystreck DT(2), Andrews C(3), Chan WM(3), Hunter DG(4), Engle
EC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Division of Ophthalmology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, South Africa.
(3)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts;
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Ophthalmology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address:
david.hunter@childrens.harvard.edu. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Neurology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; F. B. Kirby Neurobiology Center,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Manton Center for Orphan
Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department
of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of
Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland. Electronic address:
elizabeth.engle@childrens.harvard.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To improve diagnostic assessment in Moebius syndrome by (1) creating
more selective diagnostic subgroups and (2) conducting genetic evaluation in a
large patient cohort.
DESIGN: Prospective, observational study.
PARTICIPANTS: Attendees of 3 consecutive Moebius syndrome conferences held in the
United States, with a prior diagnosis of Moebius syndrome, were invited to
participate.
METHODS: Participants underwent standardized ophthalmologic examination for
Moebius syndrome minimum diagnostic criteria (MDC) (congenital, nonprogressive
facial palsy, and abduction deficit) and genetic testing for HOXA1, HOXB1, and
TUBB3 mutations.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The number of patients meeting MDC and the number of
patients with confirmed genetic mutation.
RESULTS: A total of 112 participants from 107 families enrolled. Nineteen percent
of participants (21/112) did not meet accepted MDC for Moebius syndrome because
they had abduction deficits without facial palsy or facial palsy with full ocular
motility. All 5 families with 2 affected individuals had at least 1 family member
in this category, including 2 siblings with comitant strabismus who harbored a
HOXB1 mutation. Four unrelated participants, also not meeting MDC, had
large-angle exotropia, vertical gaze deficiency, and ptosis consistent with
congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles type 3 (CFEOM3); 1 patient
harbored a novel TUBB3 mutation, and 3 patients harbored previously reported de
novo TUBB3 mutations. Three percent of participants (3/112) met MDC but also had 
restricted vertical gaze. The remaining 88 participants (79%) met MDC and had
full vertical gaze. This group had relatively homogeneous findings, and none had 
a family history of Moebius syndrome. Two previously undescribed phenomena were
observed in this category: (1) volitional Bell's phenomenon and (2) intorsion
with fixation.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the genetic contributors to classic Moebius syndrome remain
elusive, accuracy in clinical evaluation will properly subdivide patients to
facilitate genetic testing as new candidate genes are identified. Failure to test
ocular motility may lead to misdiagnosis of Moebius syndrome, especially in
patients who have facial palsy with full ductions. Patients with exotropia,
vertical gaze limitation, and ptosis do not have classic Moebius syndrome and may
have TUBB3 mutations associated with CFEOM3. To optimize genetic analysis, we
propose adding "full vertical motility" to the MDC for Moebius syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4082742
PMID: 24612975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):639-49. doi: 10.1242/dev.098731.

Hoxb1b controls oriented cell division, cell shape and microtubule dynamics in
neural tube morphogenesis.

Zigman M(1), Laumann-Lipp N, Titus T, Postlethwait J, Moens CB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 329, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Hox genes are classically ascribed to function in patterning the
anterior-posterior axis of bilaterian animals; however, their role in directing
molecular mechanisms underlying morphogenesis at the cellular level remains
largely unstudied. We unveil a non-classical role for the zebrafish hoxb1b gene, 
which shares ancestral functions with mammalian Hoxa1, in controlling progenitor 
cell shape and oriented cell division during zebrafish anterior hindbrain neural 
tube morphogenesis. This is likely distinct from its role in cell fate
acquisition and segment boundary formation. We show that, without affecting major
components of apico-basal or planar cell polarity, Hoxb1b regulates mitotic
spindle rotation during the oriented neural keel symmetric mitoses that are
required for normal neural tube lumen formation in the zebrafish. This function
correlates with a non-cell-autonomous requirement for Hoxb1b in regulating
microtubule plus-end dynamics in progenitor cells in interphase. We propose that 
Hox genes can influence global tissue morphogenesis by control of microtubule
dynamics in individual cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3899817
PMID: 24449840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Oct;26(8):1166-75. doi: 10.1071/RD13169.

EZH2 is essential for development of mouse preimplantation embryos.

Huang XJ(1), Wang X(1), Ma X(1), Sun SC(1), Zhou X(1), Zhu C(1), Liu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Weigang No.1, Nanjing 210095, China. (2)Corresponding author. Email:

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) is essential for the development of the
early mouse preimplantation embryo. Loss of Ezh2 results in embryonic lethality
in mice. Ezh2-deficient embryos display impaired outgrowth potential, defective
establishment of Ezh2-null embryonic stem (ES) cells and adherence and
differentiation of the trophoblast layer into giant cells. We investigated if
Ezh2 controls the fate of embryos at an earlier stage by treating with
cycloheximide (CHX) or microinjecting short interfering RNA (siRNA) to restrict
embryonic Ezh2 expression during preimplantation. CHX inhibited de novo EZH2
protein synthesis in zygotes, suggesting that EZH2 requires de novo synthesis
during post-fertilisation stages. We found that loss of Ezh2 at the pronuclear
stage caused severe growth retardation and reduced blastocyst formation.
Expression of the pluripotency-associated markers Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were
significantly decreased in embryos that had been injected with Ezh2 siRNA. In
addition, Ezh2 loss induced upregulated expression of genes related to the
differentiation of germ layers, including Gata6, Hoxb1 and Hand1. Finally,
apoptosis was increased in the blastocyst embryos with Ezh2 knockdown.
Modification of histone H3-Lysine 27 de-methylation and tri-methylation
(H3K27me2/3) was strongly reduced in Ezh2 siRNA embryos. We conclude that Ezh2 is
essential for early preimplantation embryo development through the regulation of 
epigenetic modification and apoptosis.

PMID: 24153105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cancer Cell Int. 2013 Oct 22;13(1):101. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-13-101.

HOXB1 restored expression promotes apoptosis and differentiation in the HL60
leukemic cell line.

Petrini M, Felicetti F, Bottero L, Errico MC, Morsilli O, Boe A, De Feo A, Carè
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
Sanità, Rome 00161, Italy. alessandra.care@iss.it.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (HOX) genes deregulation has been largely implicated in the 
development of human leukemia. Among the HOXB cluster, HOXB1 was silent in a
number of analyzed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) primary cells and cell lines,
whereas it was expressed in normal terminally differentiated peripheral blood
cells.
METHODS: We evaluated the biological effects and the transcriptome changes
determined by the retroviral transduction of HOXB1 in the human promyelocytic
cell line HL60.
RESULTS: Our results suggest that the enforced expression of HOXB1 reduces cell
growth proliferation, inducing apoptosis and cell differentiation along the
monocytic and granulocytic lineages. Accordingly, gene expression analysis showed
the HOXB1-dependent down-regulation of some tumor promoting genes, paralleled by 
the up-regulation of apoptosis- and differentiation-related genes, thus
supporting a tumor suppressor role for HOXB1 in AML. Finally, we indicated HOXB1 
promoter hypermethylation as a mechanism responsible for HOXB1 silencing.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose HOXB1 as an additional member of the HOX family with
tumour suppressor properties suggesting a HOXB1/ATRA combination as a possible
future therapeutic strategy in AML.

PMCID: PMC3874656
PMID: 24148231  [PubMed]


19. Semin Ophthalmol. 2013 Sep-Nov;28(5-6):427-37. doi: 10.3109/08820538.2013.825288.

The genetic basis of incomitant strabismus: consolidation of the current
knowledge of the genetic foundations of disease.

Graeber CP(1), Hunter DG, Engle EC.

Author information: 
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston , Massachusetts , USA and.

In recent years, our understanding of the genetic foundations of incomitant
strabismus has grown significantly. Much new understanding has been gleaned since
the concept of congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) was introduced
in 2002, and the genetic basis of CCDDs continues to be elucidated. In this
review, we aim to provide an update of the genetic and clinical presentation of
these disorders. Disorders reviewed include Duane syndrome (DS), HOXA1 and HOXB1 
syndromes, Moebius syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles
(CFEOM), and horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis (HGPPS).

PMCID: PMC4098966
PMID: 24138051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 May 1;6(1):11. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-11.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium valproate causes limited transcriptional
change in mouse embryonic stem cells but selectively overrides Polycomb-mediated 
Hoxb silencing.

Boudadi E(1), Stower H, Halsall JA, Rutledge CE, Leeb M, Wutz A, O'Neill LP,
Nightingale KP, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Institute of Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT,
UK. b.m.turner@bham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) cause histone hyperacetylation
and H3K4 hypermethylation in various cell types. They find clinical application
as anti-epileptics and chemotherapeutic agents, but the pathways through which
they operate remain unclear. Surprisingly, changes in gene expression caused by
HDACi are often limited in extent and can be positive or negative. Here we have
explored the ability of the clinically important HDACi valproic acid (VPA) to
alter histone modification and gene expression, both globally and at specific
genes, in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
RESULTS: Microarray expression analysis of ES cells exposed to VPA (1 mM, 8 h),
showed that only 2.4% of genes showed a significant, >1.5-fold transcriptional
change. Of these, 33% were down-regulated. There was no correlation between gene 
expression and VPA-induced changes in histone acetylation or H3K4 methylation at 
gene promoters, which were usually minimal. In contrast, all Hoxb genes showed
increased levels of H3K9ac after exposure to VPA, but much less change in other
modifications showing bulk increases. VPA-induced changes were lost within 24 h
of inhibitor removal. VPA significantly increased the low transcription of Hoxb4 
and Hoxb7, but not other Hoxb genes. Expression of Hoxb genes increased in ES
cells lacking functional Polycomb silencing complexes PRC1 and PRC2.
Surprisingly, VPA caused no further increase in Hoxb transcription in these
cells, except for Hoxb1, whose expression increased several fold. Retinoic acid
(RA) increased transcription of all Hoxb genes in differentiating ES cells within
24 h, but thereafter transcription remained the same, increased progressively or 
fell progressively in a locus-specific manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Hoxb genes in ES cells are unusual in being sensitive to VPA, with
effects on both cluster-wide and locus-specific processes. VPA increases H3K9ac
at all Hoxb loci but significantly overrides PRC-mediated silencing only at Hoxb4
and Hoxb7. Hoxb1 is the only Hoxb gene that is further up-regulated by VPA in
PRC-deficient cells. Our results demonstrate that VPA can exert both cluster-wide
and locus-specific effects on Hoxb regulation.

PMCID: PMC3769143
PMID: 23634885  [PubMed]


21. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Nov;138:143-51. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.03.011. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Retinoic acid receptors' expression and function during zebrafish early
development.

Oliveira E(1), Casado M, Raldúa D, Soares A, Barata C, Piña B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Chemistry, Institute of Environmental Assessment
and Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC), Jordi Girona 18, 08034 Barcelona, Spain; CESAM &
Department of Biology, University of Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.

Retinoic acid (RA) regulates many developmental processes through its binding to 
two types of nuclear receptors, the retinoic acid receptor (RAR), and the
retinoid-X receptor (RXR), which preferentially binds to the 9-cis isomer. Here
we analyzed the RAR/RXR regulatory system during the first 5 days of development 
of zebrafish. Analysis of the relative transcript abundances for the four RAR and
the six RXR zebrafish genes present in the zebrafish genome indicates a
transition from maternal to embryonic transcripts during the first 24h post
fertilization. These changes did not affect the response to exogenous RA of the
known RAR-responsive genes cyp26a1, dhrs3a, hoxb1b, hoxb5a, and hoxb5b. At the
transcriptomic level, RA treatment elicited a negative feedback of genes involved
in the endogenous RA synthesis and reduced levels of transcripts related to organ
and anatomic development. These effects occurred at concentrations at which no
morphological changes were observed. Data analysis suggests that exposure to
exogenous RA results in an advance of the developing program, activating genes
that should remain silent until later developmental stages and inhibiting
expression of development-related genes. We conclude that zebrafish embryos are
particularly sensitive to potential disruptors of the RAR/RXR regulatory system.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23619336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Development. 2013 May;140(10):2190-202. doi: 10.1242/dev.089136. Epub 2013 Apr
11.

A novel role for Pax6 in the segmental organization of the hindbrain.

Kayam G(1), Kohl A, Magen Z, Peretz Y, Weisinger K, Bar A, Novikov O, Brodski C, 
Sela-Donenfeld D.

Author information: 
(1)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, The
Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, 76100 Rehovot,
Israel.

Complex patterns and networks of genes coordinate rhombomeric identities,
hindbrain segmentation and neuronal differentiation and are responsible for later
brainstem functions. Pax6 is a highly conserved transcription factor crucial for 
neuronal development, yet little is known regarding its early roles during
hindbrain segmentation. We show that Pax6 expression is highly dynamic in
rhombomeres, suggesting an early function in the hindbrain. Utilization of
multiple gain- and loss-of-function approaches in chick and mice revealed that
loss of Pax6 disrupts the sharp expression borders of Krox20, Kreisler, Hoxa2,
Hoxb1 and EphA and leads to their expansion into adjacent territories, whereas
excess Pax6 reduces these expression domains. A mutual negative cross-talk
between Pax6 and Krox20 allows these genes to be co-expressed in the hindbrain
through regulation of the Krox20-repressor gene Nab1 by Pax6. Rhombomere
boundaries are also distorted upon Pax6 manipulations, suggesting a mechanism by 
which Pax6 acts to set hindbrain segmentation. Finally, FGF signaling acts
upstream of the Pax6-Krox20 network to regulate Pax6 segmental expression. This
study unravels a novel role for Pax6 in the segmental organization of the early
hindbrain and provides new evidence for its significance in regional organization
along the central nervous system.

PMID: 23578930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003249. Epub 2013 Feb 
7.

Assembly of the auditory circuitry by a Hox genetic network in the mouse
brainstem.

Di Bonito M(1), Narita Y, Avallone B, Sequino L, Mancuso M, Andolfi G, Franzè AM,
Puelles L, Rijli FM, Studer M.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy.

Rhombomeres (r) contribute to brainstem auditory nuclei during development. Hox
genes are determinants of rhombomere-derived fate and neuronal connectivity.
Little is known about the contribution of individual rhombomeres and their
associated Hox codes to auditory sensorimotor circuitry. Here, we show that r4
contributes to functionally linked sensory and motor components, including the
ventral nucleus of lateral lemniscus, posterior ventral cochlear nuclei (VCN),
and motor olivocochlear neurons. Assembly of the r4-derived auditory components
is involved in sound perception and depends on regulatory interactions between
Hoxb1 and Hoxb2. Indeed, in Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutant mice the transmission of
low-level auditory stimuli is lost, resulting in hearing impairments. On the
other hand, Hoxa2 regulates the Rig1 axon guidance receptor and controls
contralateral projections from the anterior VCN to the medial nucleus of the
trapezoid body, a circuit involved in sound localization. Thus, individual
rhombomeres and their associated Hox codes control the assembly of distinct
functionally segregated sub-circuits in the developing auditory brainstem.

PMCID: PMC3567144
PMID: 23408898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Neurobiol. 2013 May;73(5):384-98. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22069. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Embryonic origins of the mouse superior olivary complex.

Marrs GS(1), Morgan WJ, Howell DM, Spirou GA, Mathers PH.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory Neuroscience Research Center, West Virginia University School of
Medicine, Morgantown, WV 26508, USA.

Many areas of the central nervous system are organized into clusters of cell
groups, with component cell groups exhibiting diverse but related functions. One 
such cluster, the superior olivary complex (SOC), is located in the ventral
auditory brainstem in mammals. The SOC is an obligatory contact point for most
projection neurons of the ventral cochlear nucleus and plays central roles in
many aspects of monaural and binaural information processing. Despite their
important interrelated functions, little is known about the embryonic origins of 
SOC nuclei, due in part to a paucity of developmental markers to distinguish
individual cell groups. In this report, we present a collection of novel markers 
for the developing SOC nuclei in mice, including the transcription factors FoxP1,
MafB, and Sox2, and the lineage-marking transgenic line En1-Cre. We use these
definitive markers to examine the rhombic lip and rhombomeric origins of SOC
nuclei and demonstrate that they can serve to uniquely identify SOC nuclei and
subnuclei in newborn pups. The markers are also useful in identifying distinct
nuclear domains within the presumptive SOC as early as embryonic day (E) 14.5,
well before morphological distinction of individual nuclei is evident. These
findings indicate that the mediolateral and dorsoventral position of SOC nuclei
characteristic of the adult brainstem is established during early neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4217651
PMID: 23303740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(9):4607-11.

Weighted gene co-expression network analysis in identification of endometrial
cancer prognosis markers.

Zhu XL(1), Ai ZH, Wang J, Xu YL, Teng YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Endometrial cancer (EC) is the most common gynecologic malignancy.
Identification of potential biomarkers of EC would be helpful for the detection
and monitoring of malignancy, improving clinical outcomes.
METHODS: The Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis method was used to
identify prognostic markers for EC in this study. Moreover, underlying molecular 
mechanisms were characterized by KEGG pathway enrichment and transcriptional
regulation analyses.
RESULTS: Seven gene co-expression modules were obtained, but only the turquoise
module was positively related with EC stage. Among the genes in the turquoise
module, COL5A2 (collagen, type V, alpha 2) could be regulated by PBX (pre-B-cell 
leukemia homeobox 1)1/2 and HOXB1(homeobox B1) transcription factors to be
involved in the focal adhesion pathway; CENP-E (centromere protein E, 312kDa) by 
E2F4 (E2F transcription factor 4, p107/p130-binding); MYCN (v-myc
myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived [avian]) by PAX5
(paired box 5); and BCL-2 (B-cell CLL/ lymphoma 2) and IGFBP-6 (insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 6) by GLI1. They were predicted to be associated
with EC progression via Hedgehog signaling and other cancer related-pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: These data on transcriptional regulation may provide a better
understanding of molecular mechanisms and clues to potential therapeutic targets 
in the treatment of EC.

PMID: 23167388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(2):389-98. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2259-2. 
Epub 2012 Sep 30.

Targeting the HOX/PBX dimer in breast cancer.

Morgan R(1), Boxall A, Harrington KJ, Simpson GR, Gillett C, Michael A, Pandha
HS.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Institute of Bioscience and Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, Leggett Building, University of Surrey, Surrey, GU2 7WG, UK.
r.morgan@surrey.ac.uk

The HOX genes are a family of closely related transcription factors that help to 
define the identity of cells and tissues during embryonic development and which
are also frequently deregulated in a number of malignancies, including breast
cancer. While relatively little is known about the roles that individual HOX
genes play in cancer, it is however clear that these roles can be both
contradictory, with some members acting as oncogenes and some as tumor
suppressors, and also redundant, with several genes essentially having the same
function. Here, we have attempted to address this complexity using the HXR9
peptide to target the interaction between HOX proteins and PBX, a second
transcription factor that serves as a common co-factor for many HOX proteins. We 
show that HXR9 causes apoptosis in a number of breast cancer-derived cell lines
and that sensitivity to HXR9 is directly related to the averaged expression of
HOX genes HOXB1 through to HOXB9, providing a potential biomarker to predict the 
sensitivity of breast tumors to HXR9 or its derivatives. Measuring the expression
of HOX genes HOXB1-HOXB9 in primary tumors revealed that a subset of tumors show 
highly elevated expression indicating that these might be potentially very
sensitive to killing by HXR9. Furthermore, we show that while HXR9 blocks the
oncogenic activity of HOX genes, it does not affect the known tumor-suppressor
properties of a subset of HOX genes in breast cancer.

PMID: 23053648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Nov 19;19(6):805-16. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0251. Print
2012 Dec.

Quantitative, genome-wide analysis of the DNA methylome in sporadic pituitary
adenomas.

Duong CV(1), Emes RD, Wessely F, Yacqub-Usman K, Clayton RN, Farrell WE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University School of
Medicine, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire ST4 7QB, UK.

DNA methylation is one of the several epigenetic modifications that together with
genetic aberrations are hallmarks of tumorigenesis including those emanating from
the pituitary gland. In this study, we examined DNA methylation across 27<U+200A>578 CpG
sites spanning more than 14<U+200A>000 genes in the major pituitary adenoma subtypes.
Genome-wide changes were first determined in a discovery cohort comprising
non-functioning (NF), growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL)-secreting and
corticotroph (CT) adenoma relative to post-mortem pituitaries. Using stringent
cut-off criteria, we validated increased methylation by pyrosequencing in 12 of
16 (75%) genes. Overall, these criteria identified 40 genes in NF, 21 in GH, six 
in PRL and two in CT that were differentially methylated relative to controls. In
a larger independent cohort of adenomas, for genes in which hypermethylation had 
been validated, different frequencies of hypermethylation were apparent, where
the KIAA1822 (HHIPL1) and TFAP2E genes were hypermethylated in 12 of 13 NF
adenomas whereas the COL1A2 gene showed an increase in two of 13 adenomas. For
genes showing differential methylation across and between adenoma subtypes,
pyrosequencing confirmed these findings. In three of 12 genes investigated, an
inverse relationship between methylation and transcript expression was observed
where increased methylation of EML2, RHOD and HOXB1 is associated with
significantly reduced transcript expression. This study provides the first
genome-wide survey of adenoma, subtype-specific epigenomic changes and will prove
useful for identification of biomarkers that perhaps predict or characterise
growth patterns. The functional characterisation of identified genes will also
provide insight of tumour aetiology and identification of new therapeutic
targets.

PMID: 23045325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46036. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046036. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Implication of DNA demethylation and bivalent histone modification for selective 
gene regulation in mouse primordial germ cells.

Mochizuki K(1), Tachibana M, Saitou M, Tokitake Y, Matsui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Resource Center for Biomedical Research, Institute of Development, Aging 
and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) sequentially induce specific genes required for
their development. We focused on epigenetic changes that regulate PGC-specific
gene expression. mil-1, Blimp1, and Stella are preferentially expressed in PGCs, 
and their expression is upregulated during PGC differentiation. Here, we first
determined DNA methylation status of mil-1, Blimp1, and Stella regulatory regions
in epiblast and in PGCs, and found that they were hypomethylated in
differentiating PGCs after E9.0, in which those genes were highly expressed. We
used siRNA to inhibit a maintenance DNA methyltransferase, Dnmt1, in embryonic
stem (ES) cells and found that the flanking regions of all three genes became
hypomethylated and that expression of each gene increased 1.5- to 3-fold. In
addition, we also found 1.5- to 5-fold increase of the PGC genes in the PGCLCs
(PGC-like cells) induced form ES cells by knockdown of Dnmt1. We also obtained
evidence showing that methylation of the regulatory region of mil-1 resulted in
2.5-fold decrease in expression in a reporter assay. Together, these results
suggested that DNA demethylation does not play a major role on initial activation
of the PGC genes in the nascent PGCs but contributed to enhancement of their
expression in PGCs after E9.0. However, we also found that repression of
representative somatic genes, Hoxa1 and Hoxb1, and a tissue-specific gene, Gfap, 
in PGCs was not dependent on DNA methylation; their flanking regions were
hypomethylated, but their expression was not observed in PGCs at E13.5. Their
promoter regions showed the bivalent histone modification in PGCs, that may be
involved in repression of their expression. Our results indicated that epigenetic
status of PGC genes and of somatic genes in PGCs were distinct, and suggested
contribution of epigenetic mechanisms in regulation of the expression of a
specific gene set in PGCs.

PMCID: PMC3461056
PMID: 23029374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Feb 15;521(3):697-708. doi: 10.1002/cne.23200.

The interfascicular trigeminal nucleus: a precerebellar nucleus in the mouse
defined by retrograde neuronal tracing and genetic fate mapping.

Fu Y(1), Tvrdik P, Makki N, Machold R, Paxinos G, Watson C.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, New South Wales 2031, Australia.

We have found a previously unreported precerebellar nucleus located among the
emerging fibers of the motor root of the trigeminal nerve in the mouse, which we 
have called the interfascicular trigeminal nucleus (IF5). This nucleus had
previously been named the tensor tympani part of the motor trigeminal nucleus
(5TT) in rodent brain atlases, because it was thought to be a subset of small
motor neurons of the motor trigeminal nucleus innervating the tensor tympani
muscle. However, following injection of retrograde tracer in the cerebellum, the 
labeled neurons in IF5 were found to be choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)
negative, indicating that they are not motor neurons. The cells of IF5 are
strongly labeled in mice from Wnt1Cre and Atoh1 CreER lineage fate mapping, in
common with the major precerebellar nuclei that arise from the rhombic lip and
that issue mossy fibers. Analysis of sections from mouse Hoxa3, Hoxb1, and Egr2
Cre labeled lineages shows that the neurons of IF5 arise from rhombomeres caudal 
to rhombomere 4, most likely from rhombomeres 6-8. We conclude that IF5 is a
significant precerebellar nucleus in the mouse that shares developmental gene
expression characteristics with mossy fiber precerebellar nuclei that arise from 
the caudal rhombic lip.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3936347
PMID: 22829396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul 13;91(1):171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.05.018. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

HOXB1 founder mutation in humans recapitulates the phenotype of Hoxb1-/- mice.

Webb BD(1), Shaaban S, Gaspar H, Cunha LF, Schubert CR, Hao K, Robson CD, Chan
WM, Andrews C, MacKinnon S, Oystreck DT, Hunter DG, Iacovelli AJ, Ye X, Camminady
A, Engle EC, Jabs EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York 10029, USA.

Members of the highly conserved homeobox (HOX) gene family encode transcription
factors that confer cellular and tissue identities along the antero-posterior
axis of mice and humans. We have identified a founder homozygous missense
mutation in HOXB1 in two families from a conservative German American population.
The resulting phenotype includes bilateral facial palsy, hearing loss, and
strabismus and correlates extensively with the previously reported Hoxb1(-/-)
mouse phenotype. The missense variant is predicted to result in the substitution 
of a cysteine for an arginine at amino acid residue 207 (Arg207Cys), which
corresponds to the highly conserved Arg5 of the homeodomain. Arg5 interacts with 
thymine in the minor groove of DNA through hydrogen bonding and electrostatic
attraction. Molecular modeling and an in vitro DNA-protein binding assay predict 
that the mutation would disrupt these interactions, destabilize the
HOXB1:PBX1:DNA complex, and alter HOXB1 transcriptional activity.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3397264
PMID: 22770981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 3;287(32):26962-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.382960. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Impact of protein/protein interactions on global intermolecular translocation
rates of the transcription factors Sox2 and Oct1 between DNA cognate sites
analyzed by z-exchange NMR spectroscopy.

Takayama Y(1), Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0520, USA.

Oct1 and Sox2 synergistically regulate developmental genes by binding to adjacent
sites within promoters. We have investigated the kinetics of global
intermolecular translocation of Sox2 and Oct1 between cognate sites located on
different DNA molecules by z-exchange NMR spectroscopy. In the Hoxb1 promoter,
the Sox2 and Oct1 sites are immediately adjacent to one another, and the
intermolecular translocation rates are too slow to be measured by z-exchange
spectroscopy. By introducing a 3-bp insertion between the Sox2 and Oct1 sites to 
mimic the spacing in the FGF4 enhancer, the interprotein contact surface is
reduced, and the translocation rates are increased. Interaction between Sox2 and 
the POU-specific domain (POU(S)) of Oct1 does not affect the translocation
mechanism but modulates the rates. Translocation involves only jumping
(dissociation and reassociation) for Sox2, but both jumping and direct
intersegment transfer (no dissociation into free solution) for Oct1. The
dissociation (k(off) ~1.5 s(-1)) and association (k(on) ~5.1 × 10(9) m(-1)s(-1)) 
rate constants for Sox2 are reduced 4-fold and increased 5-fold, respectively, in
the presence of Oct1. k(off) (~3.5 s(-1)) for Oct1 is unaffected by Sox2, whereas
k(on) (~1.3 × 10(9) m(-1)s(-1)) is increased ~13-fold. The direct intermolecular 
translocation rate (k(inter) ~1.8 × 10(4) m(-1)s(-1)) for the POU(S) domain of
Oct1 is reduced 2-fold by Sox2, whereas that for the POU homeodomain (POU(HD)) of
Oct1 (k(inter) ~ 1.7 × 10(4) m(-1)s(-1)) remains unaltered, consistent with the
absence of contacts between Sox2 and POU(HD). The data suggest a model for the
sequence of binding events involved in synergistic gene regulation by Sox2 and
Oct1.

PMCID: PMC3411032
PMID: 22718759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3478-85. doi: 10.1002/art.34573.

Methylation alterations of WT1 and homeobox genes in inflamed muscle biopsy
samples from patients with untreated juvenile dermatomyositis suggest
self-renewal capacity.

Wang M(1), Xie H, Shrestha S, Sredni S, Morgan GA, Pachman LM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Chicago Research Center and Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of methylation alteration in inflamed muscles 
from children with juvenile dermatomyositis (DM) and other idiopathic
inflammatory myopathies (IIMs).
METHODS: Magnetic resonance imaging-directed diagnostic muscle biopsies yielded
samples from 20 children with juvenile DM, which were used for genome-wide DNA
methylation profiling, as were muscle biopsy samples from 4 healthy controls.
Bisulfite treatment followed by pyrosequencing confirmed methylation status in
juvenile DM and other IIMs. Immunohistochemistry defined localization and
expression levels of WT1.
RESULTS: Comparison of genome-wide DNA methylation profiling between juvenile DM 
muscle and normal control muscle revealed 27 genes with a significant methylation
difference between the groups. These genes were enriched with transcription
factors and/or cell cycle regulators and were unrelated to duration of untreated 
disease. Six homeobox genes were among them; ALX4, HOXC11, HOXD3, and HOXD4 were 
hypomethylated, while EMX2 and HOXB1 were hypermethylated. WT1 was significantly 
hypomethylated in juvenile DM (<U+0394>ß = -0.41, P < 0.001). Bisulfite pyrosequencing
verification in samples from 56 patients with juvenile DM confirmed the
methylation alterations of these genes. Similar methylation alterations were
observed in juvenile polymyositis (n = 5) and other IIMs (n = 9). Concordant with
the other findings, WT1 protein was increased in juvenile DM muscle, with average
positive staining of 11.6%, but was undetectable in normal muscle (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that affected muscles of children with juvenile
DM and IIMs have the capacity to be repaired, and that homeobox and WT1 genes are
epigenetically marked to facilitate this repair process, potentially suggesting
new avenues of therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3462248
PMID: 22674142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034762. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Hoxb1 controls anteroposterior identity of vestibular projection neurons.

Chen Y(1), Takano-Maruyama M, Fritzsch B, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas,
United States of America.

The vestibular nuclear complex (VNC) consists of a collection of sensory relay
nuclei that integrates and relays information essential for coordination of eye
movements, balance, and posture. Spanning the majority of the hindbrain alar
plate, the rhombomere (r) origin and projection pattern of the VNC have been
characterized in descriptive works using neuroanatomical tracing. However,
neither the molecular identity nor developmental regulation of individual nucleus
of the VNC has been determined. To begin to address this issue, we found that
Hoxb1 is required for the anterior-posterior (AP) identity of precursors that
contribute to the lateral vestibular nucleus (LVN). Using a gene-targeted
Hoxb1-GFP reporter in the mouse, we show that the LVN precursors originate
exclusively from r4 and project to the spinal cord in the stereotypic pattern of 
the lateral vestibulospinal tract that provides input into spinal motoneurons
driving extensor muscles of the limb. The r4-derived LVN precursors express the
transcription factors Phox2a and Lbx1, and the glutamatergic marker Vglut2, which
together defines them as dB2 neurons. Loss of Hoxb1 function does not alter the
glutamatergic phenotype of dB2 neurons, but alters their stereotyped spinal cord 
projection. Moreover, at the expense of Phox2a, the glutamatergic determinants
Lmx1b and Tlx3 were ectopically expressed by dB2 neurons. Our study suggests that
the Hox genes determine the AP identity and diversity of vestibular precursors,
including their output target, by coordinating the expression of neurotransmitter
determinant and target selection properties along the AP axis.

PMCID: PMC3317634
PMID: 22485187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 27;287(18):14349-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.352864. Epub
2012 Mar 6.

Interplay between minor and major groove-binding transcription factors Sox2 and
Oct1 in translocation on DNA studied by paramagnetic and diamagnetic NMR.

Takayama Y(1), Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0520, USA.

The pathways whereby Sox2 scans DNA to locate its specific binding site are
investigated by NMR in specific and nonspecific Sox2·DNA complexes and in a
specific ternary complex with Oct1 on the Hoxb1 regulatory element. Direct
transfer of Sox2 between nonspecific sites on different DNA molecules occurs
without dissociation into free solution at a rate of ~10(6) M(-1) s(-1), whereas 
one-dimensional sliding proceeds with a diffusion constant of =0.1 µm(2)·s(-1).
Translocation of Sox2 from one specific DNA site to another occurs via jumping,
involving complete dissociation into free solution (k(d) ~5-6 s(-1)) followed by 
reassociation (k(a) ~5 × 10(8) M(-1) s(-1)). In the presence of Oct1 bound to an 
adjacent specific site, k(d) is reduced by more than 10-fold. Paramagnetic
relaxation measurements, however, demonstrate that sparsely populated (<1%),
transient states involving nonspecifically bound Sox2 in rapid exchange with
specifically bound Sox2 are sampled in both binary Sox2·DNA- and ternary
Oct1·Sox2·Hoxb1-DNA-specific complexes. Moreover, Sox2 modulates the mechanism of
translocation of Oct1. Both Sox2 and the Oct1 POU(HD) domain are transiently
released from the specific ternary complex by sliding to an adjacent nonspecific 
site, followed by direct transfer to another DNA molecule, whereas the Oct1
POU(S) domain is fixed to its specific site through direct interactions with
Sox2. Intermolecular translocation of POU(HD) results in the formation of a
bridged intermediate spanning two DNA molecules, enhancing the probability of
complete intermolecular translocation of Oct1. By way of contrast, in the
specific Oct1·DNA binary complex, POU(S) undergoes direct intermolecular
translocation, whereas POU(HD) scans the DNA by sliding.

PMCID: PMC3340251
PMID: 22396547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):219-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.026. Epub 2011
Dec 24.

HoxB8 in noradrenergic specification and differentiation of the autonomic nervous
system.

Huber L(1), Ferdin M, Holzmann J, Stubbusch J, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Different prespecification of mesencephalic and trunk neural crest cells
determines their response to environmental differentiation signals and
contributes to the generation of different autonomic neuron subtypes,
parasympathetic ciliary neurons in the head and trunk noradrenergic sympathetic
neurons. The differentiation of ciliary and sympathetic neurons shares many
features, including the initial BMP-induced expression of noradrenergic
characteristics that is, however, subsequently lost in ciliary but maintained in 
sympathetic neurons. The molecular basis of specific prespecification and
differentiation patterns has remained unclear. We show here that HoxB gene
expression in trunk neural crest is maintained in sympathetic neurons. Ectopic
expression of a single HoxB gene, HoxB8, in mesencephalic neural crest results in
a strongly increased expression of sympathetic neuron characteristics like the
transcription factor Hand2, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) in ciliary neurons. Other subtype-specific
properties like RGS4 and RCad are not induced. HoxB8 has only minor effects in
postmitotic ciliary neurons and is unable to induce TH and DBH in the enteric
nervous system. Thus, we conclude that HoxB8 acts by maintaining noradrenergic
properties transiently expressed in ciliary neuron progenitors during normal
development. HoxC8, HoxB9, HoxB1 and HoxD10 elicit either small and transient or 
no effects on noradrenergic differentiation, suggesting a selective effect of
HoxB8. These results implicate that Hox genes contribute to the differential
development of autonomic neuron precursors by maintaining noradrenergic
properties in the trunk sympathetic neuron lineage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22236961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Development. 2011 Dec;138(24):5403-14. doi: 10.1242/dev.069849.

Dual embryonic origin of the mammalian otic vesicle forming the inner ear.

Freyer L(1), Aggarwal V, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1301 Morris Park 
Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. laina.freyer@phd.einstein.yu.edu

The inner ear and cochleovestibular ganglion (CVG) derive from a specialized
region of head ectoderm termed the otic placode. During embryogenesis, the otic
placode invaginates into the head to form the otic vesicle (OV), the primordium
of the inner ear and CVG. Non-autonomous cell signaling from the hindbrain to the
OV is required for inner ear morphogenesis and neurogenesis. In this study, we
show that neuroepithelial cells (NECs), including neural crest cells (NCCs), can 
contribute directly to the OV from the neural tube. Using Wnt1-Cre, Pax3(Cre/+)
and Hoxb1(Cre/+) mice to label and fate map cranial NEC lineages, we have
demonstrated that cells from the neural tube incorporate into the otic epithelium
after otic placode induction has occurred. Pax3(Cre/+) labeled a more extensive
population of NEC derivatives in the OV than did Wnt1-Cre. NEC derivatives
constitute a significant population of the OV and, moreover, are regionalized
specifically to proneurosensory domains. Descendents of Pax3(Cre/+) and Wnt1-Cre 
labeled cells are localized within sensory epithelia of the saccule, utricle and 
cochlea throughout development and into adulthood, where they differentiate into 
hair cells and supporting cells. Some NEC derivatives give rise to neuroblasts in
the OV and CVG, in addition to their known contribution to glial cells. This
study defines a dual cellular origin of the inner ear from sensory placode
ectoderm and NECs, and changes the current paradigm of inner ear neurosensory
development.

PMCID: PMC3222214
PMID: 22110056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26791. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026791. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Epigenetic changes with dietary soy in cynomolgus monkeys.

Howard TD(1), Ho SM, Zhang L, Chen J, Cui W, Slager R, Gray S, Hawkins GA,
Medvedovic M, Wagner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States of America.
tdhoward@wfubmc.edu

Nutritional interventions are important alternatives for reducing the prevalence 
of many chronic diseases. Soy is a good source of protein that contains
isoflavones, including genistein and daidzein, and may alter the risk of obesity,
Type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, and reproductive cancers. 
We have shown previously in nonhuman primates that soy protein containing
isoflavones leads to improved body weight, insulin sensitivity, lipid profiles,
and atherosclerosis compared to protein without soy isoflavones (casein), and
does not increase the risk of cancer. Since genistein has been shown to alter DNA
methylation, we compared the methylation profiles of cynomolgus monkeys, from
multiple tissues, eating two high-fat, typical American diets (TAD) with similar 
macronutrient contents, with or without soy protein. DNA methylation status was
successfully determined for 80.6% of the probes in at least one tissue using
Illumina's HumanMethylation27 BeadChip. Overall methylation increased in liver
and muscle tissue when monkeys switched from the TAD-soy to the TAD-casein diets.
Genes involved in epigenetic processes, specifically homeobox genes (HOXA5,
HOXA11, and HOXB1), and ABCG5 were among those that changed between diets. These 
data support the use of the HumanMethylation27 BeadChip in cynomolgus monkeys and
identify epigenetic changes associated with dietary interventions with soy
protein that may potentially affect the etiology of complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3201974
PMID: 22046358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025603. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

An integrated meta-analysis of two variants in HOXA1/HOXB1 and their effect on
the risk of autism spectrum disorders.

Song RR(1), Zou L, Zhong R, Zheng XW, Zhu BB, Chen W, Liu L, Miao XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maternal and Child Health, School of Public Health, Tongji
Medical College, Huangzhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: HOXA1 and HOXB1 have been strongly posed as candidate genes for
autism spectrum disorders (ASD) given their important role in the development of 
hindbrain. The A218G (rs10951154) in HOXA1 and the insertion variant in HOXB1
(nINS/INS, rs72338773) were of special interest for ASD but with inconclusive
results. Thus, we conducted a meta-analysis integrating case-control and
transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) studies to clearly discern the effect of
these two variants in ASD.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Multiple electronic databases were searched to identify
studies assessing the A218G and/or nINS/INS variant in ASD. Data from
case-control and TDT studies were analyzed in an allelic model using the Catmap
software. A total of 10 and 7 reports were found to be eligible for meta-analyses
of A218G and nINS/INS variant, respectively. In overall meta-analysis, the pooled
OR for the 218G allele and the INS allele was 0.97 (95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.76-1.25,
P(heterogeneity)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029) and 1.14 (95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.97-1.33,
P(heterogeneity)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.269), respectively. No significant association was also
identified between these two variants and ASD risk in stratified analysis.
Further, cumulative meta-analysis in chronologic order showed the inclination
toward null-significant association for both variants with continual adding
studies. Additionally, although the between-study heterogeneity regarding the
A218G is not explained by study design, ethnicity, and sample size, the sensitive
analysis indicated the stability of the result.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggests the HOXA1 A218G and HOXB1 nINS/INS
variants may not contribute significantly to ASD risk.

PMCID: PMC3183057
PMID: 21980499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Dec;124(2):370-7. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr245. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Development of a neural teratogenicity test based on human embryonic stem cells: 
response to retinoic acid exposure.

Colleoni S(1), Galli C, Gaspar JA, Meganathan K, Jagtap S, Hescheler J,
Sachinidis A, Lazzari G.

Author information: 
(1)Avantea, Laboratory of Reproductive Technologies, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
silviacolleoni@avantea.it

The aim of this study was the development of an alternative testing method based 
on human embryonic stem cells for prenatal developmental toxicity with particular
emphasis on early neural development. To this purpose, we designed an in vitro
protocol based on the generation of neural rosettes, representing the in vitro
counterpart of the developing neural plate and neural tube, and we challenged
this complex cell model with retinoic acid (RA), a well-known teratogenic agent. 
The cells were exposed to different concentrations of RA during the process of
rosettes formation. Morphological and molecular parameters were evaluated in
treated as compared with untreated cells to detect both cytotoxicity and specific
neural toxicity. Transcriptomic analysis was performed with microarray Affymetrix
platform and validated by quantitative real-time PCR for genes relevant to early 
neural development such as HoxA1, HoxA3, HoxB1, HoxB4, FoxA2, FoxC1, Otx2, and
Pax7. The results obtained demonstrated that neural rosette forming cells respond
to RA with clear concentration-dependent morphological, and gene expression
changes remarkably similar to those induced in vivo, in the developing neural
tube, by RA exposure. This strict correspondence indicates that the neural
rosette protocol described is capable of detecting specific teratogenic
mechanisms causing perturbations of early neural development and therefore
represents a promising alternative test for human prenatal developmental
toxicity.

PMID: 21934132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):356-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.05.676. Epub 2011 
Jul 23.

A screen for hoxb1-regulated genes identifies ppp1r14al as a regulator of the
rhombomere 4 Fgf-signaling center.

Choe SK(1), Zhang X, Hirsch N, Straubhaar J, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605-2324, USA.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain into multiple rhombomeres is essential
for proper formation of the cerebellum, cranial nerves and cranial neural crest. 
Paralog group 1 (PG1) hox genes are expressed early in the caudal hindbrain and
are required for rhombomere formation. Accordingly, loss of PG1 hox function
disrupts development of caudal rhombomeres in model organisms and causes
brainstem defects, associated with cognitive impairment, in humans. In spite of
this important role for PG1 hox genes, transcriptional targets of PG1 proteins
are not well characterized. Here we use ectopic expression together with
embryonic dissection to identify novel targets of the zebrafish PG1 gene hoxb1b. 
Of 100 genes up-regulated by hoxb1b, 54 were examined and 25 were found to
represent novel hoxb1b regulated hindbrain genes. The ppp1r14al gene was analyzed
in greater detail and our results indicate that Hoxb1b is likely to directly
regulate ppp1r14al expression in rhombomere 4. Furthermore, ppp1r14al is
essential for establishment of the earliest hindbrain signaling-center in
rhombomere 4 by regulating expression of fgf3.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3183228
PMID: 21787765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 13;31(28):10359-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0057-11.2011.

MeCP2 is critical within HoxB1-derived tissues of mice for normal lifespan.

Ward CS(1), Arvide EM, Huang TW, Yoo J, Noebels JL, Neul JL.

Author information: 
(1)Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Rett syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), a transcriptional regulator. In addition to
cognitive, communication, and motor problems, affected individuals have
abnormalities in autonomic function and respiratory control that may contribute
to premature lethality. Mice lacking Mecp2 die early and recapitulate the
autonomic and respiratory phenotypes seen in humans. The association of autonomic
and respiratory deficits with premature death suggests that Mecp2 is critical
within autonomic and respiratory control centers for survival. To test this, we
compared the autonomic and respiratory phenotypes of mice with a null allele of
Mecp2 to mice with Mecp2 removed from their brainstem and spinal cord. We found
that MeCP2 is necessary within the brainstem and spinal cord for normal lifespan,
normal control of heart rate, and respiratory response to hypoxia. Restoration of
MeCP2 in a subset of the cells in this same region is sufficient to rescue
abnormal heart rate and abnormal respiratory response to hypoxia. Furthermore,
restoring MeCP2 function in neural centers critical for autonomic and respiratory
function alleviates the lethality associated with loss of MeCP2 function,
supporting the notion of targeted therapy toward treating Rett syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3175623
PMID: 21753013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;19(3):721-4.

[Construction and identification of a eukaryotic expression vector containing
human homeobox gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Li TL(1), Zhao CT, Zhang ZG, Liu ZZ, Liu SH, Meng DM, Hang YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Qingdao University Medical College Affiliated
Hospital, Qingdao 266003, Shangdong Province, China.

In order to investigate the special role of HOXB4 in expansion and self renewal
of hematopoietic stem cells, the cDNA of HOXB4 was extracted and cloned from
umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells by using RT-PCR. Then the eukaryotic
expression bicistronic plasmid vector pIRES2-EGFP/HOXB4 was designed and
constructed after cutting HOXB4 and pIRES2-EGFP respectively by restriction
enzyme EcoRI and BamHI. The recombinant plasmid was delivered into competent
cells of Escherichia coli. The successful construction of plasmid was confirmed
by the identification of endonuclease cutting and sequencing. The results showed 
that the HOXB4 cDNA was cloned successfully from umbilical cord blood mononuclear
cells and the recombinant eukaryotic expression bicistronic plasmid vector was
constructed, and then introduced it into 293T cells successfully. It is concluded
that a pIRES2-EGFP/HoxB1 eukaryotic expression bicistronic plasmid vector has
been constructed successfully, which results provide a useful material basis for 
exploration of HoxB4 function in the proliferation and differentiation of
hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 21729558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Dyn. 2011 Aug;240(8):1880-8. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22679. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Plasticity of neural crest-placode interaction in the developing visceral nervous
system.

Chen Y(1), Takano-Maruyama M, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 
78249, USA.

The reciprocal relationship between rhombomere (r)-derived cranial neural crest
(NC) and epibranchial placodal cells derived from the adjacent branchial arch is 
critical for visceral motor and sensory gangliogenesis, respectively. However, it
is unknown whether the positional match between these neurogenic precursors is
hard-wired along the anterior-posterior (A/P) axis. Here, we use the interaction 
between r4-derived NC and epibranchial placode-derived geniculate ganglion as a
model to address this issue. In Hoxa1(-/-) b1(-/-) embryos, r2 NC compensates for
the loss of r4 NC. Specifically, a population of r2 NC cells is redirected toward
the geniculate ganglion, where they differentiate into postganglionic (motor)
neurons. Reciprocally, the inward migration of the geniculate ganglion is
associated with r2 NC. The ability of NC and placodal cells to, respectively,
differentiate and migrate despite a positional mismatch along the A/P axis
reflects the plasticity in the relationship between the two neurogenic precursors
of the vertebrate head.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3285277
PMID: 21674689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020197. Epub 2011 May 26.

Directed neural differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells is a sensitive
system for the identification of novel Hox gene effectors.

Bami M(1), Episkopou V, Gavalas A, Gouti M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox family of homeodomain transcription factors
plays fundamental roles in regulating cell specification along the anterior
posterior axis during development of all bilaterian animals by controlling cell
fate choices in a highly localized, extracellular signal and cell context
dependent manner. Some studies have established downstream target genes in
specific systems but their identification is insufficient to explain either the
ability of Hox genes to direct homeotic transformations or the breadth of their
patterning potential. To begin delineating Hox gene function in neural
development we used a mouse ES cell based system that combines efficient neural
differentiation with inducible Hoxb1 expression. Gene expression profiling
suggested that Hoxb1 acted as both activator and repressor in the short term but 
predominantly as a repressor in the long run. Activated and repressed genes
segregated in distinct processes suggesting that, in the context examined, Hoxb1 
blocked differentiation while activating genes related to early developmental
processes, wnt and cell surface receptor linked signal transduction and
cell-to-cell communication. To further elucidate aspects of Hoxb1 function we
used loss and gain of function approaches in the mouse and chick embryos. We show
that Hoxb1 acts as an activator to establish the full expression domain of CRABPI
and II in rhombomere 4 and as a repressor to restrict expression of Lhx5 and
Lhx9. Thus the Hoxb1 patterning activity includes the regulation of the cellular 
response to retinoic acid and the delay of the expression of genes that commit
cells to neural differentiation. The results of this study show that ES neural
differentiation and inducible Hox gene expression can be used as a sensitive
model system to systematically identify Hox novel target genes, delineate their
interactions with signaling pathways in dictating cell fate and define the extent
of functional overlap among different Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC3102681
PMID: 21637844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 28;6(3):e18010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018010.

XMeis3 is necessary for mesodermal Hox gene expression and function.

In der Rieden PM(1), Jansen HJ, Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Studiekring, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Hox transcription factors provide positional information during patterning of the
anteroposterior axis. Hox transcription factors can co-operatively bind with
PBC-class co-factors, enhancing specificity and affinity for their appropriate
binding sites. The nuclear localisation of these co-factors is regulated by the
Meis-class of homeodomain proteins. During development of the zebrafish
hindbrain, Meis3 has previously been shown to synergise with Hoxb1 in the
autoregulation of Hoxb1. In Xenopus XMeis3 posteriorises the embryo upon ectopic 
expression. Recently, an early temporally collinear expression sequence of Hox
genes was detected in Xenopus gastrula mesoderm (see intro. P3). There is
evidence that this sequence sets up the embryo's later axial Hox expression
pattern by time-space translation. We investigated whether XMeis3 is involved in 
regulation of this early mesodermal Hox gene expression. Here, we present
evidence that XMeis3 is necessary for expression of Hoxd1, Hoxb4 and Hoxc6 in
mesoderm during gastrulation. In addition, we show that XMeis3 function is
necessary for the progression of gastrulation. Finally, we present evidence for
synergy between XMeis3 and Hoxd1 in Hoxd1 autoregulation in mesoderm during
gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3065463
PMID: 21464931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Stem Cells. 2011 May;29(5):858-70. doi: 10.1002/stem.630.

Anterior Hox genes interact with components of the neural crest specification
network to induce neural crest fates.

Gouti M(1), Briscoe J, Gavalas A.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens (BRFAA), Athens, Greece.

Hox genes play a central role in neural crest (NC) patterning particularly in the
cranial region of the body. Despite evidence that simultaneous loss of Hoxa1 and 
Hoxb1 function resulted in NC specification defects, the role of Hox genes in NC 
specification has remained unclear due to extended genetic redundancy among Hox
genes. To circumvent this problem, we expressed anterior Hox genes in the trunk
neural tube of the developing chick embryo. This demonstrated that anterior Hox
genes play a central role in NC cell specification by rapidly inducing the key
transcription factors Snail2 and Msx1/2 and a neural progenitor to NC cell fate
switch characterized by cell adhesion changes and an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Cells delaminated from dorsal and medial neural tube levels and
generated ectopic neurons, glia progenitors, and melanocytes. The mobilization of
the NC genetic cascade was dependent upon bone morphogenetic protein signaling
and optimal levels of Notch signaling. Therefore, anterior Hox patterning genes
participate in NC specification and EMT by interacting with NC-inducing signaling
pathways and regulating the expression of key genes involved in these processes.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3184476
PMID: 21433221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):266-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.029. Epub 2011 
Mar 6.

Hox genes define distinct progenitor sub-domains within the second heart field.

Bertrand N(1), Roux M, Ryckebüsch L, Niederreither K, Dollé P, Moon A, Capecchi
M, Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale et Génomique Fonctionnelle, Inserm UMR_S910,
Université d'Aix-Marseille, 27 Bd Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
nicolas.bertrand@univmed.fr

Much of the heart, including the atria, right ventricle and outflow tract (OFT)
is derived from a progenitor cell population termed the second heart field (SHF) 
that contributes progressively to the embryonic heart during cardiac looping.
Several studies have revealed anterior-posterior patterning of the SHF, since the
anterior region (anterior heart field) contributes to right ventricular and OFT
myocardium whereas the posterior region gives rise to the atria. We have
previously shown that Retinoic Acid (RA) signal participates to this patterning. 
We now show that Hoxb1, Hoxa1, and Hoxa3, as downstream RA targets, are expressed
in distinct sub-domains within the SHF. Our genetic lineage tracing analysis
revealed that Hoxb1, Hoxa1 and Hoxa3-expressing cardiac progenitor cells
contribute to both atria and the inferior wall of the OFT, which subsequently
gives rise to myocardium at the base of pulmonary trunk. By contrast to
Hoxb1(Cre), the contribution of Hoxa1-enhIII-Cre and Hoxa3(Cre)-labeled cells is 
restricted to the distal regions of the OFT suggesting that proximo-distal
patterning of the OFT is related to SHF sub-domains characterized by
combinatorial Hox genes expression. Manipulation of RA signaling pathways showed 
that RA is required for the correct deployment of Hox-expressing SHF cells. This 
report provides new insights into the regulatory gene network in SHF cells
contributing to the atria and sub-pulmonary myocardium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3115524
PMID: 21385575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 15;352(2):382-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.003. Epub 2011 
Feb 12.

Hoxb3 negatively regulates Hoxb1 expression in mouse hindbrain patterning.

Wong EY(1), Wang XA, Mak SS, Sae-Pang JJ, Ling KW, Fritzsch B, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The spatial regulation of combinatorial expression of Hox genes is critical for
determining hindbrain rhombomere (r) identities. To address the cross-regulatory 
relationship between Hox genes in hindbrain neuronal specification, we have
generated a gain-of-function transgenic mouse mutant Hoxb3(Tg) using the Hoxb2
r4-specific enhancer element. Interestingly, in r4 of the Hoxb3(Tg) mutant where 
Hoxb3 was ectopically expressed, the expression of Hoxb1 was specifically
abolished. The hindbrain neuronal defects of the Hoxb3(Tg) mutant mice were
similar to those of Hoxb1(-/-) mutants. Therefore, we hypothesized that Hoxb3
could directly suppress Hoxb1 expression. We first identified a novel Hoxb3
binding site S3 on the Hoxb1 locus and confirmed protein binding to this site by 
EMSA, and by in vivo ChIP analysis using P19 cells and hindbrain tissues from the
Hoxb3(Tg) mutant. We further showed that Hoxb3 could suppress Hoxb1
transcriptional activity by chick in ovo luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, in 
E10.5 wildtype caudal hindbrain, where Hoxb1 is not expressed, we showed by in
vivo ChIP that Hoxb3 was consistently bound to the S3 site on the Hoxb1 gene.
This study reveals a novel negative regulatory mechanism by which Hoxb3 as a
posterior gene serves to restrict Hoxb1 expression in r4 by direct
transcriptional repression to maintain the rhombomere identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21320481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 1;350(1):154-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.011. Epub 2010
Oct 20.

Retinoic acid-dependent establishment of positional information in the hindbrain 
was conserved during vertebrate evolution.

Ishioka A(1), Jindo T, Kawanabe T, Hatta K, Parvin MS, Nikaido M, Kuroyanagi Y,
Takeda H, Yamasu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama 
University, Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama 338-8570, Japan.

Zebrafish hoxb1b is expressed during epiboly in the posterior neural plate, with 
its anterior boundary at the prospective r4 region providing a positional cue for
hindbrain formation. A similar function and expression is known for Hoxa1 in
mice, suggesting a shared regulatory mechanism for hindbrain patterning in
vertebrate embryos. To understand the evolution of the regulatory mechanisms of
key genes in patterning of the central nervous system, we examined how hoxb1b
transcription is regulated in zebrafish embryos and compared the regulatory
mechanisms between mammals and teleosts that have undergone an additional genome 
duplication. By promoter analysis, we found that the expression of the reporter
gene recapitulated hoxb1b expression when driven in transgenic embryos by a
combination of the upstream 8.0-kb DNA and downstream 4.6-kb DNA. Furthermore,
reporter expression expanded anteriorly when transgenic embryos were exposed to
retinoic acid (RA) or LiCl, or injected with fgf3/8 mRNA, implicating the
flanking DNA examined here in the responsiveness of hoxb1b to posteriorizing
signals. We further identified at least two functional RA responsive elements in 
the downstream DNA that were shown to be major regulators of early hoxb1b
expression during gastrulation, while the upstream DNA, which harbors repetitive 
sequences with apparent similarity to the autoregulatory sequence of mouse Hoxb1,
contributed only to later hoxb1b expression, during somitogenesis. Possible
implications in vertebrate evolution are discussed based on these findings.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20969843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Autism. 2010 May 25;1(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-1-9.

Candidate gene study of HOXB1 in autism spectrum disorder.

Muscarella LA(1), Guarnieri V, Sacco R, Curatolo P, Manzi B, Alessandrelli R,
Giana G, Militerni R, Bravaccio C, Lenti C, Saccani M, Schneider C, Melmed R,
D'Agruma L, Persico AM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Service, IRCCS 'Casa Sollievo dalla Sofferenza', San Giovanni
Rotondo, FG, Italy. l.dagruma@operapadrepio.it.

BACKGROUND: HOXB1 plays a major role in brainstem morphogenesis and could partly 
determine the cranial circumference in conjunction with HOXA1. In our sample,
HOXA1 alleles significantly influence head growth rates both in autistic patients
and in population controls. An initial report, suggesting that HOXB1 could confer
autism vulnerability in interaction with HOXA1, was not confirmed by five small
association studies.
METHODS: Our sample includes 269 autistic individuals, belonging to 219 simplex
and 28 multiplex families. A mutational analysis of the two exons and flanking
intronic sequences of the HOXB1 gene was carried out in 84 autistic patients by
denaturing high performance liquid chromatography, followed by DNA sequencing.
Identified rare variants were then searched by a restriction analysis in 236
autistic patients and 325-345 controls. Case-control and family-based association
studies were performed on two common variants in 169 Italian patients versus 184 
Italian controls and in 247 trios.
RESULTS: We identified three common polymorphisms, rs72338773 [c.82insACAGCGCCC
(INS/nINS)], rs12939811 [c.309A>T (Q103H)], and rs7207109 [c.450G>A (A150A)] and 
three rare variants, namely IVS1+63G>A, rs35115415 [c.702G>A (V234V)] and
c.872_873delinsAA (S291N). SNPs rs72338773 and rs12939811 were not associated
with autism, using either a case-control (alleles, exact P = 0.13) or a
family-based design [transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT)chi2 = 1.774, P =
0.183]. The rare variants, all inherited from one of the parents, were present in
two Italian and in two Caucasian-American families. Autistic probands in two
families surprisingly inherited a distinct rare variant from each parent. The
IVS1+63A allele was present in 3/690 control chromosomes, whereas rare alleles at
rs35115415 and c.872_873delinsAA (S291N) were not found in 662 and 650 control
chromosomes, respectively. The INS-T309 allele influenced head size, but its
effect appears more modest and shows no interaction with HOXA1 alleles. The
INS-T309 allele is also associated with more severe stereotypic behaviours,
according to ADI-R scores (N = 60 patients, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB1 mutations do not represent a common cause of autism, nor do
HOXB1 common variants play important roles in autism vulnerability. HOXB1
provides minor, albeit detectable contributions to head circumference in autistic
patients, with HOXA1 displaying more prominent effects. HOXB1 variants may
modulate the clinical phenotype, especially in the area of stereotypic
behaviours.

PMCID: PMC2913946
PMID: 20678259  [PubMed]


51. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):597-608. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.024.

GSK-3 promotes conditional association of CREB and its coactivators with MEIS1 to
facilitate HOX-mediated transcription and oncogenesis.

Wang Z(1), Iwasaki M, Ficara F, Lin C, Matheny C, Wong SH, Smith KS, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):529-31.

Acute leukemias induced by MLL chimeric oncoproteins are among the subset of
cancers distinguished by a paradoxical dependence on GSK-3 kinase activity for
sustained proliferation. We demonstrate here that GSK-3 maintains the MLL
leukemia stem cell transcriptional program by promoting the conditional
association of CREB and its coactivators TORC and CBP with homedomain protein
MEIS1, a critical component of the MLL-subordinate program, which in turn
facilitates HOX-mediated transcription and transformation. This mechanism also
applies to hematopoietic cells transformed by other HOX genes, including CDX2,
which is highly expressed in a majority of acute myeloid leukemias, thus
providing a molecular approach based on GSK-3 inhibitory strategies to target
HOX-associated transcription in a broad spectrum of leukemias.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919232
PMID: 20541704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biophys J. 2010 Apr 7;98(7):1285-93. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2009.12.4274.

Tethered-hopping model for protein-DNA binding and unbinding based on
Sox2-Oct1-Hoxb1 ternary complex simulations.

Lian P(1), Liu LA, Shi Y, Bu Y, Wei D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Shandong University, Jinan, People's Republic of
China.

The sliding and hopping models encapsulate the essential protein-DNA binding
process for binary complex formation and dissociation. However, the effects of a 
cofactor protein on the protein-DNA binding process that leads to the formation
of a ternary complex remain largely unknown. Here we investigate the effect of
the cofactor Sox2 on the binding and unbinding of Oct1 with the Hoxb1 control
element. We simulate the association of Oct1 with Sox2-Hoxb1 using molecular
dynamics simulations, and the dissociation of Oct1 from Sox2-Hoxb1 using steered 
molecular dynamics simulations, in analogy to a hopping event of Oct1. We compare
the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of three model complexes (the wild-type 
and two mutants) in which the Oct1-DNA base-specific interactions or the
Sox2-Oct1 protein-protein interactions are largely abolished. We find that
Oct1-DNA base-specific interactions contribute significantly to the total
interaction energy of the ternary complex, and that nonspecific Oct1-DNA
interactions are sufficient for driving the formation of the protein-DNA
interface. The Sox2-Oct1 protein-protein binding interface is largely
hydrophobic, with remarkable shape complementarity. This interface promotes the
formation of the ternary complex and slows the dissociation of Oct1 from its
DNA-binding site. We propose a simple two-step reaction model of protein-DNA
binding, called the tethered-hopping model, that explains the importance of the
cofactor Sox2 and may apply to similar ternary protein-DNA complexes.

Copyright (c) 2010 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC2849056
PMID: 20371328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Cell Biochem. 2010 May 15;110(2):484-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22563.

Pentapeptide insertion mutagenesis of the Hoxa1 protein: mapping of transcription
activation and DNA-binding regulatory domains.

Lambert B(1), Vandeputte J, Desmet PM, Hallet B, Remacle S, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Veterinary Sciences, Life Sciences Institute (ISV), Université
Catholique de Louvain, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

The mode of action of Hoxa1, like that of most Hox proteins, remains poorly
characterized. In an effort to identify functional determinants contributing to
the activity of Hoxa1 as a transcription factor, we generated 18 pentapeptide
insertion mutants of the Hoxa1 protein and we assayed them in transfected cells
for their activity on target enhancers from the EphA2 and Hoxb1 genes known to
respond to Hoxa1 in the developing hindbrain. Only four mutants displayed a
complete loss-of-function. Three of them contained an insertion in the
homeodomain of Hoxa1, whereas the fourth loss-of-function mutant harbored an
insertion in the very N-terminal end of the protein. Transcription activation
assays in yeast further revealed that the integrity of both the N-terminal end
and homeodomain is required for Hoxa1-mediated transcriptional activation.
Furthermore, an insertion in the serine-threonine-proline rich C-terminal
extremity of Hoxa1 induced an increase in activity in mammalian cells as well as 
in the yeast assay. The C-terminal extremity thus modulates the transcriptional
activation capacity of the protein. Finally, electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed that the N-terminal extremity of the protein also exerts a
modulatory influence on DNA binding by Hoxa1-Pbx1a heterodimers.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20336696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Dyn. 2010 Apr;239(4):1155-61. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22273.

Placodal sensory ganglia coordinate the formation of the cranial visceral motor
pathway.

Takano-Maruyama M(1), Chen Y, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Institute and Department of Biology, University of Texas at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78249, USA.

The parasympathetic reflex circuit is controlled by three basic neurons. In the
vertebrate head, the sensory, and pre- and postganglionic neurons that comprise
each circuit have stereotypic positions along the anteroposterior (AP) axis,
suggesting that the circuit arises from a common developmental plan. Here, we
show that precursors of the VIIth circuit are initially aligned along the AP
axis, where the placode-derived sensory neurons provide a critical "guidepost"
through which preganglionic axons and their neural crest-derived postganglionic
targets navigate before reaching their distant target sites. In the absence of
the placodal sensory ganglion, preganglionic axons terminate and the neural crest
fated for postganglionic neurons undergo apoptosis at the site normally occupied 
by the placodal sensory ganglion. The stereotypic organization of the
parasympathetic cranial sensory-motor circuit thus emerges from the initial
alignment of its precursors along the AP axis, with the placodal sensory ganglion
coordinating the formation of the motor pathway.

PMCID: PMC2948960
PMID: 20235227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(4):599-608. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082705fl.

Retinoid signalling is required for information transfer from mesoderm to
neuroectoderm during gastrulation.

Lloret-Vilaspasa F(1), Jansen HJ, de Roos K, Chandraratna RA, Zile MH, Stern CD, 
Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Instituut Biologie Leiden (IBL), Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, 
University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The hindbrain region of the vertebrate central nervous system (CNS) presents a
complex regionalisation. It consists of 7-8 distinct morphological segments
called rhombomeres, each with a unique identity provided by combinations of
transcription factors. One class of signalling molecules, retinoids, have been
shown to be crucial for hindbrain patterning through direct trans-activation of
Hox genes in the neuroectoderm. However, how this morphogen acts is not yet fully
understood. Here, we show that the retinoid receptor antagonist AGN193109 causes 
a posterior hindbrain defect in Xenopus, comparable to that seen in other
vertebrates. We show that this defect arises during gastrulation. Blocking
endogenous retinoid activity during gastrulation causes downregulation of the
most 3' Hox genes (paralogues 1-5) in gastrula neuroectoderm, but their initial
activation in gastrula non-organiser mesoderm is unaffected. Similar results were
obtained in avian embryos: Vitamin A-deficient quail embryos have defective
expression of 3 Hox genes (i.e. Hoxb1, Hoxb4 ) in the neural tube, but their
early expression in the primitive streak and emerging paraxial and lateral
mesoderm is not affected. In Xenopus, depletion of retinoids from mesoderm by
targeted injection of mRNAs for the retinoic acid catabolising enzyme xCYP26 and 
the cellular retinoic acid binding protein xCRABP blocks 3 Hox gene expression in
the overlying neuroectoderm. We propose that the gastrula non-organiser mesoderm 
and its later derivative, the paraxial mesoderm, is the source of a retinoid,
which acts as a transforming (caudalising) signal for the future posterior
hindbrain.

PMID: 20209433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 23;107(8):3564-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000389107. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

Induction and patterning of trunk and tail neural ectoderm by the homeobox gene
eve1 in zebrafish embryos.

Cruz C(1), Maegawa S, Weinberg ES, Wilson SW, Dawid IB, Kudoh T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Exeter, Devon EX4 4SP, UK.

In vertebrates, Evx homeodomain transcription factor-encoding genes are expressed
in the posterior region during embryonic development, and overexpression
experiments have revealed roles in tail development in fish and frogs. We
analyzed the molecular mechanisms of posterior neural development and axis
formation regulated by eve1. We show that eve1 is involved in establishing trunk 
and tail neural ectoderm by two independent mechanisms: First, eve1 posteriorizes
neural ectoderm via induction of aldh1a2, which encodes an enzyme that
synthesizes retinoic acid; second, eve1 is involved in neural induction in the
posterior ectoderm by attenuating BMP expression. Further, eve1 can restore trunk
neural tube formation in the organizer-deficient ichabod(-/-) mutant. We conclude
that eve1 is crucial for the organization of the antero-posterior and
dorso-ventral axis in the gastrula ectoderm and also has trunk- and
tail-promoting activity.

PMCID: PMC2840505
PMID: 20142486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Neurobiol. 2010 Feb;70(2):87-99. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20761.

Multiple mechanisms mediate motor neuron migration in the zebrafish hindbrain.

Bingham SM(1), Sittaramane V, Mapp O, Patil S, Prince VE, Chandrasekhar A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65211, USA.

The transmembrane protein Van gogh-like 2 (Vangl2) is a component of the
noncanonical Wnt/Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) signaling pathway, and is required
for tangential migration of facial branchiomotor neurons (FBMNs) from rhombomere 
4 (r4) to r5-r7 in the vertebrate hindbrain. Since vangl2 is expressed throughout
the zebrafish hindbrain, it might also regulate motor neuron migration in other
rhombomeres. We tested this hypothesis by examining whether migration of motor
neurons out of r2 following ectopic hoxb1b expression was affected in vangl2(-)
(trilobite) mutants. Hoxb1b specifies r4 identity, and when ectopically expressed
transforms r2 to an "r4-like" compartment. Using time-lapse imaging, we show that
GFP-expressing motor neurons in the r2/r3 region of a hoxb1b-overexpressing
wild-type embryo migrate along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. Furthermore,
these cells express prickle1b (pk1b), a Wnt/PCP gene that is specifically
expressed in FBMNs and is essential for their migration. Importantly,
GFP-expressing motor neurons in the r2/r3 region of hoxb1b-overexpressing
trilobite mutants and pk1b morphants often migrate, even though FBMNs in r4 of
the same embryos fail to migrate longitudinally (tangentially) into r6 and r7.
These observations suggest that tangentially migrating motor neurons in the
anterior hindbrain (r1-r3) can use mechanisms that are independent of vangl2 and 
pk1b functions. Interestingly, analysis of tri; val double mutants also suggests 
a role for vangl2-independent factors in neuronal migration, since the valentino 
mutation partially suppresses the trilobite mutant migration defect. Together,
the hoxb1b and val experiments suggest that multiple mechanisms regulate motor
neuron migration along the AP axis of the zebrafish hindbrain.

PMCID: PMC2976605
PMID: 19937772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):55-62. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082678wv.

Identification of hoxb1b downstream genes: hoxb1b as a regulatory factor
controlling transcriptional networks and cell movement during zebrafish
gastrulation.

van den Akker WM(1), Durston AJ, Spaink HP.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Göttingen, Germany. wakker@gwdg.de

Hox proteins are homeobox containing transcription factors that play important
roles in patterning the presumptive central nervous system and the axial mesoderm
in the early vertebrate embryo. Hox genes are first expressed during gastrula
stages and recent studies suggest that their function goes beyond their role as
patterning determinants. To improve our understanding of the role of Hox proteins
during early vertebrate development, we designed a strategy to identify target
genes of the zebrafish hoxb1b using overexpression and whole-genome microarray
analysis. We directly compared the hoxb1b microarray data with those resulting
from heterologous over-expression of the Xenopus XhoxD1 gene in zebrafish
embryos. Both genes are the first expressed hox genes in their respective native 
embryos and display similar spatial expression patterns. The zebrafish
transcriptome was analysed prior to the start of the expression of the endogenous
hoxb1b gene and we observed extensive overlap between the hoxb1b and XhoxD1
putative downstream genes suggesting evolutionary functional conservation between
these hox genes. Furthermore, genes encoding transcription factors and proteins
that are known to be involved in cell adhesion and movement were over-represented
among the candidate downstream genes, indicating the involvement of the
developmentally earliest expressed hox genes in transcriptional networks and cell
movement processes.

PMID: 19876844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Cell. 2009 Oct;17(4):561-7. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.08.007.

Meis cofactors control HDAC and CBP accessibility at Hox-regulated promoters
during zebrafish embryogenesis.

Choe SK(1), Lu P, Nakamura M, Lee J, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, LRB822, Worcester, MA 01605,
USA.

Hox proteins form complexes with Pbx and Meis cofactors to control gene
expression, but the role of Meis is unclear. We demonstrate that Hoxb1-regulated 
promoters are highly acetylated on histone H4 (AcH4) and occupied by Hoxb1, Pbx, 
and Meis in zebrafish tissues where these promoters are active. Inhibition of
Meis blocks gene expression and reduces AcH4 levels at these promoters,
suggesting a role for Meis in maintaining AcH4. Within Hox transcription
complexes, Meis binds directly to Pbx and we find that this binding displaces
histone deacetylases (HDACs) from Hoxb1-regulated promoters in zebrafish embryos.
Accordingly, Pbx mutants that cannot bind Meis act as repressors by recruiting
HDACs and reducing AcH4 levels, while Pbx mutants that bind neither HDAC nor Meis
are constitutively active and recruit CBP to increase AcH4 levels. We conclude
that Meis acts, at least in part, by controlling access of HDAC and CBP to
Hox-regulated promoters.

PMCID: PMC2768649
PMID: 19853569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):214-23. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078717. Epub 2009
Sep 23.

Critical function of AP-2 gamma/TCFAP2C in mouse embryonic germ cell maintenance.

Weber S(1), Eckert D, Nettersheim D, Gillis AJ, Schäfer S, Kuckenberg P,
Ehlermann J, Werling U, Biermann K, Looijenga LH, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Formation of the germ cell lineage involves multiple processes, including
repression of somatic differentiation and reacquisition of pluripotency as well
as a unique epigenetic constitution. The transcriptional regulator Prdm1 has been
identified as a main coordinator of this process, controlling epigenetic
modification and gene expression. Here we report on the expression pattern of the
transcription factor Tcfap2c, a putative downstream target of Prdm1, during
normal mouse embryogenesis and the consequences of its specific loss in
primordial germ cells (PGCs) and their derivatives. Tcfap2c is expressed in PGCs 
from Embryonic Day 7.25 (E 7.25) up to E 12.5, and targeted disruption resulted
in sterile animals, both male and female. In the mutant animals, PGCs were
specified but were lost around E 8.0. PGCs generated in vitro from embryonic stem
cells lacking TCFAP2C displayed induction of Prdm1 and Dppa3. Upregulation of
Hoxa1, Hoxb1, and T together with lack of expression of germ cell markers such
Nanos3, Dazl, and Mutyh suggested that the somatic gene program is induced in
TCFAP2C-deficient PGCs. Repression of TCFAP2C in TCam-2, a human PGC-resembling
seminoma cell line, resulted in specific upregulation of HOXA1, HOXB1, MYOD1, and
HAND1, indicative of mesodermal differentiation. Expression of genes indicative
of ectodermal, endodermal, or extraembryonic differentiation, as well as the
finding of no change to epigenetic modifications, suggested control by other
factors. Our results implicate Tcfap2c as an important effector of Prdm1 activity
that is required for PGC maintenance, most likely mediating Prdm1-induced
suppression of mesodermal differentiation.

PMID: 19776388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5663-79. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Neuronal defects in the hindbrain of Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutants reflect
regulatory interactions among these Hox genes.

Gavalas A(1), Ruhrberg C, Livet J, Henderson CE, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Hox genes are instrumental in assigning segmental identity in the developing
hindbrain. Auto-, cross- and para-regulatory interactions help establish and
maintain their expression. To understand to what extent such regulatory
interactions shape neuronal patterning in the hindbrain, we analysed
neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation and motoneuron migration in Hoxa1, Hoxb1
and Hoxb2 mutant mice. This comparison revealed that neurogenesis and
differentiation of specific neuronal subpopulations in r4 was impaired in a
similar fashion in all three mutants, but with different degrees of severity. In 
the Hoxb1 mutants, neurons derived from the presumptive r4 territory were
re-specified towards an r2-like identity. Motoneurons derived from that territory
resembled trigeminal motoneurons in both their migration patterns and the
expression of molecular markers. Both migrating motoneurons and the resident
territory underwent changes consistent with a switch from an r4 to r2 identity.
Abnormally migrating motoneurons initially formed ectopic nuclei that were
subsequently cleared. Their survival could be prolonged through the introduction 
of a block in the apoptotic pathway. The Hoxa1 mutant phenotype is consistent
with a partial misspecification of the presumptive r4 territory that results from
partial Hoxb1 activation. The Hoxb2 mutant phenotype is a hypomorph of the Hoxb1 
mutant phenotype, consistent with the overlapping roles of these genes in facial 
motoneuron specification. Therefore, we have delineated the functional
requirements in hindbrain neuronal patterning that follow the establishment of
the genetic regulatory hierarchy between Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2.

PMID: 14522873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5191-201. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Hox3 genes coordinate mechanisms of genetic suppression and activation in the
generation of branchial and somatic motoneurons.

Gaufo GO(1), Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

In the developing hindbrain, the functional loss of individual Hox genes has
revealed some of their roles in specifying rhombomere (r) identity. However, it
is unclear how Hox genes act in concert to confer the unique identity to multiple
rhombomeres. Moreover, it remains to be elucidated how these genes interact with 
other transcriptional programs to specify distinct neuronal lineages within each 
rhombomere. We demonstrate that in r5, the combined mutation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
result in a loss of Pax6- and Olig2-expressing progenitors that give rise to
somatic motoneurons of the abducens nucleus. In r6, the absence of any
combination of the Hox3 paralogous genes results in ectopic expression of the
r4-specific determinant Hoxb1. This ectopic expression in turn results in the
differentiation of r4-like facial branchiomotoneurons within this rhombomere.
These studies reveal that members of the Hox1 and Hox3 paralogous groups
participate in a 'Hox code' that is necessary for coordinating both suppression
and activation mechanisms that ensure distinction between the multiple
rhombomeres in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 12954718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 15;17(16):2060-72.

Structure of HoxA9 and Pbx1 bound to DNA: Hox hexapeptide and DNA recognition
anterior to posterior.

LaRonde-LeBlanc NA(1), Wolberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

The HOX/HOM superfamily of homeodomain proteins controls cell fate and segmental 
embryonic patterning by a mechanism that is conserved in all metazoans. The
linear arrangement of the Hox genes on the chromosome correlates with the spatial
distribution of HOX protein expression along the anterior-posterior axis of the
embryo. Most HOX proteins bind DNA cooperatively with members of the PBC family
of TALE-type homeodomain proteins, which includes human Pbx1. Cooperative DNA
binding between HOX and PBC proteins requires a residue N-terminal to the HOX
homeodomain termed the hexapeptide, which differs significantly in sequence
between anterior- and posterior-regulating HOX proteins. We report here the
1.9-A-resolution structure of a posterior HOX protein, HoxA9, complexed with Pbx1
and DNA, which reveals that the posterior Hox hexapeptide adopts an altered
conformation as compared with that seen in previously determined anterior HOX/PBC
structures. The additional nonspecific interactions and altered DNA conformation 
in this structure account for the stronger DNA-binding affinity and altered
specificity observed for posterior HOX proteins when compared with anterior HOX
proteins. DNA-binding studies of wild-type and mutant HoxA9 and HoxB1 show
residues in the N-terminal arm of the homeodomains are critical for proper DNA
sequence recognition despite lack of direct contact by these residues to the DNA 
bases. These results help shed light on the mechanism of transcriptional
regulation by HOX proteins and show how DNA-binding proteins may use indirect
contacts to determine sequence specificity.

PMCID: PMC196259
PMID: 12923056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Psychiatry. 2003 Aug;8(8):716-7.

Lack of association of HOXA1 and HOXB1 mutations and autism in Sicilian (Italian)
patients.

Romano V, Calì F, Mirisola M, Gambino G, D' Anna R, Di Rosa P, Seidita G,
Chiavetta V, Aiello F, Canziani F, De Leo G, Ayala GF, Elia M.

PMID: 12888798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):39235-41. Epub 2003 Jul 18.

Overexpression of PREP-1 in F9 teratocarcinoma cells leads to a functionally
relevant increase of PBX-2 by preventing its degradation.

Longobardi E(1), Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Biology and Functional
Genomics, Università Vita Salute San Raffaele and DIBIT, via Olgettina 58, 20132 
Milan, Italy.

To bind DNA and to be retained in the nucleus, PBX proteins must form
heterodimeric complexes with members of the MEINOX family. Therefore the balance 
between PBX and MEINOX must be an important regulatory feature. We show that
overexpression of PREP-1 influences the level of PBX-2 protein maintaining the
PREP-1-PBX balance. This effect has important functional consequences. F9
teratocarcinoma cells stably transfected with PREP-1 had an increased DNA binding
activity to a PREP-PBX-responsive element. Because PREP-1 binds DNA efficiently
only when dimerized to PBX, the increased DNA binding activity suggests that the 
level of PBX might also have increased. Indeed PREP-1-overexpressing cells had a 
higher level of PBX-2 and PBX-1b proteins. PBX-2 increase did not depend on
increased mRNA level or a higher rate of translation but rather because of a
protein stabilization process. Indeed, PBX-2 level drastically decreased after 3 
h of cycloheximide treatment in control but not in PREP-1-overexpressing cells
and the proteasome inhibitor MG132 prevented PBX-2 decay in control cells. Hence,
dimerization with PREP-1 appears to decrease proteasomal degradation of PBX-2.
Retinoic acid induces differentiation of F9 teratocarcinoma cells with a cascade 
synthesis of HOX proteins. In PREP-1-overexpressing cells, HOXb1 induction was
more sustained (3 days versus 1 day) and the induced level of MEIS-1b, another
TALE (three amino acid loop extension) protein involved in embryonal development,
was higher. Thus an increase in PREP-1 leads to changes in the fate-determining
HOXb1 and has therefore important functional consequences.

PMID: 12871956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. EMBO J. 2003 Jul 15;22(14):3737-48.

Vertebrate HoxB gene expression requires DNA replication.

Fisher D(1), Méchali M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS, 141 rue de la Cardonille, 34396 Cedex 05
Montpellier, France.

To study the relationship between DNA replication and transcription in vivo, we
investigated Hox gene activation in two vertebrate systems: the embryogenesis of 
Xenopus and the retinoic acid-induced differentiation of pluripotent mouse P19
cells. We show that the first cell cycles following the mid- blastula transition 
in Xenopus are necessary and sufficient for HoxB activation, whereas later cell
cycles are necessary for the correct expression pattern. In P19 cells, HoxB
expression requires proliferation, and the entire locus is activated within one
cell cycle. Using synchronous cultures, we found that activation of HoxB genes is
colinear within a single cell cycle, occurs during S phase and requires S phase. 
The HoxB locus replicates early, whereas replication is still required for
maximal expression later in S phase. Thus, induction of HoxB genes occurs in a
DNA replication-dependent manner and requires only one cell cycle. We propose
that S-phase remodelling licenses the locus for transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC165622
PMID: 12853488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3821-9.

vhnf1 and Fgf signals synergize to specify rhombomere identity in the zebrafish
hindbrain.

Wiellette EL(1), Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA.

Vertebrate hindbrain segmentation is a highly conserved process but the mechanism
of rhombomere determination is not well understood. Recent work in the zebrafish 
has shown a requirement for fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signaling and for the 
transcription factor variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (vhnf1) in specification
of rhombomeres 5 and 6 (r5+r6). We show here that vhnf1 functions in two ways to 
subdivide the zebrafish caudal hindbrain domain (r4-r7) into individual
rhombomeres. First, vhnf1 promotes r5+r6 identity through an obligate synergy
with Fgf signals to activate valentino and krox20 expression. Second, vhnf1
functions independently of Fgf signals to repress hoxb1a expression. Although
vhnf1 is expressed in a broad posterior domain during gastrulation, it promotes
the specification of individual rhombomeres. This is achieved in part because
vhnf1 gives cellular competence to respond to Fgf signals in a caudal
hindbrain-specific manner.

PMID: 12835397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3807-19.

Acquisition of Hox codes during gastrulation and axial elongation in the mouse
embryo.

Forlani S(1), Lawson KA, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Early sequential expression of mouse Hox genes is essential for their later
function. Analysis of the relationship between early Hox gene expression and the 
laying down of anterior to posterior structures during and after gastrulation is 
therefore crucial for understanding the ontogenesis of Hox-mediated axial
patterning. Using explants from gastrulation stage embryos, we show that the
ability to express 3' and 5' Hox genes develops sequentially in the primitive
streak region, from posterior to anterior as the streak extends, about 12 hours
earlier than overt Hox expression. The ability to express autonomously the
earliest Hox gene, Hoxb1, is present in the posterior streak region at the onset 
of gastrulation, but not in the anterior region at this stage. However, the
posterior region can induce Hoxb1 expression in these anterior region cells. We
conclude that tissues are primed to express Hox genes early in gastrulation,
concomitant with primitive streak formation and extension, and that Hox gene
inducibility is transferred by cell to cell signalling. Axial structures that
will later express Hox genes are generated in the node region in the period that 
Hox expression domains arrive there and continue to spread rostrally. However,
lineage analysis showed that definitive Hox codes are not fixed at the node, but 
must be acquired later and anterior to the node in the neurectoderm, and
independently in the mesoderm. We conclude that the rostral progression of Hox
gene expression must be modulated by gene regulatory influences from early on in 
the posterior streak, until the time cells have acquired their stable positions
along the axis well anterior to the node.

PMID: 12835396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jul;227(3):379-86.

Hoxb1 neural crest preferentially form glia of the PNS.

Arenkiel BR(1), Gaufo GO, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah
84112, USA.

The vertebrate cranial neural crest cells give rise to many complex derivatives
of the head, neck, and face, including neuronal and glial cells that act in
concert for proper development of the anterior-peripheral nervous system. Several
genes have been implicated in the processes of neural crest specification,
migration, and differentiation; among these are the hox gene clusters. To
determine the fates of hox-expressing cranial neural crest, we describe the
results of a genetic lineage analysis by using the Cre/loxP system to drive the
activation of different ROSA26 reporter alleles under the regulation of the hoxb1
locus. By targeting the 3' untranslated region of the hoxb1 gene, we have
preserved endogenous gene activity and have been able to accurately follow the
fates of the cells derived from the hoxb1 expression domain. Emphasis was placed 
on identifying the cell and tissue types that arise from the rhombomere 4-derived
neural crest. Our results demonstrate that, in addition to forming much of the
cartilage, bones, and muscle of the ears and neck, a significant population of
rhombomere 4-derived neural crest is fated to generate the glial component of the
seventh cranial nerve.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2525-34.

The regional pattern of retinoic acid synthesis by RALDH2 is essential for the
development of posterior pharyngeal arches and the enteric nervous system.

Niederreither K(1), Vermot J, Le Roux I, Schuhbaur B, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de
Strasbourg, France.

Targeted inactivation of the mouse retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2
(RALDH2/ALDH1a2), the enzyme responsible for early embryonic retinoic acid
synthesis, is embryonic lethal because of defects in early heart morphogenesis.
Transient maternal RA supplementation from E7.5 to (at least) E8.5 rescues most
of these defects, but the supplemented Raldh2(-/-) mutants die prenatally, from a
lack of septation of the heart outflow tract (Niederreither, K., Vermot, J.,
Messaddeq, N., Schuhbaur, B., Chambon, P. and Dollé, P. (2001). Development 128, 
1019-1031). We have investigated the developmental basis for this defect, and
found that the RA-supplemented Raldh2(-/-) embryos exhibit impaired development
of their posterior (3rd-6th) branchial arch region. While the development of the 
first and second arches and their derivatives, as well as the formation of the
first branchial pouch, appear to proceed normally, more posterior pharyngeal
pouches fail to form and the pharyngeal endoderm develops a rudimentary,
pouch-like structure. All derivatives of the posterior branchial arches are
affected. These include the aortic arches, pouch-derived organs (thymus,
parathyroid gland) and post-otic neural crest cells, which fail to establish
segmental migratory pathways and are misrouted caudally. Patterning and axonal
outgrowth of the posterior (9th-12th) cranial nerves is also altered. Vagal crest
deficiency in Raldh2(-/-) mutants leads to agenesis of the enteric ganglia, a
condition reminiscent of human Hirschprung's disease. In addition, we provide
evidence that: (i) wildtype Raldh2 expression is restricted to the posteriormost 
pharyngeal mesoderm; (ii) endogenous RA response occurs in both the pharyngeal
endoderm and mesoderm, and extends more rostrally than Raldh2 expression up to
the 2nd arch; (iii) RA target genes (Hoxa1, Hoxb1) are downregulated in both the 
pharyngeal endoderm and mesoderm of mutant embryos. Thus, RALDH2 plays a crucial 
role in producing RA required for pharyngeal development, and RA is one of the
diffusible mesodermal signals that pattern the pharyngeal endoderm.

PMID: 12702665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Dev Biol. 2003 Jan 15;253(2):200-13.

Autonomous and nonautonomous functions for Hox/Pbx in branchiomotor neuron
development.

Cooper KL(1), Leisenring WM, Moens CB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Basic Science, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, 1100 Fairview Ave. N., Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

The vertebrate branchiomotor neurons are organized in a pattern that corresponds 
with the segments, or rhombomeres, of the developing hindbrain and have
identities and behaviors associated with their position along the
anterior/posterior axis. These neurons undergo characteristic migrations in the
hindbrain and project from stereotyped exit points. We show that lazarus/pbx4,
which encodes an essential Hox DNA-binding partner in zebrafish, is required for 
facial (VIIth cranial nerve) motor neuron migration and for axon pathfinding of
trigeminal (Vth cranial nerve) motor axons. We show that lzr/pbx4 is required for
Hox paralog group 1 and 2 function, suggesting that Pbx interacts with these
proteins. Consistent with this, lzr/pbx4 interacts genetically with hoxb1a to
control facial motor neuron migration. Using genetic mosaic analysis, we show
that lzr/pbx4 and hoxb1a are primarily required cell-autonomously within the
facial motor neurons; however, analysis of a subtle non-cell-autonomous effect
indicates that facial motor neuron migration is promoted by interactions amongst 
the migrating neurons. At the same time, lzr/pbx4 is required
non-cell-autonomously to control the pathfinding of trigeminal motor axons. Thus,
Pbx/Hox can function both cell-autonomously and non-cell-autonomously to direct
different aspects of hindbrain motor neuron behavior.

PMID: 12645925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Jun 28;26(3):189-91.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in human embryo lung cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LY(1), Wu GJ, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in
human embryo lung (HEL) cells and influence of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection on the expressions of these genes.
METHOD: The expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes were detected
with semi-quantitative RT-PCR method.
RESULTS: 1. HEL cells expressed HOXB5 and HOXB6 genes, but they did not express
HOXB1 and HOXB9 genes. 2. After HCMV infection, HEL cell was induced to express
HOXB9 gene, as the expression of HOXB6 gene was elevated. The expression of HOXB5
gene had no significant change. HOXB1 was still not expressed. 3. Treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the expression of HOXB9 gene in HEL cells
infected by HCMV was significantly increased. But during the advanced infect
period, the expression of HOXB6 was significantly decreased.
CONCLUSION: HCMV can induce abnormal expressions of HOXB6 and HOXB9 genes, which 
may play an important role in HCMV-induced abnormal embryogenesis.

PMID: 12536675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Dev Biol. 2003 Jan 1;253(1):150-62.

Novel activities of Mafb underlie its dual role in hindbrain segmentation and
regional specification.

Giudicelli F(1), Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Mechta-Grigoriou F, Poquet C, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230, Paris Cedex 05, France.

The bZip transcription factor Mafb is expressed in two segments of the developing
vertebrate hindbrain: the rhombomeres 5 and 6. Loss of Mafb expression in the
mouse mutant kreisler leads to elimination of r5 and to alterations of r6
regional identity. Here, we further investigated the role of Mafb in hindbrain
patterning using gain-of-function experiments in the chick embryo. Our work has
revealed novel functions for Mafb, including a positive autoregulatory activity, 
the capacity to repress Hoxb1 expression, and the capacity to synergise with or
antagonise Krox20 activity. These different activities appear to be spatially
restricted in the hindbrain, presumably due to interactions with other factors.
Reinvestigation of the kreisler mutation indicated that it also results in an
ectopic activation of Mafb in rhombomere 3, accounting for the previously
described molecular alterations of this rhombomere in the mutant. Together, these
data allow us to refine our view of the dual function of Mafb in both
segmentation and specification of anteroposterior identity in the hindbrain.

PMID: 12490204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem J. 2003 Mar 15;370(Pt 3):1087-95.

Cross-talk between glucocorticoid and retinoic acid signals involving
glucocorticoid receptor interaction with the homoeodomain protein Pbx1.

Subramaniam N(1), Campión J, Rafter I, Okret S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University
Hospital, Novum, SE-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Glucocorticoid (GC) signalling influences the response of the cell to a number of
other signals via a mechanism referred to as 'cross-talk'. This cross-talk may
act at several levels, including an interaction between the transcription factors
involved in the signalling pathways. In the present paper, we demonstrate a novel
functional interaction between GC and all- trans -retinoic acid (RA) signalling. 
We show that, in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells, GCs potentiate RA-induced
expression of the murine Hoxb -1 gene through an autoregulatory element, b1-ARE, 
recognized by the Pbx1 and HOXB1 homoeodomain proteins. The synergistic effect of
GC did not involve GC receptor (GR) binding to the b1-ARE, and the GC-GR complex 
alone was unable to activate transcription via the element. Furthermore, the
ability of the GR to transactivate was not required, excluding expression of a
GC-induced protein as the mechanism for the GC/RA synergy. Additional
transfection experiments showed that the Pbx1/HOXB1 heterodimer was the target
for the GC effect. Furthermore, functional dissection of the GR demonstrated that
the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of the GR was required for the synergy. A physical
interaction between the GR and Pbx1 proteins was demonstrated in vivo by
co-immunoprecipitation experiments. These results are compatible with a model in 
which the GC/RA synergy is mediated by a direct interaction between the GR and
Pbx1. On the basis of the ubiquitous expression of both GR and Pbx1, a number of 
genes regulated by Pbx are likely to be important targets for GC-mediated
'cross-talk'.

PMCID: PMC1223238
PMID: 12487626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Med Genet. 2002 Nov;39(11):e70.

No association between HOXA1 and HOXB1 genes and autism spectrum disorders (ASD).

Talebizadeh Z, Bittel DC, Miles JH, Takahashi N, Wang CH, Kibiryeva N, Butler MG.

PMCID: PMC1735009
PMID: 12414832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mech Dev. 2002 Nov;119(1):81-90.

Hox cluster polarity in early transcriptional availability: a high order
regulatory level of clustered Hox genes in the mouse.

Roelen BA(1), de Graaff W, Forlani S, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The molecular mechanism underlying the 3' to 5' polarity of induction of mouse
Hox genes is still elusive. While relief from a cluster-encompassing repression
was shown to lead to all Hoxd genes being expressed like the 3'most of them,
Hoxd1 (Kondo and Duboule, 1999), the molecular basis of initial activation of
this 3'most gene, is not understood yet. We show that, already before primitive
streak formation, prior to initial expression of the first Hox gene, a dramatic
transcriptional stimulation of the 3'most genes, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2, is observed
upon a short pulse of exogenous retinoic acid (RA), whereas it is not in the case
for more 5', cluster-internal, RA-responsive Hoxb genes. In contrast, the
RA-responding Hoxb1lacZ transgene that faithfully mimics the endogenous gene
(Marshall et al., 1994) did not exhibit the sensitivity of Hoxb1 to precocious
activation. We conclude that polarity in initial activation of Hoxb genes
reflects a greater availability of 3'Hox genes for transcription, suggesting a
pre-existing (susceptibility to) opening of the chromatin structure at the 3'
extremity of the cluster. We discuss the data in the context of prevailing models
involving differential chromatin opening in the directionality of clustered Hox
gene transcription, and regarding the importance of the cluster context for
correct timing of initial Hox gene expression.Interestingly, Cdx1 manifested the 
same early transcriptional availability as Hoxb1.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12385756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Development. 2002 Jul;129(13):3033-44.

Eya1 is required for the morphogenesis of mammalian thymus, parathyroid and
thyroid.

Xu PX(1), Zheng W, Laclef C, Maire P, Maas RL, Peters H, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Great Falls, MT 59405, 
USA. pxu@po.mri.montana.edu

Eyes absent (Eya) genes regulate organogenesis in both vertebrates and
invertebrates. Mutations in human EYA1 cause congenital Branchio-Oto-Renal (BOR) 
syndrome, while targeted inactivation of murine Eya1 impairs early developmental 
processes in multiple organs, including ear, kidney and skeletal system. We have 
now examined the role of Eya1 during the morphogenesis of organs derived from the
pharyngeal region, including thymus, parathyroid and thyroid. The thymus and
parathyroid are derived from 3rd pharyngeal pouches and their development is
initiated via inductive interactions between neural crest-derived arch
mesenchyme, pouch endoderm, and possibly the surface ectoderm of 3rd pharyngeal
clefts. Eya1 is expressed in all three cell types during thymus and parathyroid
development from E9.5 and the organ primordia for both of these structures failed
to form in Eya1(-/-) embryos. These results indicate that Eya1 is required for
the initiation of thymus and parathyroid gland formation. Eya1 is also expressed 
in the 4th pharyngeal region and ultimobranchial bodies. Eya1(-/-) mice show
thyroid hypoplasia, with severe reduction in the number of parafollicular cells
and the size of the thyroid lobes and lack of fusion between the ultimobranchial 
bodies and the thyroid lobe. These data indicate that Eya1 also regulates mature 
thyroid gland formation. Furthermore, we show that Six1 expression is markedly
reduced in the arch mesenchyme, pouch endoderm and surface ectoderm in the
pharyngeal region of Eya1(-/-) embryos, indicating that Six1 expression in those 
structures is Eya1 dependent. In addition, we show that in Eya1(-/-) embryos, the
expression of Gcm2 in the 3rd pouch endoderm is undetectable at E10.5, however,
the expression of Hox and Pax genes in the pouch endoderm is preserved at
E9.5-10.5. Finally, we found that the surface ectoderm of the 3rd and 4th
pharyngeal region show increased cell death at E10.5 in Eya1(-/-) embryos. Our
results indicate that Eya1 controls critical early inductive events involved in
the morphogenesis of thymus, parathyroid and thyroid.

PMCID: PMC3873877
PMID: 12070080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jun 15;30(12):2663-8.

Changing homeodomain residues 2 and 3 of Hoxa1 alters its activity in a cell-type
and enhancer dependent manner.

Remacle S(1), Shaw-Jackson C, Matis C, Lampe X, Picard J, Rezsöhazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique du Développement, UCL 7382, Université Catholique de
Louvain, B-1200 Bruxelles, Belgium.

The second and third amino acid residues of the N-terminal arm of most Hox
protein homeodomains are basic (lysine or arginine), whereas they are asparagine 
and alanine, respectively, in the Hoxa1 homeodomain. Previous reports pinpointed 
these residues as specificity determinants in the function of Hoxa1 when it is
acting as a monomer. However, in vitro data supported that these residues do not 
influence the target specificity of Hoxa1 in Pbx1a-Hoxa1 heterodimers. Here, we
have analysed the transcriptional activity of a Hoxa1(NA-KR) mutant for which the
asparagine and alanine residues of the homeodomain have been replaced by lysine
and arginine, respectively. Comparison between the wild-type and mutant Hoxa1
reveals that they show distinct activity on the TSEII enhancer of the
somatostatin gene, but that they are equally active in the presence of Pbx and
Prep cofactors. This therefore corroborates the biochemical evidence having shown
that the second and third residues of the homeodomain do not contribute to the
DNA binding of Hoxa1-Pbx dimers. However, on the hoxb1 autoregulatory enhancer,
Hoxa1 and Hoxa1(NA-KR) may display distinct activity despite the presence of Pbx,
in a cell-type dependent manner. Therefore, our data suggest that, depending on
the enhancer, these residues may contribute to the functional specificity of
Hoxa1 and that this contribution may not be abrogated by the interaction with
Pbx.

PMCID: PMC117285
PMID: 12060683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2339-54.

Knockdown of duplicated zebrafish hoxb1 genes reveals distinct roles in hindbrain
patterning and a novel mechanism of duplicate gene retention.

McClintock JM(1), Kheirbek MA, Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Developmental Biology, The University of Chicago, 1027 E 57th
Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

We have used a morpholino-based knockdown approach to investigate the functions
of a pair of zebrafish Hox gene duplicates, hoxb1a and hoxb1b, which are
expressed during development of the hindbrain. We find that the zebrafish hoxb1
duplicates have equivalent functions to mouse Hoxb1 and its paralogue Hoxa1.
Thus, we have revealed a 'function shuffling' among genes of paralogue group 1
during the evolution of vertebrates. Like mouse Hoxb1, zebrafish hoxb1a is
required for migration of the VIIth cranial nerve branchiomotor neurons from
their point of origin in hindbrain rhombomere 4 towards the posterior. By
contrast, zebrafish hoxb1b, like mouse Hoxa1, is required for proper segmental
organization of rhombomere 4 and the posterior hindbrain. Double knockdown
experiments demonstrate that the zebrafish hoxb1 duplicates have partially
redundant functions. However, using an RNA rescue approach, we reveal that these 
duplicated genes do not have interchangeable biochemical functions: only hoxb1a
can properly pattern the VIIth cranial nerve. Despite this difference in protein 
function, we provide evidence that the hoxb1 duplicate genes were initially
maintained in the genome because of complementary degenerative mutations in
defined cis-regulatory elements.

PMID: 11973267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 May 1;30(9):2043-51.

Characterization of PREP2, a paralog of PREP1, which defines a novel sub-family
of the MEINOX TALE homeodomain transcription factors.

Fognani C(1), Kilstrup-Nielsen C, Berthelsen J, Ferretti E, Zappavigna V, Blasi
F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Genetics, DIBIT, Department of Molecular Biology and
Functional Genetics, Università Vita Salute San Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, 20132
Milano, Italy.

TALE (three amino acid loop extension) homeodomain proteins include the PBC and
the MEINOX sub-families. MEINOX proteins form heterodimer complexes with PBC
proteins. Heterodimerization is crucial to DNA binding and for nuclear
localization. PBC-MEINOX heterodimers bind DNA also in combination with HOX
proteins, thereby modulating their DNA-binding specificity. TALE proteins
therefore play crucial roles in multiple developmental and differentiation
pathways in vivo. We report the identification and characterization of a novel
human gene homologous to PREP1, called PREP2. Sequence comparisons indicate that 
PREP1 and PREP2 define a novel sub-family of MEINOX proteins, distinct from the
MEIS sub-family. PREP2 is expressed in a variety of human adult tissues and
displays a more restricted expression pattern than PREP1. PREP2 is capable of
heterodimerizing with PBC proteins. Heterodimerization with PBX1 appears to be
essential for nuclear localization of both PREP2 and PBX1. A comparison between
the functional properties of PREP1 and PREP2 reveals that PREP2-PBX display a
faster DNA-dissociation rate than PREP1-PBX heterodimers, suggesting different
roles in controlling gene expression. Like PREP1, PREP2-PBX heterodimers are
capable of forming ternary complexes with HOXB1. The analysis of some PREP2 in
vitro properties suggests a functional diversification among PREP and between
PREP and MEIS MEINOX proteins.

PMCID: PMC113854
PMID: 11972344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Dev Dyn. 2002 Mar;223(3):353-70.

Analysis of two distinct retinoic acid response elements in the homeobox gene
Hoxb1 in transgenic mice.

Huang D(1), Chen SW, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 
York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Expression of vertebrate Hox genes is regulated by retinoids such as retinoic
acid (RA) in cell culture and in early embryonic development. Retinoic acid
response elements (RAREs) have been identified in Hox gene regulatory regions,
suggesting that endogenous retinoids may be involved in the direct control of Hox
gene patterning functions. Previously, two RAREs located 3' of the murine Hoxb1
gene, a DR(2) RARE and a DR(5) RARE, have been shown to regulate Hoxb1 mRNA
expression in the neural epithelium and the foregut region, respectively; the
foregut develops into the esophagus, liver, pancreas, lungs, and stomach. We have
now examined the functional roles of these two types of 3' RAREs in regulating
Hoxb1 expression at different stages of gestation, from embryonic day 7.5 to
13.5, in transgenic mice carrying specific RARE mutations. We demonstrate that
the DR(5) RARE is required for the regulation of Hoxb-1 transgene region-specific
expression in the gut and extraembryonic tissues, as well as for the RA-induced
anteriorization of Hoxb-1 transgene expression in the gut. In contrast,
expression of the Hoxb1 transgene in the neural epithelium requires only the
DR(2) RARE. By in situ hybridization, we have identified a new site of Hoxb1
expression in the developing forelimbs at approximately day 12.5, and we show
that, in transgenic embryos, expression in the forelimb buds requires that either
the DR(2) or the DR(5) RARE is functional. Attainment of a high level of Hoxb1
transgene expression in other regions, such as in rhombomere 4 (r4) and in the
somites, requires that both the DR(2) and DR(5) RAREs are functional. In
addition, our transgenic data indicate that the Hoxb1 gene is expressed in other 
tissues such as the hernia gut, genital eminence, and lung. Our analysis shows
that endogenous retinoids act through individual DR(2) and DR(5) RAREs to
regulate Hoxb1 expression in different regions of the embryo and that functional 
redundancy between these DR(2) and DR(5) RAREs does not exist with respect to
neural epithelium and the gut Hoxb1 expression.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11891985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jan 8;114(1):24-30.

Lack of association between HoxA1 and HoxB1 gene variants and autism in 110
multiplex families.

Li J(1), Tabor HK, Nguyen L, Gleason C, Lotspeich LJ, Spiker D, Risch N, Myers
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

A recent report suggested that the HoxA1 and/or HoxB1 genes play a role in
susceptibility to autism. To determine whether these findings could be confirmed,
we screened these genes for DNA polymorphisms by sequencing all exons in 24
individuals with autism. We identified the same sequence variants in the genes
that appeared in this report, which include one single-base substitution variant 
in HoxA1 and a common haplotype in HoxB1. We performed an association study by
applying the transmission disequilibrium test to detect possible association of
these variants to autism in 110 multiplex families. Our results demonstrated no
deviation from the null hypothesis of no association. We have also separately
examined transmissions within individual mating types, for paternal versus
maternal alleles, to affected versus unaffected children, and for transmission to
affected boys versus girls. None of these subsets revealed significant deviation 
from the null expectation. Our interpretation of these findings is that it is
unlikely that HoxA1 and HoxB1 play a significant role in the genetic
predisposition to autism.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11840501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Development. 2001 Dec;128(23):4789-800.

Regionalisation of anterior neuroectoderm and its competence in responding to
forebrain and midbrain inducing activities depend on mutual antagonism between
OTX2 and GBX2.

Martinez-Barbera JP(1), Signore M, Boyl PP, Puelles E, Acampora D, Gogoi R,
Schubert F, Lumsden A, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The anterior neural ridge (ANR), and the isthmic organiser (IsO) represent two
signalling centres possessing organising properties necessary for forebrain (ANR)
as well as midbrain and rostral hindbrain (IsO) development. An important
mediator of ANR and IsO organising property is the signalling molecule FGF8.
Previous work has indicated that correct positioning of the IsO and Fgf8
expression in this domain is controlled by the transcription factors Otx2 and
Gbx2. In order to provide novel insights into the roles of Otx2 and Gbx2, we have
studied mutant embryos carrying different dosages of Otx2, Otx1 and Gbx2. Embryos
deficient for both OTX2 and GBX2 proteins (hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2); Gbx2(-/-)) show
abnormal patterning of the anterior neural tissue, which is evident at the
presomite-early somite stage prior to the onset of Fgf8 neuroectodermal
expression. Indeed, hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2); Gbx2(-/-) embryos exhibit broad
co-expression of early forebrain, midbrain and rostral hindbrain markers such as 
hOtx1, Gbx2, Pax2, En1 and Wnt1 and subsequently fail to activate forebrain and
midbrain-specific gene expression. In this genetic context, Fgf8 is expressed
throughout the entire anterior neural plate, thus indicating that its activation 
is independent of both OTX2 and GBX2 function. Analysis of hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2);
Gbx2(-/-) and Otx1(+/-); Otx2(+/-) mutant embryos also suggests that FGF8 cannot 
repress Otx2 without the participation of GBX2. Finally, we report that embryos
carrying a single strong hypomorphic Otx2 allele (Otx2(lambda)) in an Otx2 and
Gbx2 null background (Otx2(lambda)/-; Gbx2(-/-)) recover both the headless
phenotype exhibited by Otx2(lambda)/- embryos and forebrain- and
midbrain-specific gene expression that is not observed in hOtx1(2)/hOtx1(2);
Gbx2(-/-) mutants. Together, these data provide novel genetic evidence indicating
that OTX2 and GBX2 are required for proper segregation of early regional
identities anterior and posterior to the mid-hindbrain boundary (MHB) and for
conferring competence to the anterior neuroectoderm in responding to forebrain-, 
midbrain- and rostral hindbrain-inducing activities.

PMID: 11731459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 2001 Oct;128(19):3707-16.

Initiation of facial motoneurone migration is dependent on rhombomeres 5 and 6.

Studer M(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. studer@tigem.it

In mammals, facial branchiomotor (FBM) neurones are born in ventral rhombomere
(r) 4 and migrate through r5 to dorsal r6 where they form the facial motor
nucleus. This pattern of migration gives rise to the distinctive appearance of
the internal genu of the facial nerve, which is lacking in birds. To distinguish 
between extrinsic cues and intrinsic factors in the caudal migration of FBM
neurones, this study takes advantage of the evolutionary migratory difference
between mouse and chick in generating mouse-chick chimaeras in ovo. After the
homotopic transplantation of mouse r5 and/or r6 into a chick embryo, chick
ventral r4 neurones redirected their cell bodies towards the ectopic mouse source
and followed a caudal migratory path, reminiscent of mouse FBM neurones. In a
second series of grafting experiments, when mouse r4 was transplanted in place of
chick r4, mouse r4 neurones were unable to migrate into chick r5, although mouse 
and chick cells were able to mix freely within r4. Thus, these data suggest that 
local environmental cues embedded in mouse r5 and r6 are directly involved in
initiating caudal migration of FBM neurones. In addition, they demonstrate that
chick FBM neurones are competent to recapitulate a migratory behaviour that has
been lost during avian phylogeny.

PMID: 11585797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Development. 2001 Aug;128(15):3017-27.

Synergy between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1: the relationship between arch patterning and the
generation of cranial neural crest.

Gavalas A(1), Trainor P, Ariza-McNaughton L, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping synergistic roles in patterning the hindbrain
and cranial neural crest cells. The combination of an ectoderm-specific
regulatory mutation in the Hoxb1 locus and the Hoxa1 mutant genetic background
results in an ectoderm-specific double mutation, leaving the other germ layers
impaired only in Hoxa1 function. This has allowed us to examine neural crest and 
arch patterning defects that originate exclusively from the neuroepithelium as a 
result of the simultaneous loss of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 in this tissue. Using
molecular and lineage analysis in this double mutant background we demonstrate
that presumptive rhombomere 4, the major site of origin of the second pharyngeal 
arch neural crest, is reduced in size and has lost the ability to generate neural
crest cells. Grafting experiments using wild-type cells in cultured normal or
double mutant mouse embryos demonstrate that this is a cell-autonomous defect,
suggesting that the formation or generation of cranial neural crest has been
uncoupled from segmental identity in these mutants. Furthermore, we show that
loss of the second arch neural crest population does not have any adverse
consequences on early patterning of the second arch. Signalling molecules are
expressed correctly and pharyngeal pouch and epibranchial placode formation are
unaffected. There are no signs of excessive cell death or loss of proliferation
in the epithelium of the second arch, suggesting that the neural crest cells are 
not the source of any indispensable mitogenic or survival signals. These results 
illustrate that Hox genes are not only necessary for proper axial specification
of the neural crest but that they also play a vital role in the generation of
this population itself. Furthermore, they demonstrate that early patterning of
the separate components of the pharyngeal arches can proceed independently of
neural crest cell migration.

PMID: 11532923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Development. 2001 Jul;128(13):2471-84.

Consequences of Hox gene duplication in the vertebrates: an investigation of the 
zebrafish Hox paralogue group 1 genes.

McClintock JM(1), Carlson R, Mann DM, Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Developmental Biology, The University of Chicago, 1027 E 57th
Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

As a result of a whole genome duplication event in the lineage leading to
teleosts, the zebrafish has seven clusters of Hox patterning genes, rather than
four, as described for tetrapod vertebrates. To investigate the consequences of
this genome duplication, we have carried out a detailed comparison of genes from 
a single Hox paralogue group, paralogue group (PG) 1. We have analyzed the
sequences, expression patterns and potential functions of all four of the
zebrafish PG1 Hox genes, and compared our data with that available for the three 
mouse genes. As the basic functions of Hox genes appear to be tightly
constrained, comparison with mouse data has allowed us to identify specific
changes in the developmental roles of Hox genes that have occurred during
vertebrate evolution. We have found variation in expression patterns, amino acid 
sequences within functional domains, and potential gene functions both within the
PG1 genes of zebrafish, and in comparison to mouse PG1 genes. We observed novel
expression patterns in the midbrain, such that zebrafish hoxa1a and hoxc1a are
expressed anterior to the domain traditionally thought to be under Hox patterning
control. The hoxc1a gene shows significant coding sequence changes in known
functional domains, which correlate with a reduced capacity to cause
posteriorizing transformations. Moreover, the hoxb1 duplicate genes have
differing functional capacities, suggesting divergence after duplication. We also
find that an intriguing function 'shuffling' between paralogues has occurred,
such that one of the zebrafish hoxb1 duplicates, hoxb1b, performs the role in
hindbrain patterning played in mouse by the non-orthologous Hoxa1 gene.

PMID: 11493564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Development. 2001 Jun;128(11):2031-8.

Roles of retinoic acid receptors in early embryonic morphogenesis and hindbrain
patterning.

Wendling O(1), Ghyselinck NB, Chambon P, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, B.P. 163, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

Mutants mice carrying targeted inactivations of both retinoic acid receptor (RAR)
alpha and RAR gamma (A alpha/A gamma mutants) were analyzed at different
embryonic stages, in order to establish the timing of appearance of defects that 
we previously observed during the fetal period. We show that embryonic day (E)9.5
A alpha/A gamma embryos display severe malformations, similar to those already
described in retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 null mutants. These malformations
reflect early roles of retinoic acid signaling in axial rotation, segmentation
and closure of the hindbrain; formation of otocysts, pharyngeal arches and
forelimb buds; and in the closure of the primitive gut. The hindbrain of E8.5 A
alpha/A gamma embryos shows a posterior expansion of rhombomere 3 and 4 (R3 and
R4) markers, but fails to express kreisler, a normal marker of R5 and R6. This
abnormal hindbrain phenotype is strikingly different from that of embryos lacking
RAR alpha and RAR beta (A alpha/A beta mutants), in which we have previously
shown that the territory corresponding to R5 and R6 is markedly enlarged.
Administration of a pan-RAR antagonist at E8.0 to wild-type embryos cultured in
vitro results in an A alpha/A beta-like hindbrain phenotype, whereas an earlier
treatment at E7.0 yields an A alpha/A gamma-like phenotype. Altogether, our data 
suggest that RAR alpha and/or RAR gamma transduce the RA signal that is required 
first to specify the prospective R5/R6 territory, whereas RAR beta is
subsequently involved in setting up the caudal boundary of this territory.

PMID: 11493525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Protein Sci. 2001 Jun;10(6):1244-53.

The HoxB1 hexapeptide is a prefolded domain: implications for the Pbx1/Hox
interaction.

Slupsky CM(1), Sykes DB, Gay GL, Sykes BD.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Engineering Network of Centres of Excellence, Department of
Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2H7, Canada.

Hox proteins are transcriptional regulators that bind consensus DNA sequences.
The DNA-binding specificity of many of these Hox proteins is modulated by the
heterodimerization with partners, such as the Pbx proteins. This cooperative
heterodimerization is accomplished through a conserved hexapeptide motif found
N-terminal to the Hox DNA-binding homeodomain. Several human leukemias have been 
associated with a chromosomal translocation involving either the Hox gene (i.e., 
NUP98/HOXA9) or the gene encoding Pbx1 (E2A/PBX1). The transforming ability of
these fusion oncoproteins relies at least partially on the ability to interact
with one another through this hexapeptide motif. Herein we describe NMR
structural calculations of the hexapeptide of HoxB1
(Nalpha-acetyl-Thr-Phe-Asp-Trp-Met-Lys-amide) that has been shown to mediate
binding between HoxB1 and Pbx1 and a hexapeptide consensus sequence
(Nalpha-acetyl-Leu-Phe-Pro-Trp-Met-Arg-amide). The consensus peptide exists in
two conformations caused by cis-trans isomerization of the Phe-Pro peptide bond. 
The structures of the HoxB1 peptide and the trans form of the consensus peptide
reveal a turn very similar to that found as part of the HoxB1/Pbx1/DNA complex in
the X-ray crystal structure. This observation implies that this region is at
least partially 'preformed' and thus ready to interact with Pbx1 and stabilize
binding of Pbx1 and HoxB1 to DNA. The structural results presented here provide a
starting point for synthesizing potential nonpeptide or cyclical peptide
antagonists that mimic the interaction of these transcriptional cofactors
resulting in a potential chemotherapeutic for certain types of leukemias.

PMCID: PMC2374006
PMID: 11369863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Dev Biol. 2001 Jun 1;234(1):244-60.

The Wheels mutation in the mouse causes vascular, hindbrain, and inner ear
defects.

Alavizadeh A(1), Kiernan AE, Nolan P, Lo C, Steel KP, Bucan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Genetics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

In a screen for mouse mutations with dominant behavioral anomalies, we identified
Wheels, a mutation associated with circling and hyperactivity in heterozygotes
and embryonic lethality in homozygotes. Mutant Wheels embryos die at E10.5-E11.5 
and exhibit a host of morphological anomalies which include growth retardation
and anomalies in vascular and hindbrain development. The latter includes
perturbation of rhombomeric boundaries as detected by Krox20 and Hoxb1. PECAM-1
staining of embryos revealed normal formation of the primary vascular plexus.
However, subsequent stages of branching and remodeling do not proceed normally in
the yolk sac and in the embryo proper. To obtain insights into the circling
behavior, we examined development of the inner ear by paint-filling of membranous
labyrinths of Whl/+ embryos. This analysis revealed smaller posterior and lateral
semicircular canal primordia and a delay in the canal fusion process at E12.5. By
E13.5, the lateral canal was truncated and the posterior canal was small or
absent altogether. Marker analysis revealed an early molecular phenotype in
heterozygous embryos characterized by perturbed expression of Bmp4 and Msx1 in
prospective lateral and posterior cristae at E11.5. We have constructed a genetic
and radiation hybrid map of the centromeric portion of mouse Chromosome 4 across 
the Wheels region and refined the position of the Wheels locus to the
approximately 1.1-cM region between D4Mit104 and D4Mit181. We have placed the
locus encoding Epha7, in the Wheels candidate region; however, further analysis
showed no mutations in the Epha7-coding region and no detectable changes in mRNA 
expression pattern. In summary, our findings indicate that Wheels, a gene which
is essential for the survival of the embryo, may link diverse processes involved 
in vascular, hindbrain, and inner ear development.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11356033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20506-15. Epub 2001 Mar 1.

The recruitment of SOX/OCT complexes and the differential activity of HOXA1 and
HOXB1 modulate the Hoxb1 auto-regulatory enhancer function.

Di Rocco G(1), Gavalas A, Popperl H, Krumlauf R, Mavilio F, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-Istituto Scientifico H. San Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano,
Italy.

Regionally restricted expression patterns of Hox genes in developing embryos rely
on auto-, cross-, and para-regulatory transcriptional elements. One example is
the Hoxb1 auto-regulatory element (b1-ARE), which drives expression of Hoxb1 in
the fourth rhombomere of the hindbrain. We previously showed that HOXB1 and PBX1 
activate transcription from the b1-ARE by binding to sequences required for the
expression of a reporter gene in rhombomere 4 in vivo. We now report that in
embryonal carcinoma cells, which retain characteristics of primitive
neuroectodermal cells, the b1-ARE displays higher basal and HOX/PBX-induced
activities than in other cell backgrounds. We have identified a bipartite-binding
site for SOX/OCT heterodimers within the b1-ARE that accounts for its cell
context-specific activity and is required for maximal transcriptional activity of
HOX/PBX complexes in embryonal carcinoma cells. Furthermore, we found that in an 
embryonal carcinoma cell background, HOXB1 has a significantly higher
transcriptional activity than its paralog HOXA1. We map the determinants for this
differential activity within the HOXB1 N-terminal transcriptional activation
domain. By using analysis in transgenic and HOXA1 mutant mice, we extended these 
findings on the differential activities of HOXA1 and HOXB1 in vivo, and we
demonstrated that they are important for regulating aspects of HOXB1 expression
in the hindbrain. We found that mutation of the SOX/OCT site and targeted
inactivation of Hoxa1 both impair the response of the b1-ARE to retinoic acid in 
transgenic mice. Our results show that Hoxa1 is the primary mediator of the
response of b1-ARE to retinoic acid in vivo and that this function is dependent
on the binding of SOX/OCT heterodimers to the b1-ARE. These results uncover novel
functional differences between Hox paralogs and their modulators.

PMID: 11278854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1299-312.

Meis3 synergizes with Pbx4 and Hoxb1b in promoting hindbrain fates in the
zebrafish.

Vlachakis N(1), Choe SK, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, and Program in
Neuroscience, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655,
USA.

Many Hox proteins are thought to require Pbx and Meis co-factors to specify cell 
identity during embryogenesis. Here we demonstrate that Meis3 synergizes with
Pbx4 and Hoxb1b in promoting hindbrain fates in the zebrafish. We find that
Hoxb1b and Pbx4 act together to induce ectopic hoxb1a expression in rhombomere 2 
of the hindbrain. In contrast, Hoxb1b and Pbx4 acting together with Meis3 induce 
hoxb1a, hoxb2, krox20 and valentino expression rostrally and cause extensive
transformation of forebrain and midbrain fates to hindbrain fates, including
differentiation of excess rhombomere 4-specific Mauthner neurons. This
synergistic effect requires that Hoxb1b and Meis3 have intact Pbx-interaction
domains, suggesting that their in vivo activity is dependent on binding to Pbx4. 
In the case of Meis3, binding to Pbx4 is also required for nuclear access. Our
results are consistent with Hoxb1b and Meis3 interacting with Pbx4 to form
complexes that regulate hindbrain development during zebrafish embryogenesis.

PMID: 11262231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Genes Dev. 2001 Mar 1;15(5):567-80.

Krox-20 patterns the hindbrain through both cell-autonomous and non
cell-autonomous mechanisms.

Giudicelli F(1), Taillebourg E, Charnay P, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The Krox-20 gene encodes a zinc finger transcription factor, which has been shown
previously, by targeted inactivation in the mouse, to be required for the
development of rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 in the segmented embryonic hindbrain. In
the present work, Krox-20 was expressed ectopically in the developing chick
hindbrain by use of electroporation. We demonstrate that Krox-20 expression is
sufficient to confer odd-numbered rhombomere characteristics to r2, r4, and r6
cells, presumably in a cell-autonomous manner. Therefore, Krox-20, appears as the
major determinant of odd-numbered identity within the hindbrain. In addition, we 
provide evidence for the existence of a non cell-autonomous autoactivation
mechanism allowing recruitment of Krox-20-positive cells from even-numbered
territories by neighboring Krox-20-expressing cells. On the basis of these
observations, we propose that Krox-20 regulates multiple, intertwined steps in
segmental patterning: Initial activation of Krox-20 in a few cells leads to the
segregation, homogenization, and possibly expansion of territories to which
Krox-20 in addition confers an odd-numbered identity.

PMCID: PMC312642
PMID: 11238377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Biol. 2000 Apr 15;220(2):263-84.

Vitamin A deficiency results in the dose-dependent acquisition of anterior
character and shortening of the caudal hindbrain of the rat embryo.

White JC(1), Highland M, Kaiser M, Clagett-Dame M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706-1544, USA.

The developing nervous system is particularly vulnerable to vitamin A deficiency.
Retinoid has been proposed to be a posteriorizing factor during hindbrain
development, although direct evidence in the mammalian embryo is lacking. In the 
present study, pregnant vitamin A-deficient (VAD) rats were fed purified diets
containing varying levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA; 0, 0.5, 1.5, 6, 12,
25, 50, 125, or 250 microg/g diet) or were supplemented with retinol. Hindbrain
development was studied from embryonic day 10 to 12.5 ( approximately 6 to 40
somites). Normal morphogenesis was observed in all embryos from groups fed 250
microg atRA/g diet or retinol. The most caudal region of the hindbrain was the
most sensitive to retinoid insufficiency, as evidenced by a loss of the
hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) in embryos from the 125 microg atRA/g diet 
group. Further reduction of atRA to 50 microg/g diet led to the loss of cranial
nerves IX, X, XI, and XII and associated sensory ganglia IX and X in all embryos 
as well as the loss of hindbrain segmentation caudal to the rhombomere (r) 3/4
border in a subset of embryos. Dysmorphic orthotopic otic vesicles or immature
otic-like vesicles in both orthotopic and caudally ectopic locations were also
observed. As the level of atRA was reduced, a loss of caudal hindbrain
segmentation was observed in all embryos and the incidence of otic vesicle
abnormalities increased. Perturbations in hindbrain segmentation, cranial nerve
formation, and otic vesicle development were associated with abnormal patterning 
of the posterior hindbrain. Embryos from VAD dams fed between 0.5 and 50 microg
atRA/g diet exhibited Hoxb-1 protein expression along the entire neural tube
caudal to the r3/r4 border at a time when it should be restricted to r4. Krox-20 
protein expression was expanded in r3 but absent or reduced in presumptive r5.
Hoxd-4 mRNA expression was absent in the posterior hindbrain, and the rostral
limit of Hoxb-5 protein expression in the neural tube was anteriorized,
suggesting that the most posterior hindbrain region (r7/r8) had been deleted
and/or improperly patterned. Thus, when limiting amounts of atRA are provided to 
VAD dams, the caudal portion of the hindbrain is shortened and possesses
r4/r5-like characteristics, with this region finally exhibiting r4-like gene
expression when retinoid is restricted even more severely. Thus, regions of the
anterior hindbrain (i.e., r3 and r4) appear to be greatly expanded, whereas the
posterior hindbrain (r5-r8) is reduced or absent. This work shows that retinoid
plays a critical role in patterning, segmentation, and neurogenesis of the caudal
hindbrain and serves as an essential posteriorizing signal for this region of the
central nervous system in the mammal.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10753515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Teratology. 2000 Dec;62(6):393-405.

Discovery of allelic variants of HOXA1 and HOXB1: genetic susceptibility to
autism spectrum disorders.

Ingram JL(1), Stodgell CJ, Hyman SL, Figlewicz DA, Weitkamp LR, Rodier PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Family studies have demonstrated that the autism spectrum disorders
(ASDs) have a major genetic etiologic component, but expression and penetrance of
the phenotype are variable. Mice with null mutations of Hoxa1 or Hoxb1, two genes
critical to hindbrain development, have phenotypic features frequently observed
in autism, but no naturally occurring variants of either gene have been
identified in mammals.
METHODS: By sequencing regions of genomic DNA of patients with autism spectrum
disorders, we detected a substitution variant at HOXA1 and an insertion variant
at HOXB1, both in coding regions of the genes. Fifty-seven individuals
ascertained for a diagnosis of an ASD, along with 166 of their relatives, were
typed for these variants. Two non-ASD populations were typed, and the frequency
of the newly identified alleles was determined in all groups. The genotypes of
the ASD families were tested for conformation to Hardy-Weinberg proportions and
Mendelian expectations for gene transmission.
RESULTS: The frequency of the variants was 10-25% in persons of European or
African origin. In the ASD families, there was a significant deviation from the
HOXA1 genotype ratios expected from Hardy-Weinberg proportions (P = 0.005). Among
affected offspring, a significant deviation from Mendelian expectation in gene
transmission (P = 0.011) was observed. No statistically significant effects were 
detected when the same analyses were applied to the HOXB1 locus, but there was
evidence of an interaction between HOXA1, HOXB1, and gender in susceptibility to 
ASDs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results support a role for HOXA1 in susceptibility to autism,
and add to the existing body of evidence implicating early brain stem injury in
the etiology of ASDs.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11091361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5343-54.

Hoxb1 controls effectors of sonic hedgehog and Mash1 signaling pathways.

Gaufo GO(1), Flodby P, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The diverse neuronal subtypes in the adult central nervous system arise from
progenitor cells specified by the combined actions of anteroposterior (AP) and
dorsoventral (DV) signaling molecules in the neural tube. Analyses of the
expression and targeted disruption of the homeobox gene Hoxb1 demonstrate that it
is essential for patterning progenitor cells along the entire DV axis of
rhombomere 4 (r4). Hoxb1 accomplishes this function by acting very early during
hindbrain neurogenesis to specify effectors of the sonic hedgehog and Mash1
signaling pathways. In the absence of Hoxb1 function, multiple neurons normally
specified within r4 are instead programmed for early cell death. The findings
reported here provide evidence for a genetic cascade in which an AP-specified
transcription factor, Hoxb1, controls the commitment and specification of neurons
derived from both alar and basal plates of r4.

PMID: 11076756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 9;276(6):4109-18. Epub 2000 Nov 7.

Superactivation of Pax6-mediated transactivation from paired domain-binding sites
by dna-independent recruitment of different homeodomain proteins.

Mikkola I(1), Bruun JA, Holm T, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.

The Pax6 genes encode evolutionary conserved transcription factors that act high 
up in the regulatory hierarchy controlling development of central organs such as 
the eyes and the central nervous system. These proteins contain two DNA-binding
domains. The N-terminal paired domain is separated from a paired-type homeodomain
by a linker region, and a transactivation domain is located C-terminal to the
homeodomain. Vertebrate Pax6 genes express a paired-less isoform of Pax6
(Pax6DeltaPD) from an internal start codon in the coding region between the
paired domain and homeodomain. We now provide evidence for an interaction between
the full-length isoform and Pax6DeltaPD, which enhances the transactivation
activity of Pax6 from paired domain-binding sites. The paired-like homeodomain
protein Rax behaved similarly to Pax6DeltaPD. Both Pax6DeltaPD and Rax bound to
the homeodomain of Pax6 in vitro in the absence of specific DNA binding.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments following cotransfection confirmed the
existence of complexes between Pax6 and Pax6DeltaPD, Pax6 and Rax, and
Pax6DeltaPD and Rax in vivo. Interestingly, the C-terminal subdomain of the
paired domain and the homeodomain can interact with each other. The paired domain
can also interact with itself. Surprisingly, GST pull-down assays revealed that
the homeodomains of such diverse proteins as Chx10, Six3, Lhx2, En-1, Prep1,
Prox1, and HoxB1 could all bind to Pax6, and several of these enhanced
Pax6-mediated transactivation upon coexpression. Since many homeodomain proteins 
are coexpressed with Pax6 in several tissues during development, our results
indicate the existence of novel regulatory interactions that may be important for
fine tuning of gene regulation.

PMID: 11069920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8623-33.

Cell signaling switches HOX-PBX complexes from repressors to activators of
transcription mediated by histone deacetylases and histone acetyltransferases.

Saleh M(1), Rambaldi I, Yang XJ, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

The Hoxb1 autoregulatory element comprises three HOX-PBX binding sites. Despite
the presence of HOXB1 and PBX1, this enhancer fails to activate reporter gene
expression in retinoic acid-treated P19 cell monolayers. Activation requires cell
aggregation in addition to RA. This suggests that HOX-PBX complexes may repress
transcription under some conditions. Consistent with this, multimerized HOX-PBX
binding sites repress reporter gene expression in HEK293 cells. We provide a
mechanistic basis for repressor function by demonstrating that a corepressor
complex, including histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 3, mSIN3B, and N-CoR/SMRT, 
interacts with PBX1A. We map a site of interaction with HDAC1 to the PBX1 N
terminus and show that the PBX partner is required for repression by the HOX-PBX 
complex. Treatment with the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A not only
relieves repression but also converts the HOX-PBX complex to a net activator of
transcription. We show that this activation function is mediated by the
recruitment of the coactivator CREB-binding protein by the HOX partner.
Interestingly, HOX-PBX complexes are switched from transcriptional repressors to 
activators in response to protein kinase A signaling or cell aggregation.
Together, our results suggest a model whereby the HOX-PBX complex can act as a
repressor or activator of transcription via association with corepressors and
coactivators. The model implies that cell signaling is a direct determinant of
HOX-PBX function in the patterning of the animal embryo.

PMCID: PMC102167
PMID: 11046157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 1;222(1):71-83.

A large targeted deletion of Hoxb1-Hoxb9 produces a series of single-segment
anterior homeotic transformations.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Bradley A, Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University System Health
Sciences Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Hox genes regulate axial regional specification during animal embryonic
development and are grouped into four clusters. The mouse HoxB cluster contains
10 genes, Hoxb1 to Hoxb9 and Hoxb13, which are transcribed in the same direction.
We have generated a mouse strain with a targeted 90-kb deletion within the HoxB
cluster from Hoxb1 to Hoxb9. Surprisingly, heterozygous mice show no detectable
abnormalities. Homozygous mutant embryos survive to term and exhibit an ordered
series of one-segment anterior homeotic transformations along the cervical and
thoracic vertebral column and defects in sternum morphogenesis. Neurofilament
staining indicates abnormalities in the IXth cranial nerve. Notably, simultaneous
deletion of Hoxb1 to Hoxb9 resulted in the sum of phenotypes of single HoxB gene 
mutants. Although a higher penetrance is observed, no synergistic or new
phenotypes were observed, except for the loss of ventral curvature at the
cervicothoracic boundary of the vertebral column. Although Hoxb13, the most 5'
gene, is separated from the rest by 70 kb, it has been suggested to be expressed 
with temporal and spatial colinearity. Here, we show that the expression pattern 
of Hoxb13 is not affected by the targeted deletion of the other 9 genes. Thus,
Hoxb13 expression seems to be independent of the deleted region, suggesting that 
its expression pattern could be achieved independent of the colinear pattern of
the cluster or by a regulatory element located 5' of Hoxb9.

PMID: 10885747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 1;222(1):12-26.

Locally released retinoic acid repatterns the first branchial arch cartilages in 
vivo.

Plant MR(1), MacDonald ME, Grad LI, Ritchie SJ, Richman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The fates of cranial neural crest cells are unique compared to trunk neural
crest. Cranial neural crest cells form bone and cartilage and ultimately these
cells make up the entire facial skeleton. Previous studies had established that
exogenous retinoic acid has effects on neurogenic derivatives of cranial neural
crest cells and on segmentation of the hindbrain. In the present study we
investigated the role of retinoic acid on the skeletal derivatives of migrating
cranial neural crest cells. We wanted to test whether low doses of locally
applied retinoic acid could respecify the neural crest-derived, skeletal
components of the beak in a reproducible manner. Retinoic acid-soaked beads were 
positioned at the presumptive mid-hindbrain junction in stage 9 chicken embryos. 
Two ectopic cartilage elements were induced, the first a sheet of cartilage
ventral and lateral to the quadrate and the second an accessory cartilage rod
branching from Meckel's cartilage. The accessory rod resembled a retroarticular
process that had formed within the first branchial arch domain. In addition the
quadrate was often displaced laterally and fused to the retroarticular process.
The next day following bead implantation, expression domains of Hoxa2 and Hoxb1
were shifted in an anterior direction up to the mesencephalon and Msx-2 was
slightly down-regulated in the hindbrain. Despite down-regulation in neural crest
cells, the onset of Msx-2 expression in the facial prominences at stage 18-20 was
normal. This correlates with normal distal beak morphology. Focal labeling of
neural crest with DiI showed that instead of migrating in a neat group toward the
second branchial arch, a cohort of labeled cells from r4 spread anteriorly toward
the proximal first arch region. AP-2 expression data confirmed the uninterrupted 
presence of AP-2-expressing cells from the anterior mesencephalon to r4. The
morphological changes can be explained by mismigration of r4 neural crest into
the first arch, but at the same time maintenance of their identity. Up-regulation
of the Hoxa2 gene in the first branchial arch may have encouraged r4 cells to
move in the anterior direction. This combination of events leads to the first
branchial arch assuming some of the characteristics of the second branchial arch.

PMID: 10885743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2000 Apr 14;120(2):151-64.

The previously identified r3/r5 repressor may require the cooperation of
additional negative elements for rhombomere restriction of Hoxb1.

Fox EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. au_gc@psych.purdue.edu

Hoxb1 has several rhombomere-specific roles in hindbrain development and may
contribute to development of a small number of tissues outside the hindbrain. To 
gain insight into the regulation of late Hoxb1 expression in these structures,
several regions of the Hoxb1 locus were systematically evaluated for their
ability to control late Hoxb1 expression in transgenic mouse embryos. This was
achieved by progressive enlargement of the portion of the Hoxb1 locus used to
control reporter gene expression. Unexpectedly, the previously identified
rhombomere 4 (r4) enhancer and r3/r5 repressor that were thought to be sufficient
for r4 restriction of Hoxb1 produced continuous expression throughout much of the
length of the central nervous system (CNS) and in several structures outside the 
nervous system. However, adjacent regions of the Hoxb1 locus, in combination with
the r4 enhancer and r3/r5 repressor were capable of restricting most expression
to r4 in the hindbrain, and to gut epithelium/mesoderm, caudal spinal cord and
caudal paraxial mesoderm outside the hindbrain. Expression that occurred outside 
r4 in the brains of the majority of founder embryos was confined to scattered
cells in specific regions. These cells may have arisen in r4 and then migrated
into adjacent brain regions as rhombomere lineage restrictions dissipated.
Alternatively, these dispersed stained cells may have originated outside r4
implying that Hoxb1 cannot be accurately regulated in a consistent manner outside
the Hox complex.

PMID: 10775768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16681-9.

Cooperative interactions between PBX, PREP, and HOX proteins modulate the
activity of the alpha 2(V) collagen (COL5A2) promoter.

Penkov D(1), Tanaka S, Di Rocco G, Berthelsen J, Blasi F, Ramirez F.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center in the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, New York, New York 10029,
USA.

Cell type-specific expression of the human alpha2(V) collagen (COL5A2) gene
depends on a cis-acting element that consists of two contiguous protein binding
sites (FPA and FPB) located between nucleotides -149 and -95, relative to the
transcription start site. The present study focused on the characterization of
the FPB-bound complex. DNA binding assays and cell transfection experiments
revealed that the bipartite core sequence of FPB (5'-ATCAATCA-3') binds the
PBX1/2, PREP1, and HOXB1 proteins, and this in turn leads to promoter
transactivation. In the presence of all three nuclear factors, cooperative
interactions between recombinant PBX1 and PREP1 or PBX1 and HOXB1 result in
binding of the heterodimers to FPB in vitro. Similarly, overexpression of
different combinations of PBX1, PREP1, and HOXB1 transactivates FPB-driven
transcription. In contrast to the composition of the FPB complex purified from
COL5A2-positive cells, the FPB complex from COL5A2-negative cells contains PBX2
and PREP1 but lacks PBX1. However, PBX1 exogenously introduced into
COL5A2-negative cells cannot stimulate FPB-driven transcription unless
co-expressed with PREP1. Within the intrinsic limitations of the experimental
model, our results indicate that combinatorial interactions among PBX and PREP or
HOX proteins are involved in regulating tissue-specific production of collagen V.

PMID: 10748126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Development. 2000 Apr;127(8):1553-62.

Retinoid signaling is essential for patterning the endoderm of the third and
fourth pharyngeal arches.

Wendling O(1), Dennefeld C, Chambon P, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

The requirement of retinoic acid (RA) in the initial formation of the pharyngeal 
arches was investigated by treating headfold-stage mouse embryos with a pan-RAR
antagonist in vitro and in vivo. This results in a complete absence of
mesenchyme, arteries, nerves and epibranchial placodes of the 3rd and 4th
pharyngeal arches, complete agenesis of the 3rd and 4th pouches and consistent
lack of the 6th arch artery. Mesodermally derived endothelial cells are absent
from the 3rd and 4th pharyngeal arch region and the distribution domain of EphA2 
transcripts in mesodermal cells is shifted caudally. In situ hybridization with
CRABPI, kreisler and EphA4 probes and the pattern of expression of a Wnt1-lacZ
transgene show that neural crest cells (NCC) normally destined to the 3rd and 4th
arches migrate ectopically. Most interestingly, the appearance of the 3rd and 4th
arches is prevented by the antagonist only during a very narrow window of time,
which does not correspond to the period of post-otic NCC migration. Both the
timing of appearance and the nature of the defects in RAR antagonist-treated
embryos indicate that migrating NCC and mesodermal cells destined to the caudal
pharyngeal arches do not represent primary targets of RA action. Alterations in
the endodermal expression pattern of Hoxa1, Hoxb1, Pax1, Pax9, Fgf3 and Fgf8 in
response to the antagonist-induced block in RA signal transduction demonstrate
for the first time that RA signaling is indispensable for the specification of
the pharyngeal endoderm and suggest that this signaling is necessary to provide a
permissive environment locally for the migration of NCC and mesodermal cells. Our
study also indicates that the formation of the 2nd pharyngeal arch and that of
the 3rd and 4th pharyngeal arches probably involve distinct RA-dependent
developmental processes.

PMID: 10725232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Dev Dyn. 2000 Jan;217(1):109-19.

A novel pbx family member expressed during early zebrafish embryogenesis forms
trimeric complexes with Meis3 and Hoxb1b.

Vlachakis N(1), Ellstrom DR, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

pbx genes encode homeodomain-containing transcriptional regulators that interact 
with other proteins to control embryogenesis and tumorigenesis. We present the
characterization of a zebrafish pbx CDNA that appears to encode a novel family
member, pbx4. pbx4 RNA is maternally deposited and is detected throughout the
zebrafish embryo during blastula stages. It becomes excluded from ventroanterior 
structures at late gastrula stages and is detected within the forming central
nervous system during segmentation stages. pbx4 expression overlaps with that of 
two other homeobox genes, hoxb1b and meis3, in the region of the presumptive
caudal hindbrain during gastrula stages. In vitro binding experiments revealed
that protein complexes containing Pbx4/Meis3 and Pbx4/Hoxb1b, but not
Meis3/Hoxb1b could be generated. A novel trimeric complex containing Pbx4, Meis3,
and Hoxb1b was also formed. We speculate that complexes with different
combinations of Pbx4, Meis3, and Hoxb1b specify different developmental fates
during vertebrate embryogenesis. Dev Dyn 2000;217:109-119.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10679934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Hum Mutat. 1998;12(5):363.

A genetic polymorphism in the human HOXB1 homeobox gene implying a 9bp tandem
repeat in the amino-terminal coding region. Mutations in brief no. 200. Online.

Faiella A(1), Zortea M, Barbaria E, Albani F, Capra V, Cama A, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, Istituto Scientifico H S. Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.

In man there are 39 homeobox genes of the HOX family in four loci, HOXA, HOXB,
HOXC and HOXD on chromosomes 7, 17, 12, and 2. We discovered the existence of two
major alleles, termed a and b, of gene HOXB1. They differ at a specific position 
in the 5' portion of the coding region. Sequencing the two alleles revealed that 
the allele HOXB1A, contains two copies of the 9bp sequence 5'ACAGCGCCC3',
starting at position 65 of the coding region, whereas the allele HOXB1b contains 
three copies of this sequence (Fig. 1). As a consequence, the allele HOXB1b
encodes a homeoprotein containing two copies of the tripeptide HisSerAla,
starting at amino acid residue 25, which is present in only one copy in allele
HOXB1a. We analyzed 250 individuals and found that the allelic frequencies of
HOXB1a and HOXB1b were 78.8% and 21.2%. The murine homologue contains only one
copy of the 9bp repeat (Fig. 1). 7 mouse strains, namely 129, BALB/c, C57BL/6,
C57BL/10, CAST/Ei, C3H and SPRET/Ei, are homozygous for this allele. The allele
present in gibbon and rhesus monkey appears to be identical to the human HOXB1b
(Fig. 1).

PMID: 10671062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Development. 2000 Mar;127(5):933-44.

Roles of Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in patterning the early hindbrain of the mouse.

Barrow JR(1), Stadler HS, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Early in its development, the vertebrate hindbrain is transiently subdivided into
a series of compartments called rhombomeres. Genes have been identified whose
expression patterns distinguish these cellular compartments. Two of these genes, 
Hoxa1 and Hoxa2, have been shown to be required for proper patterning of the
early mouse hindbrain and the associated neural crest. To determine the extent to
which these two genes function together to pattern the hindbrain, we generated
mice simultaneously mutant at both loci. The hindbrain patterning defects were
analyzed in embryos individually mutant for Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in greater detail and
extended to embryos mutant for both genes. From these data a model is proposed to
describe how Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Hoxb1, Krox20 (Egr2) and kreisler function together to
pattern the early mouse hindbrain. Critical to the model is the demonstration
that Hoxa1 activity is required to set the anterior limit of Hoxb1 expression at 
the presumptive r3/4 rhombomere boundary. Failure to express Hoxb1 to this
boundary in Hoxa1 mutant embryos initiates a cascade of gene misexpressions that 
result in misspecification of the hindbrain compartments from r2 through r5.
Subsequent to misspecification of the hindbrain compartments, ectopic induction
of apoptosis appears to be used to regulate the aberrant size of the misspecified
rhombomeres.

PMID: 10662633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Development. 2000 Jan;127(1):155-66.

Segmental expression of Hoxb2 in r4 requires two separate sites that integrate
cooperative interactions between Prep1, Pbx and Hox proteins.

Ferretti E(1), Marshall H, Pöpperl H, Maconochie M, Krumlauf R, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, DIBIT, Università Vita-Salute S. Raffaele, Milan,
Italy.

Direct auto- and cross-regulatory interactions between Hox genes serve to
establish and maintain segmentally restricted patterns in the developing
hindbrain. Rhombomere r4-specific expression of both Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 depends upon
bipartite cis Hox response elements for the group 1 paralogous proteins, Hoxal
and Hoxbl. The DNA-binding ability and selectivity of these proteins depend upon 
the formation of specific heterodimeric complexes with members of the PBC
homeodomain protein family (Pbx genes). The r4 enhancers from Hoxb1 and Hoxb2
have the same activity, but differ with respect to the number and organisation of
bipartite Pbx/Hox (PH) sites required, suggesting the intervention of other
components/sequences. We report here that another family of homeodomain proteins 
(TALE, Three-Amino acids-Loop-Extension: Prep1, Meis, HTH), capable of dimerizing
with Pbx/EXD, is involved in the mechanisms of r4-restricted expression. We show 
that: (1) the r4-specific Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 enhancers are complex elements
containing separate PH and Prep/Meis (PM) sites; (2) the PM site of the Hoxb2,
but not Hoxb1, enhancer is essential in vivo for r4 expression and also
influences other sites of expression; (3) both PM and PH sites are required for
in vitro binding of Prepl-Pbx and formation and binding of a ternary Hoxbl-Pbxla 
(or 1b)-Prepl complex. (4) A similar ternary association forms in nuclear
extracts from embryonal P19 cells, but only upon retinoic acid induction. This
requires synthesis of Hoxbl and also contains Pbx with either Prepl or Meisl.
Together these findings highlight the fact that PM sites are found in close
proximity to bipartite PH motifs in several Hox responsive elements shown to be
important in vivo and that such sites play an essential role in potentiating
regulatory activity in combination with the PH motifs.

PMID: 10654609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Development. 2000 Jan;127(1):75-85.

Retinoic acid synthesis and hindbrain patterning in the mouse embryo.

Niederreither K(1), Vermot J, Schuhbaur B, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, CU de Strasbourg.

Targeted disruption of the murine retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Raldh2) gene
precludes embryonic retinoic acid (RA) synthesis, leading to midgestational
lethality (Niederreither, K., Subbarayan, V., Dolle, P. and Chambon, P. (1999).
Nature Genet. 21, 444-448). We describe here the effects of this RA deficiency on
the development of the hindbrain and associated neural crest. Morphological
segmentation is impaired throughout the hindbrain of Raldh2-/- embryos, but its
caudal portion becomes preferentially reduced in size during development.
Specification of the midbrain region and of the rostralmost rhombomeres is
apparently normal in the absence of RA synthesis. In contrast, marked alterations
are seen throughout the caudal hindbrain of mutant embryos. Instead of being
expressed in two alternate rhombomeres (r3 and r5), Krox20 is expressed in a
single broad domain, correlating with an abnormal expansion of the r2-r3 marker
Meis2. Instead of forming a defined r4, Hoxb1- and Wnt8A-expressing cells are
scattered throughout the caudal hindbrain, whereas r5/r8 markers such as kreisler
or group 3/4 Hox genes are undetectable or markedly downregulated. Lack of
alternate Eph receptor gene expression could explain the failure to establish
rhombomere boundaries. Increased apoptosis and altered migratory pathways of the 
posterior rhombencephalic neural crest cells are associated with impaired
branchial arch morphogenesis in mutant embryos. We conclude that RA produced by
the embryo is required to generate posterior cell fates in the developing mouse
hindbrain, its absence leading to an abnormal r3 (and, to a lesser extent, r4)
identity of the caudal hindbrain cells.

PMID: 10654602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Genes Dev. 2000 Jan 15;14(2):198-211.

Mechanisms of Hox gene colinearity: transposition of the anterior Hoxb1 gene into
the posterior HoxD complex.

Kmita M(1), van Der Hoeven F, Zákány J, Krumlauf R, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Transposition of Hoxd genes to a more posterior (5') location within the HoxD
complex suggested that colinearity in the expression of these genes was due, in
part, to the existence of a silencing mechanism originating at the 5' end of the 
cluster and extending towards the 3' direction. To assess the strength and
specificity of this repression, as well as to challenge available models on
colinearity, we inserted a Hoxb1/lacZ transgene within the posterior HoxD
complex, thereby reconstructing a cluster with a copy of the most anterior gene
inserted at the most posterior position. Analysis of Hoxb1 expression after
ectopic relocation revealed that Hoxb1-specific activity in the fourth rhombomere
was totally abolished. Treatment with retinoic acid, or subsequent relocations
toward more 3' positions in the HoxD complex, did not release this silencing in
hindbrain cells. In contrast, however, early and anterior transgene expression in
the mesoderm was unexpectedly not suppressed. Furthermore, the transgene induced 
a transient ectopic activation of the neighboring Hoxd13 gene, without affecting 
other genes of the complex. Such a local and transient break in colinearity was
also observed after transposition of the Hoxd9/lacZ reporter gene, indicating
that it may be a general property of these transgenes when transposed at an
ectopic location. These results are discussed in the context of existing models, 
which account for colinear activation of vertebrate Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC316340
PMID: 10652274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Proteins. 1999 Dec 1;37(4):565-75.

Hydrophobicity at the surface of proteins.

Scarsi M(1), Majeux N, Caflisch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

A new method is presented to quantitatively estimate and graphically display the 
propensity of nonpolar groups to bind at the surface of proteins. It is based on 
the calculation of the binding energy, i.e., van der Waals interaction plus
protein electrostatic desolvation, of a nonpolar probe sphere rolled over the
protein surface, and on the color coding of this quantity on a smooth molecular
surface (hydrophobicity map). The method is validated on ten protein-ligand
complexes and is shown to distinguish precisely where polar and nonpolar groups
preferentially bind. Comparisons with existing approaches, like the display of
the electrostatic potential or the curvature, illustrate the advantages and the
better predictive power of the present method. Hydrophobicity maps will play an
important role in the characterization of binding sites for the large number of
proteins emerging from the genome projects and structure modeling approaches.

PMID: 10651272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):43-54.

Hindbrain respecification in the retinoid-deficient quail.

Gale E(1), Zile M, Maden M.

Author information: 
(1)New Hunt's House, King's College London, Guy's Campus, London Bridge, London, 
UK. emily.gale@kcl.ac.uk

We report here the development and rescue of the truncated hindbrain of
retinoid-deprived quail embryos. The embryo is completely rescued by an injection
of retinol into the egg; this confirms retinol, or a related retinoid, as a
required molecule in hindbrain development. Staging the retinoid replacement
enabled us to determine that the 3-4 somite stage is the period when retinoids
are required for normal development. Analysis of the development of the
retinoid-deprived hindbrain phenotype through somitogenesis has revealed a
pathway of retinoid action in early hindbrain regionalization. The hindbrain of
the retinoid-deprived embryo is normal in size, during early somitogenesis, but
has a respecified pattern of Krox-20 expression. From the earliest expression of 
Krox-20, at the 5 somite stage, the rhombomere 3 stripe fills the caudal third of
the developing hindbrain to the level of the first somite. Morphologically only
2, instead of the normal 5, rhombomere bulges form. These 2 bulges express genes 
and, later, develop morphology characteristic of rhombomeres 1 and 2 and
rhombomere 3. Posterior hindbrain specific genes, Hoxb-1, Fgf3, MafB, and the
rhombomere 5 stripe of Krox-20 are never expressed in the head neuroepithelium of
these embryos. From the initial formation of the neural plate, there is no
evidence of rhombomere 4-7 specific characteristics. These results indicate the
specification of the posterior hindbrain is lost and its cells participate in the
formation of an enlarged anterior hindbrain. In our previous study, we reported
the absence of the posterior hindbrain in retinoid-deprived quails (Maden, M.,
Gale, E., Kostetskii, I., Zile, M., 1996. Vitamin A-deficient quail embryos have 
half a hindbrain and other neural defects. Curr. Biol. 6, 417-426). Here, we show
this phenotype to be the result of respecification of the hindbrain cells. This
provides evidence for a region specific response to a single stimulus, retinol,
which suggests a pre-rhombomeric regionalization of the hindbrain.

PMID: 10559479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Development. 1999 Dec;126(23):5523-31.

The transcription factor GATA3 is a downstream effector of Hoxb1 specification in
rhombomere 4.

Pata I(1), Studer M, van Doorninck JH, Briscoe J, Kuuse S, Engel JD, Grosveld F, 
Karis A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, 51010 Tartu,
Estonia.

In this paper, we show that the transcription factor GATA3 is dynamically
expressed during hindbrain development. Function of GATA3 in ventral rhombomere
(r) 4 is dependent on functional GATA2, which in turn is under the control of
Hoxb1. In particular, the absence of Hoxb1 results in the loss of GATA2
expression in r4 and the absence of GATA2 results in the loss of GATA3
expression. The lack of GATA3 expression in r4 inhibits the projection of
contralateral vestibuloacoustic efferent neurons and the migration of facial
branchiomotor neurons similar to Hoxb1-deficient mice. Ubiquitous expression of
Hoxb1 in the hindbrain induces ectopic expression of GATA2 and GATA3 in ventral
r2 and r3. These findings demonstrate that GATA2 and GATA3 lie downstream of
Hoxb1 and provide the first example of Hox pathway transcription factors within a
defined population of vertebrate motor neurons.

PMID: 10556076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5027-40.

Mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 show extensive remodeling of the hindbrain
and defects in craniofacial development.

Rossel M(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The analysis of mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 suggests that these two
genes function together to pattern the hindbrain. Separately, mutations in Hoxa1 
and Hoxb1 have profoundly different effects on hindbrain development. Hoxa1
mutations disrupt the rhombomeric organization of the hindbrain, whereas Hoxb1
mutations do not alter the rhombomeric pattern, but instead influence the fate of
cells originating in rhombomere 4. We suggest that these differences are not the 
consequences of different functional roles for these gene products, but rather
reflect differences in the kinetics of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 gene expression. In strong
support of the idea that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping functions, Hoxa1/Hoxb1 
double mutant homozygotes exhibit a plethora of defects either not seen, or seen 
only in a very mild form, in mice mutant for only Hoxa1 or Hoxb1. Examples
include: the loss of both rhombomeres 4 and 5, the selective loss of the 2(nd)
branchial arch, and the loss of most, but not all, 2(nd) branchial arch-derived
tissues. We suggest that the early role for both of these genes in hindbrain
development is specification of rhombomere identities and that the aberrant
development of the hindbrain in Hoxa1/Hoxb1 double mutants proceeds through two
phases, the misspecification of rhombomeres within the hindbrain, followed
subsequently by size regulation of the misspecified hindbrain through induction
of apoptosis.

PMID: 10529420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Mol Biol. 1999 Aug 20;291(3):521-30.

NMR studies of the pbx1 TALE homeodomain protein free in solution and bound to
DNA: proposal for a mechanism of HoxB1-Pbx1-DNA complex assembly.

Jabet C(1), Gitti R, Summers MF, Wolberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 21205, USA.

The Hox homeodomain proteins are transcription factors involved in developmental 
regulation. Many of the vertebrate Hox proteins bind DNA cooperatively with the
Pbx1 homeodomain protein. The crystal structure of a human HoxB1-Pbx1-DNA ternary
complex revealed that interactions between the two proteins are mediated by the
HoxB1 hexapeptide, which inserts into a hydrophobic pocket in Pbx1. It was also
found that the Pbx1 DNA-binding domain is larger than the canonical three-helix
homeodomain, containing an additional alpha-helix that is joined to the C
terminus of the homeodomain by a turn of 310helix. These extra C-terminal
residues had previously been shown to augment the cooperative interaction of Pbx1
with Hox partners, as well as enhancing the DNA binding of monomeric Pbx1. In
order to characterize the role of the fourth Pbx1 helix in greater detail, we
have examined the backbone structure of the enlarged Pbx1 DNA-binding domain in
solution by(1)H,(15)N and(13)C multidimensional NMR spectroscopy. Our results
show that the additional alpha-helix of Pbx1 is unfolded when the protein is free
in solution and that its folding is triggered by binding of Pbx1 to DNA. In
contrast, no change in conformation is observed upon mixing the HoxB1 protein
with Pbx1 in the absence of DNA. This study suggests a model for the assembly of 
a stable HoxB1-Pbx1-DNA ternary complex.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10448033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 20;274(34):24401-7.

An enhancer element for expression of the Ncx (Enx, Hox11L1) gene in neural
crest-derived cells.

Iitsuka Y(1), Shimizu H, Kang MM, Sasagawa K, Sekiya S, Tokuhisa T, Hatano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The murine Ncx (Enx, Hox11L1) gene is specifically expressed in a neuronal subset
of neural crest-derived tissues. In attempts to elucidate the regulatory DNA
element of the tissue-specific expression, we sequenced the 5'-flanking region of
the Ncx gene. The transcriptional initiation site was determined at 297
nucleotides (-297) upstream from the ATG start codon (+1). A retinoic acid
response element was located on the region between -1163 and -1150. Transient
transfection assays with the 5'-flanking sequences fused to the luciferase gene
showed that the region between -1387 and -1368 was crucial for the
tissue-specific enhancer activity. Furthermore, nuclear proteins extracted from
neural crest-derived cells such as murine and human neuroblastoma cells bind to
the DNA region between -1387 and -1368. This DNA element was also conserved in
the 5'-flanking region of the human NCX gene. Our observations strongly suggest
that the DNA element (between -1387 and -1368) contributes to tissue-specific
expression of the Ncx gene in murine and human species.

PMID: 10446220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Science. 1999 Jun 25;284(5423):2168-71.

Homeotic transformation of rhombomere identity after localized Hoxb1
misexpression.

Bell E(1), Wingate RJ, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Guy's
Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Segmentation of the hindbrain and branchial region is a conserved feature of head
development, involving the nested expression of Hox genes. Although it is
presumed that vertebrate Hox genes function as segment identifiers, responsible
for mediating registration between elements of diverse embryonic origin, this
assumption has remained untested. To assess this, retroviral misexpression was
combined with orthotopic grafting in chick embryos to generate a mismatch in Hox 
coding between a specific rhombomere and its corresponding branchial arch.
Rhombomere-restricted misexpression of a single gene, Hoxb1, resulted in the
homeotic transformation of the rhombomere, revealed by reorganization of motor
axon projections.

PMID: 10381880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mech Dev. 1999 May;83(1-2):53-64.

The PBX-regulating protein PREP1 is present in different PBX-complexed forms in
mouse.

Ferretti E(1), Schulz H, Talarico D, Blasi F, Berthelsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Biology and Biotechnology (DIBIT), H.S.
San Raffaele Scientific Institute, via Olgettina 58, 20132, Milan, Italy.

Human PREP1, a novel homeodomain protein of the TALE super-family, forms a stable
DNA-binding complex with PBX proteins in solution, a ternary complex with PBX and
HOXB1 on DNA, and is able to act as a co-activator in the transcription of
PBX-HOXB1 activated promoters (Berthelsen, J., Zappavigna, V., Ferretti, E.,
Mavilio, F., Blasi, F. , 1998b. The novel homeoprotein Prep1 modulates Pbx-Hox
protein cooperatity. EMBO J. 17, 1434-1445; Berthelsen, J., Zappavigna, V.,
Mavilio, F., Blasi, F., 1998c. Prep1, a novel functional partner of Pbx proteins.
EMBO J. 17, 1423-1433). Here we demonstrate the presence of DNA-binding PREP1-PBX
complexes also in murine cells. In vivo, PREP1 is a predominant partner of PBX
proteins in various murine tissues. However, the choice of PBX family member
associated with PREP1 is largely tissue-type specific. We report the cloning and 
expression domain of murine Prep1 gene. Murine PREP1 shares 100% identity with
human PREP1 in the homeodomain and 95% similarity throughout the whole protein.
In the adult mouse, PREP1 is expressed ubiquitously, with peaks in testis and
thymus. We further demonstrate the presence of murine Prep1 mRNA and protein, and
of different DNA-binding PREP1-PBX complexes, in mouse embryos from at least 9.5 
days p.c. Moreover, we show that PREP1 is present in all embryonic tissues from
at least 7.5-17.5 days p.c with a predominantly nuclear staining. PREP1 is able
to super-activate the PBX-HOXB-1 autoregulated Hoxb-1 promoter, and we show that 
all three proteins, PREP1, PBX and HOXB-1, are present together in the mouse
rhombomere 4 domain in vivo, compatible with a role of PREP1 as a regulator of
PBX and HOXB-1 proteins activity during development.

PMID: 10381567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):5134-42.

Trimeric association of Hox and TALE homeodomain proteins mediates Hoxb2
hindbrain enhancer activity.

Jacobs Y(1), Schnabel CA, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

Pbx/exd proteins modulate the DNA binding affinities and specificities of Hox
proteins and contribute to the execution of Hox-dependent developmental programs 
in arthropods and vertebrates. Pbx proteins also stably heterodimerize and bind
DNA with Meis and Pknox1-Prep1, additional members of the TALE (three-amino-acid 
loop extension) superclass of homeodomain proteins that function on common
genetic pathways with a subset of Hox proteins. In this study, we demonstrated
that Pbx and Meis bind DNA as heterotrimeric complexes with Hoxb1 on a
genetically defined Hoxb2 enhancer, r4, that mediates the cross-regulatory
transcriptional effects of Hoxb1 in vivo. The DNA binding specificity of the
heterotrimeric complex for r4 is mediated by a Pbx-Hox site in conjunction with a
distal Meis site, which we showed to be required for ternary complex formation
and Meis-enhanced transcription. Formation of heterotrimeric complexes in which
all three homeodomains bind their cognate DNA sites is topologically facilitated 
by the ability of Pbx and Meis to interact through their amino termini and bind
DNA without stringent half-site orientation and spacing requirements.
Furthermore, Meis site mutation in the Hoxb2 enhancer phenocopies Pbx-Hox site
mutation to abrogate enhancer-directed expression of a reporter transgene in the 
murine embryonic hindbrain, demonstrating that DNA binding by all three proteins 
is required for trimer function in vivo. Our data provide in vitro and in vivo
evidence for the combinatorial regulation of Hox and TALE protein functions that 
are mediated, in part, by their interdependent DNA binding activities as ternary 
complexes. As a consequence, Hoxb1 employs Pbx and Meis-related proteins, as a
pair of essential cofactors in a higher-order molecular complex, to mediate its
transcriptional effects on an endogenous Hox response element.

PMCID: PMC84356
PMID: 10373562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):18121-7.

Receptor interacting protein RIP140 inhibits both positive and negative gene
regulation by glucocorticoids.

Subramaniam N(1), Treuter E, Okret S.

Author information: 
(1)Department, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge University Hospital, F60 Novum,
SE-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Recent development in the field of gene regulation by nuclear receptors (NRs)
have identified a role for cofactors in transcriptional control. While some of
the NR-associated proteins serve as coactivators, the effect of the receptor
interacting protein 140 (RIP140) on NR transcriptional responses is complex. In
this report we have studied the effect of RIP140 on gene regulation by the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). We demonstrate that RIP140 antagonized all
GR-mediated responses tested, which included activation through classical GRE,
the synergistic effects of glucocorticoids on AP-1 and Pbx1/HOXB1 responsive
elements, as well as gene repression through a negative GRE and cross-talk with
NF-kappaB (RelA). This involved the ligand-binding domain of the GR and did not
occur when the GR was bound to the antagonist RU486. The strong repressive effect
of RIP140 was restricted to glucocorticoid-mediated responses in as much as it
slightly increased signaling through the RelA and the Pit-1/Pbx proteins and only
slightly repressed signaling through the Pbx1/HOXB1 and AP-1 proteins, excluding 
general squelching as a mechanism. Instead, this suggests that RIP140 acts as a
direct inhibitor of GR function. In line with a direct effect of RIP140 on the
GR, we demonstrate a GR-RIP140 interaction in vitro by a glutathione
S-transferase-pull down assay. Furthermore, the repressive effect of RIP140 could
partially be overcome by overexpression of the coactivator TIF2, which involved a
competition between TIF2 and RIP140 for binding to the GR.

PMID: 10364267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2751-8.

Specification of distinct motor neuron identities by the singular activities of
individual Hox genes.

Jungbluth S(1), Bell E, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Hodgkin
Building, Guy's Campus, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Hox genes have been implicated in specifying positional values along the
anteroposterior axis of the caudal central nervous system, but their nested and
overlapping expression has complicated the understanding of how they confer
specific neural identity. We have employed a direct gain-of-function approach
using retroviral vectors to misexpress Hoxa2 and Hoxb1 outside of the normal Hox 
expression domains, thereby avoiding complications resulting from possible
interactions with endogenous Hox genes. Misexpression of either Hoxa2 or Hoxb1 in
the anteriormost hindbrain (rhombomere1, r1) leads to the generation of motor
neurons in this territory, even though it is normally devoid of this cell type.
These ectopic neurons have the specific identity of branchiomotor neurons and, in
the case of Hoxb1-induced cells, their axons leave the hindbrain either by
fasciculating with the resident cranial motor axons at isthmic (trochlear) or r2 
(trigeminal) levels of the axis or via novel ectopic exit points in r1. Next, we 
have attempted to identify the precise branchiomotor subtypes that are generated 
after misexpression and our results suggest that the ectopic motor neurons
generated following Hoxa2 misexpression are trigeminal-like, while those
generated following Hoxb1 misexpression are facial-like. Our data demonstrate,
therefore, that at least to a certain extent and for certain cell types, the
singular activities of individual Hox genes (compared to a combinatorial mode of 
action, for example) are sufficient to impose on neuronal precursor cells the
competence to generate distinctly specified cell types. Moreover, as these
particular motor neuron subtypes are normally generated in the most anterior
domains of Hoxa2 and Hoxb1 expression, respectively, our data support the idea
that the main site of individual Hox gene action is in the anteriormost subdomain
of their expression, consistent with the phenomenon of posterior dominance.

PMID: 10331985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nat Struct Biol. 1999 Apr;6(4):297-300.

Structural basis of Hox specificity.

Wilson DS, Desplan C.

PMID: 10201389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Teratology. 1999 Mar;59(3):139-47.

Mechanism of hyperthermia effects on CNS development: rostral gene expression
domains remain, despite severe head truncation; and the hindbrain/otocyst
relationship is altered.

Buckiová D(1), Brown NA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Prague. bucki@biomed.cas.cz

To study the mechanism of hyperthermia on the development of the rostral neural
tube, we used a model in which closely-staged presomite 9.5-day rat embryos were 
exposed in culture to 43 degrees C for 13 min, and then cultured further for
12-48 hr. This treatment had little effect on the development of the rest of the 
embryo, but resulted in a spectrum of brain defects, the most severe being a lack
of all forebrain and midbrain structures. Whole-mount in situ hybridisation was
used to monitor the expression domains of Otx2, Emx2, Krox20, and hoxb1. These
showed that there were no ectopic expression patterns, for any gene at any stage 
examined. Even in those embryos which apparently lacked all forebrain and
midbrain structures, there were expression domains of Otx2 and Emx2 in the most
rostral neural tissue, and these retained their nested dorso-ventral boundaries, 
showing that cells fated to form rostral brain were not wholly eliminated. Thus, 
heat-induced rostral neural tube truncation is of a quite different mechanism
from the respecification proposed for retinoic acid, despite their very similar
phenotypes. In the hindbrain region of treated embryos, we observed decreased
intensity of Krox20, staining and an abnormal relationship developed between the 
position of hoxb1 expression and the otocyst and pharyngeal arches. In the most
extreme cases, this domain was shifted to be more caudal than the rostral edge of
the otocyst, while the otocyst retained its normal position relative to the
pharyngeal arches. We interpret this as a growth imbalance between
neuroepithelium and overlying tissues, perhaps due to a disruption of signals
from the midbrain/hindbrain boundary.

PMID: 10194804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nature. 1999 Feb 25;397(6721):649, 651.

Hox proteins reach out round DNA.

Scott MP.

Comment on
    Nature. 1999 Feb 25;397(6721):714-9.

PMID: 10067886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cell. 1999 Feb 19;96(4):587-97.

Structure of a HoxB1-Pbx1 heterodimer bound to DNA: role of the hexapeptide and a
fourth homeodomain helix in complex formation.

Piper DE(1), Batchelor AH, Chang CP, Cleary ML, Wolberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Hox homeodomain proteins are developmental regulators that determine body plan in
a variety of organisms. A majority of the vertebrate Hox proteins bind DNA as
heterodimers with the Pbx1 homeodomain protein. We report here the 2.35 A
structure of a ternary complex containing a human HoxB1-Pbx1 heterodimer bound to
DNA. Heterodimer contacts are mediated by the hexapeptide of HoxB1, which binds
in a pocket in the Pbx1 protein formed in part by a three-amino acid insertion in
the Pbx1 homeodomain. The Pbx1 DNA-binding domain is larger than the canonical
homeodomain, containing an additional alpha helix that appears to contribute to
binding of the HoxB1 hexapeptide and to stable binding of Pbx1 to DNA. The
structure suggests a model for modulation of Hox DNA binding activity by Pbx1 and
related proteins.

PMID: 10052460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Dec;9(12):969-81.

The murine Hoxb1 3' RAIDR5 enhancer contains multiple regulatory elements.

Thompson JR(1), Huang DY, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

Homeobox genes play key roles in specifying body part identity during vertebrate 
embryonic development. Retinoids are signaling molecules involved in the
regulation of expression of homeobox genes. We have previously identified an
retinoic acid (RA)-inducible enhancer (RAIDR5) located approximately 6.5 kb 3' of
the coding region of the murine Hoxb1 gene. This 3' enhancer contains three
sequences that are highly conserved in similar RA-inducible enhancers identified 
in the murine and human Hoxa1 genes and in the chicken Hoxb1 gene. One element, a
DR5 RA response element, contributes to the RA inducibility of a Hoxb1 reporter
gene construct in F9 cells. In this report, further analysis of the other two
elements of the Hoxb1 3' enhancer is reported. The two other sequences, conserved
element (CE) 1 and CE2, act as negative elements in cultured F9 cells; when
either is mutated, an increase in the beta-galactosidase activity of a Hoxb1
reporter gene construct results. A single Hoxb1 CE2 DNA element:protein binding
complex was detected in F9 stem cells, and experiments suggest that this is the
same binding protein that recognizes the CE2 element of Hoxa1. In a variant F9
cell line in which both allelic copies of the RA receptor gamma (RARgamma) gene
are disrupted, the CE2 binding complex is absent, and this absence correlates
with the inability of the CE2 element to function as a repressor of Hoxb1
reporter gene expression in these cells. A single Hoxb1 CE1 binding complex is
also detected by gel shift assays in nuclear extracts prepared from both stem and
RA-treated F9 cells. This complex contains an Mr approximately 200,000 protein as
shown by UV cross-linking. Although the sequences of the CE1 elements of Hoxb1
and Hoxa1 are highly conserved, they differ by two nucleotides. Gel shift
analysis shows that either of these nucleotide changes prevents binding of F9
cell protein extracts. When gel shift assays were performed using nuclear
extracts prepared from mouse embryos at a time when Hoxb1 mRNA is expressed,
i.e., day 9.0, CE1 and CE2 binding complexes identical in mobility to those
detected in F9 cells were observed. This suggests roles for both the CE1 and CE2 
elements in regulating Hoxb1 gene expression during development.

PMID: 9869297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Dyn. 1998 Dec;213(4):370-85.

Ectopic expression of hoxb2 after retinoic acid treatment or mRNA injection:
disruption of hindbrain and craniofacial morphogenesis in zebrafish embryos.

Yan YL(1), Jowett T, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403-1254, USA.

To investigate pattern formation in the vertebrate hindbrain, we isolated a full 
length hoxb2 cDNA clone from zebrafish. In a gene phylogeny, zebrafish hoxb2
clusters with human HOXB2, and it maps on linkage group 3 along with several
other loci whose orthologues are syntenic with human HOXB2. In the hindbrain,
hoxb2 is expressed at high levels in rhombomere 3 (r3), lower levels in r4, still
lower in r5, and at undetectable levels in r6. In r7, r8, and the rostral spinal 
cord, hoxb2 is expressed at a lower level than in r5. Lateral cells appearing to 
emanate from r4 express both hoxb2 and dlx2, suggesting that they are neural
crest. Overexpression of hoxb2 by mRNA injections into early cleavage stage
embryos resulted in abnormal morphogenesis of the midbrain and rostral hindbrain,
abnormal patterning in r4, fusion of cartilage elements arising from pharyngeal
arches 1 and 2, and ectopic expression of krx20 and valentino (but not pax2,
rtk1, or hoxb1) in the rostral hindbrain, midbrain, and, surprisingly, the eye.
Treatments with retinoic acid produced a phenotype similar to that of ectopic
hoxb2 expression, including ectopic krx20 (but not valentino) expression in the
eye, and fusion of cartilages from pharyngeal arches 1 and 2. The results suggest
that hoxb2 plays an important role in the patterning of hindbrain and pharyngeal 
arches in the zebrafish.

PMID: 9853959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1998 Nov-Dec;20(6):591-9.

All-trans-retinoic acid upregulates the expression of COUP-TFI in early-somite
mouse embryos cultured in vitro.

Clotman F(1), Van Maele-Fabry G, Picard JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium.

Exposure of embryos to an excess of retinoic acid (RA) modifies the
spatio-temporal pattern of expression of developmental genes. RA regulates the
expression of target genes through binding of the retinoid nuclear receptors
(RARs and RXRs), as heterodimers, to regulatory cis-acting elements. COUP-TF
factors, which are able to dimerize with the RXRs and to compete with the
retinoid receptors for their DNA binding sites, are suspected to modulate the
retinoid signal transduction pathway. Therefore, COUP-TF factors may be involved 
in the regulation of the expression of developmental genes and/or in the
modifications induced by an excess of RA in the expression of these genes. The
aim of this work is to assess whether RA-induced modifications in the expression 
of Krox-20 and Hox genes correlate with alterations of the expression of COUP-TF 
genes. In addition to spatial modifications in the expression patterns of Krox-20
and Hox genes, we report here an upregulation of the expression level of COUP-TFI
after RA exposure. However, this abnormality did not spatially overlap with the
modifications observed in the expression of Krox-20 and Hox genes. These data
suggest an involvement of COUP-TFI in the generation of RA-induced abnormalities,
but do not support the hypothesis of an involvement of this factor in the
regulation of the expression of Hox or Krox-20 genes.

PMID: 9831119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Nov;208(9):517-22.

Hox gene expression reveals regionalization along the anteroposterior axis of the
zebrafish notochord.

Prince VE(1), Price AL, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy and The Committee on
Developmental Biology, University of Chicago, 1027 E. 57th St., Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

The vertebrate Hox genes have been shown to confer regional identity along the
anteroposterior axis of the developing embryo, especially within the central
nervous system (CNS) and the paraxial mesoderm. The notochord has been shown to
play vital roles in patterning adjacent tissues along both the dorsoventral and
mediolateral axes. However, the notochord's role in imparting anteroposterior
information to adjacent structures is less well understood, especially as the
notochord shows no morphological distinctions along the anteroposterior axis and 
is not generally described as a segmental or compartmentalized structure. Here we
report that four zebrafish hox genes: hoxb1, hoxb5, hoxc6 and hoxc8 are
regionally expressed along the anteroposterior extent of the developing
notochord. Notochord expression for each gene is transient, but maintains a
definite, gene-specific anterior limit throughout its duration. The hox gene
expression in the zebrafish notochord is spatially colinear with those genes
lying most 3' in the hox clusters having the most anterior limits. The expression
patterns of these hox cluster genes in the zebrafish are the most direct
molecular evidence for a system of anteroposterior regionalization of the
notochord in any vertebrate studied to date.

PMID: 9799433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6201-12.

Definition of the transcriptional activation domains of three human HOX proteins 
depends on the DNA-binding context.

Viganò MA(1), Di Rocco G, Zappavigna V, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)TIGET, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Hox proteins control developmental patterns and cell differentiation in
vertebrates by acting as positive or negative regulators of still unidentified
downstream target genes. The homeodomain and other small accessory sequences
encode the DNA-protein and protein-protein interaction functions which ultimately
dictate target recognition and functional specificity in vivo. The effector
domains responsible for either positive or negative interactions with the cell
transcriptional machinery are unknown for most Hox proteins, largely due to a
lack of physiological targets on which to carry out functional analysis. We
report the identification of the transcriptional activation domains of three
human Hox proteins, HOXB1, HOXB3, and HOXD9, which interact in vivo with the
autoregulatory and cross-regulatory enhancers of the murine Hoxb-1 and human
HOXD9 genes. Activation domains have been defined both in a homologous context,
i.e., within a HOX protein binding as a monomer or as a HOX-PBX heterodimer to
the specific target, and in a heterologous context, after translocation to the
yeast Gal4 DNA-binding domain. Transfection analysis indicates that activation
domains can be identified in different regions of the three HOX proteins
depending on the context in which they interact with the DNA target. These
results suggest that Hox proteins may be multifunctional transcriptional
regulators, interacting with different cofactors and/or components of the
transcriptional machinery depending on the structure of their target regulatory
elements.

PMCID: PMC109207
PMID: 9774637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mech Dev. 1998 Aug;76(1-2):185-90.

The winged helix transcription factor Hfh2 is expressed in neural crest and
spinal cord during mouse development.

Labosky PA(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 36th and Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

The embryonic neural crest is a unique group of cells that gives rise to the
peripheral nervous system as well as many other cell types. Most of the work
describing the behavior and specification of these cells has been done in the
avian system, a system amenable to experimental manipulations such as tissue
grafting, cell transplantation and lineage tracing. This work has been greatly
facilitated by the use of molecular markers of neural crest cells such as HNK-1
and slug, markers that are not yet available for the study of mouse neural crest.
Here we demonstrate that Hfh2 (HNF3 forkhead homologue 2), a member of the
'winged helix' or 'forkhead' transcription factor gene family, is expressed in
premigratory and migrating neural crest cells in the early mouse embryo and in
motorneuron progenitors in the developing spinal cord. Using linkage analysis we 
have localized the Hfh2 gene to chromosome 4 at 44.91 cM from the centromere.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9767163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24670-5.

An enhancer element in the EphA2 (Eck) gene sufficient for rhombomere-specific
expression is activated by HOXA1 and HOXB1 homeobox proteins.

Chen J(1), Ruley HE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine (Rheumatology) and Cell Biology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. Jin.Chen@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

In the hindbrain of the mouse embryo, there is often coincident
rhombomere-restricted expression of Eph receptor tyrosine kinases and Hox
homeobox genes, raising the possibility of regulatory interactions. In this
paper, we have identified cis-acting regulatory sequences of the EphA2 (Eck)
gene, which direct node and hindbrain-specific expression in transgenic embryos. 
An 8-kilobase region of mouse genomic DNA element was sufficient to drive
rhombomere 4 (r4)-specific expression while conferring patchy expression in the
node. Further analysis localized the rhombomere-specific enhancer to a
0.9-kilobase sequence. This element contains multiple Hox-Pbx consensus binding
sites that bind to both HOXA1/Pbx1 and HOXB1/Pbx1 proteins in vitro.
Co-expression of either HOXA1 or HOXB1 with Pbx1 transactivated EphA2
enhancer-dependent reporter gene expression. These results, together with
observations of reduced EphA2 expression in hoxa1 and hoxb1 double mutant mice,
suggest that expression of EphA2 gene in rhombomere 4 is directly regulated by
Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 homeobox transcription factors.

PMID: 9733765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Jul;42(5):637-44.

Genetic patterning of the posterior neuropore region of curly tail mouse embryos:
deficiency of Wnt5a expression.

Gofflot F(1), Hall M, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
gofflot@gene.ucl.ac.be

The mouse mutant curly tail (ct) develops tail flexion defects and spina bifida
as the result of delayed or failed closure of the posterior neuropore (PNP). With
the aim of identifying genes involved in the chain of events resulting in
defective neurulation, which can be detected at day 10.5 of development, we
examined the expression patterns of a number of genes implicated in patterning of
axial structures, mesoderm and neuroepithelium. The genes analyzed were Shh,
HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, Brachyury, Hoxb1, Evx1, Fgf8, Wnt5a and Wnt5b. No
differences could be detected between non-mutant embryos and ct/ct embryos with
normal PNP size for any of these genes. Comparisons between ct/ct embryos with
enlarged PNP and phenotypically normal ct/ct or nonmutant embryos showed
differences only for Wnt5a. Expression of this gene was greatly reduced in the
ventral caudal mesoderm and hindgut endoderm. Analysis of younger embryos
revealed that prior to the stage at which embryos at risk of developing neural
tube defects can be detected, the same proportion of ct/ct embryos shows reduced 
Wnt5a expression. The proportion of embryos showing reduced expression and almost
undetectable expression of Wnt5a reflects the proportions of tail defects and
spina bifida seen at later stages. We suggest that deficiency of Wnt5a signaling 
in the ventral caudal region tissues is an important component of the mechanism
of development of the defects in affected curly tail mutant mice, and that it is 
causally related to decreased cell proliferation within the ventral caudal
region. A possible relationship between decreased Wnt5a expression and reduced
levels of heparan sulphate proteoglycan is discussed.

PMID: 9712518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3235-46.

A conserved retinoic acid responsive element in the murine Hoxb-1 gene is
required for expression in the developing gut.

Huang D(1), Chen SW, Langston AW, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, NY
10021, USA.

The murine Hoxb-1 gene contains a homeobox sequence and is expressed in a
spatiotemporal specific pattern in neuroectoderm, mesoderm and gut endoderm
during development. We previously identified a conserved retinoic acid
(RA)-inducible enhancer, named the RAIDR5, which contains a DR5 RARE; this RAIDR5
enhancer is located 3' of the Hoxb-1-coding region in both the mouse and chick.
In the F9 murine teratocarcinoma cell line, this DR5 RARE is required for the RA 
response of the Hoxb-1 gene, suggesting a functional role of the DR5 RARE in
Hoxb-1 gene expression during embryogenesis. From the analysis of Hoxb-1/lacZ
reporter genes in transgenic mice, we have shown that a wild-type (WT) transgene 
with 15 kb of Hoxb-1 genomic DNA, including this Hoxb-1 3' RAIDR5, is expressed
in the same tissues and at the same times as the endogenous Hoxb-1 gene. However,
a transgene construct with point mutations in the DR5 RARE (DR5mu) was not
expressed in the developing foregut, which gives rise to organs such as the
esophagus, lung, stomach, liver and pancreas. Like the wild-type transgene, this 
DR5 RARE mutated transgene was expressed in rhombomere 4 in 9.5 day postcoitum
(d.p.c.) embryos. Similarly, transgene staining in the foregut of animals
carrying a deletion of the entire Hox-b1 RAIDR5 enhancer (3'-del) was greatly
reduced relative to that seen with the WT transgene. We also demonstrated that
expression of the WT transgene in the gut increases in response to exogenous RA, 
resulting in anterior expansion of the expression in the gut. These observations 
that the Hoxb-1 gene is expressed in the developing gut and that this expression 
is regulated through a DR5 RARE strongly suggest a role for Hoxb-1 in the
anteroposterior axis patterning of the gut and a critical role for endogenous
retinoids in early gut development.

PMID: 9671595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 1;273(18):11092-9.

Regulatory interactions between the human HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 proteins and
the upstream sequence of the Otx2 gene in embryonal carcinoma cells.

Guazzi S(1), Pintonello ML, Viganò A, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, H. San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy. guazzis@dibit.hsr.it

Vertebrate Hox and Otx genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors 
thought to transduce positional information along the body axis in the segmental 
portion of the trunk and in the rostral brain, respectively. Moreover, Hox and
Otx2 genes show a complementary spatial regulation during embryogenesis. In this 
report, we show that a 1821-base pair (bp) upstream DNA fragment of the Otx2 gene
is positively regulated by co-transfection with expression vectors for the human 
HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 proteins in an embryonal carcinoma cell line (NT2/D1) and
that a shorter fragment of only 534 bp is able to drive this regulation. We also 
identified the HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 DNA-binding region on the 534-bp Otx2
genomic fragment using nuclear extracts from Hox-transfected COS cells and 12.5
days postcoitum mouse embryos or HOXB3 homeodomain-containing bacterial extracts.
HOXB1, HOXB3, and nuclear extracts from 12.5 days postcoitum mouse embryos bind
to a sequence containing two palindromic TAATTA sites, which bear four copies of 
the ATTA core sequence, a common feature of most HOM-C/HOX binding sites. HOXB2
protected an adjacent site containing a direct repeat of an ACTT sequence, quite 
divergent from the ATTA consensus. The region bound by the three homeoproteins is
strikingly conserved through evolution and necessary (at least for HOXB1 and
HOXB3) to mediate the up-regulation of the Otx2 transcription. Taken together,
our data support the hypothesis that anteriorly expressed Hox genes might play a 
role in the refinement of the Otx2 early expression boundaries in vivo.

PMID: 9556594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):1123-36.

Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 synergize in patterning the hindbrain, cranial nerves and second 
pharyngeal arch.

Gavalas A(1), Studer M, Lumsden A, Rijli FM, Krumlauf R, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire and Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collége de France, BP 163 - 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de
Strasbourg, France.

The analysis of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 null mutants suggested that these genes are
involved in distinct aspects of hindbrain segmentation and specification. Here we
investigate the possible functional synergy of the two genes. The generation of
Hoxa1(3'RARE)/Hoxb1(3'RARE) compound mutants resulted in mild facial motor nerve 
defects reminiscent of those present in the Hoxb1 null mutants. Strong genetic
interactions between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 were uncovered by introducing the
Hoxb1(3'RARE) and Hoxb1 null mutations into the Hoxa1 null genetic background.
Hoxa1(null)/Hoxb1(3'RARE) and Hoxa1(null)/Hoxb1(null )double homozygous embryos
showed additional patterning defects in the r4-r6 region but maintained a
molecularly distinct r4-like territory. Neurofilament staining and retrograde
labelling of motor neurons indicated that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 synergise in patterning
the VIIth through XIth cranial nerves. The second arch expression of neural crest
cell markers was abolished or dramatically reduced, suggesting a defect in this
cell population. Strikingly, the second arch of the double mutant embryos
involuted by 10.5 dpc and this resulted in loss of all second arch-derived
elements and complete disruption of external and middle ear development.
Additional defects, most notably the lack of tympanic ring, were found in first
arch-derived elements, suggesting that interactions between first and second arch
take place during development. Taken together, our results unveil an extensive
functional synergy between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 that was not anticipated from the
phenotypes of the simple null mutants.

PMID: 9463359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):1025-36.

Genetic interactions between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 reveal new roles in regulation of
early hindbrain patterning.

Studer M(1), Gavalas A, Marshall H, Ariza-McNaughton L, Rijli FM, Chambon P,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In the developing vertebrate hindbrain Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 play important roles in
patterning segmental units (rhombomeres). In this study, genetic analysis of
double mutants demonstrates that both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 participate in the
establishment and maintenance of Hoxb1 expression in rhombomere 4 through auto-
and para-regulatory interactions. The generation of a targeted mutation in a
Hoxb1 3' retinoic acid response element (RARE) shows that it is required for
establishing early high levels of Hoxb1 expression in neural ectoderm. Double
mutant analysis with this Hoxb1(3'RARE) allele and other targeted
loss-of-function alleles from both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 reveals synergy between these 
genes. In the absence of both genes, a territory appears in the region of r4, but
the earliest r4 marker, the Eph tyrosine kinase receptor EphA2, fails to be
activated. This suggests a failure to initiate rather than maintain the
specification of r4 identity and defines new roles for both Hoxb1 and Hoxa1 in
early patterning events in r4. Our genetic analysis shows that individual members
of the vertebrate labial-related genes have multiple roles in different steps
governing segmental processes in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 9463349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 2;17(5):1434-45.

The novel homeoprotein Prep1 modulates Pbx-Hox protein cooperativity.

Berthelsen J(1), Zappavigna V, Ferretti E, Mavilio F, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia dei Microrganismi dell'Università, H.S.
Raffaele, via Olgettina 58, 20132, Milan, Italy.

The products of the mammalian Pbx and Drosophila exd genes are able to interact
with Hox proteins specifically and to increase their DNA binding affinity and
selectivity. In the accompanying paper we show that Pbx proteins exist as stable 
heterodimers with a novel homeodomain protein, Prep1. Here we show that Prep1-Pbx
interaction presents novel structural features: it is independent of DNA binding 
and of the integrity of their respective homeodomains, and requires sequences in 
the N-terminal portions of both proteins. The Prep1-Pbx protein-protein
interaction is essential for DNA-binding activity. Prep1-Pbx complexes are
present in early mouse embryos at a time when Pbx is also interacting with Hox
proteins. The use of different interaction surfaces could allow Pbx to interact
with Prep1 and Hox proteins simultaneously. Indeed, we observe the formation of a
ternary Prep1-Pbx1-HOXB1 complex on a HOXB1-responsive target in vitro.
Interaction with Prep1 enhances the ability of the HOXB1-Pbx1 complex to activate
transcription in a cooperative fashion from the same target. Our data suggest
that Prep1 is an additional component in the transcriptional regulation by Hox
proteins.

PMCID: PMC1170491
PMID: 9482740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Dev Dyn. 1997 Dec;210(4):431-45.

Genetic patterning of the developing mouse tail at the time of posterior
neuropore closure.

Gofflot F(1), Hall M, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Posterior neuropore (PNP) closure coincides with the end of gastrulation, marking
the end of primary neurulation and primary body axis formation. Secondary
neurulation and axis formation involve differentiation of the tail bud
mesenchyme. Genetic control of the primary-secondary transition is not
understood. We report a detailed analysis of gene expression in the caudal region
of day 10 mouse embryos during primary neuropore closure. Embryos were collected 
at the 27-32 somite stage, fixed, processed for whole mount in situ
hybridisation, and subsequently sectioned for a more detailed analysis. Genes
selected for study include those involved in the key events of gastrulation and
neurulation at earlier stages and more cranial levels. Patterns of expression
within the tail bud, neural plate, recently closed neural tube, notochord,
hindgut, mesoderm, and surface ectoderm are illustrated and described.
Specifically, we report continuity of expression of the genes Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Evx1,
Fgf8, RARgamma, Brachyury, and Hoxb1 from primitive streak and node into
subpopulations of the tail bud and caudal axial structures. Within the caudal
notochord, developing floorplate, and hindgut, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, Shh, and
Brachyury expression domains correlate directly with known genetic roles and
predicted tissue interdependence during induction and differentiation of these
structures. The patterns of expression of Wnt5a, Hoxb1, Brachyury, RARgamma, and 
Evx1, together with observations on proliferation, reveal that the caudal
mesoderm is organised at a molecular level into distinct domains delineated by
longitudinal and transverse borders before histological differentiation.
Expression of Wnt5a in the ventral ectodermal ridge supports previous evidence
that this structure is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. These
results provide a foundation for understanding the mechanisms facilitating
transition from primary to secondary body axis formation, as well as the factors 
involved in defective spinal neurulation.

PMID: 9415428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jan;211(1):97-108.

An evolutionary conserved element is essential for somite and adjacent
mesenchymal expression of the Hoxa1 gene.

Thompson JR(1), Chen SW, Ho L, Langston AW, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

The murine Hoxa1 gene is a member of the vertebrate Hox complex and plays a role 
in defining the body plan during development. At day 8.0-9.0 post coitus, Hoxa1
transcripts are detected extensively throughout the embryo in the neural tube,
adjacent mesenchyme, paraxial mesoderm, somites and gut epithelium; expression
extends from the most caudal region of the embryo to the rhombomere 3/4 border.
This spatiotemporal expression of Hoxa1 mRNA is critical for normal embryonic
development. We have previously identified a 10 bp element, called CE2, which is 
located approximately 3 kilobases 3' of the Hoxa1 coding region in the RAIDR5
enhancer, and which binds to an approximately 170 kd protein in retinoic acid
treated P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. CE2 elements were also identified 3' of
the murine Hoxb1 gene, the chicken Hoxb1 gene and the human Hoxa1 gene. To
examine the role of this CE2 element in regulating Hoxa1 expression in vivo,
transgenic mice were generated which express a Hoxa1 beta-galactosidase reporter 
gene that contains a mutation in the CE2 element. Relative to transgenic mice
bearing a wild type CE2 element, the mutant CE2 construct recapitulated
rhombomeric, neural, and gut epithelium expression but failed to show
beta-galactosidase expression in somites and adjacent mesenchymal tissue. Gel
shift analysis showed that binding activity similar to that detected in extracts 
prepared from retinoic acid treated P19 cells was present in nuclear extracts
prepared from day 9.0 embryos. However, an additional binding complex not
detected in P19 cells was also observed. These results indicate that in
transgenic animals, the evolutionary conserved CE2 element is a somite and
adjacent mesenchymal enhancer of Hoxa1 expression.

PMID: 9438427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 1997 Aug;124(15):2923-34.

Specification of the anterior hindbrain and establishment of a normal
mid/hindbrain organizer is dependent on Gbx2 gene function.

Wassarman KM(1), Lewandoski M, Campbell K, Joyner AL, Rubenstein JL, Martinez S, 
Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Program in Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0452, USA.

Analysis of mouse embryos homozygous for a loss-of-function allele of Gbx2
demonstrates that this homeobox gene is required for normal development of the
mid/hindbrain region. Gbx2 function appears to be necessary at the neural plate
stage for the correct specification and normal proliferation or survival of
anterior hindbrain precursors. It is also required to maintain normal patterns of
expression at the mid/hindbrain boundary of Fgf8 and Wnt1, genes that encode
signaling molecules thought to be key components of the mid/hindbrain (isthmic)
organizer. In the absence of Gbx2 function, isthmic nuclei, the cerebellum, motor
nerve V, and other derivatives of rhombomeres 1-3 fail to form. Additionally, the
posterior midbrain in the mutant embryos appears to be extended caudally and
displays abnormalities in anterior/posterior patterning. The failure of anterior 
hindbrain development is presumably due to the loss of Gbx2 function in the
precursors of the anterior hindbrain. However, since Gbx2 expression is not
detected in the midbrain it seems likely that the defects in midbrain
anterior/posterior patterning result from an abnormal isthmic signaling center.
These data provide genetic evidence for a link between patterning of the anterior
hindbrain and the establishment of the mid/hindbrain organizer, and identify Gbx2
as a gene required for these processes to occur normally.

PMID: 9247335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Genes Dev. 1997 Jul 15;11(14):1885-95.

Cross-regulation in the mouse HoxB complex: the expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere
4 is regulated by Hoxb1.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Studer M, Chan SK, Pöpperl H, Sham MH, Mann RS,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC),
National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), London, UK.

Correct regulation of the segment-restricted patterns of Hox gene expression is
essential for proper patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain. We have examined the
molecular basis of restricted expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere 4 (r4), by using 
deletion analysis in transgenic mice to identify an r4 enhancer from the mouse
gene. A bipartite Hox/Pbx binding motif is located within this enhancer, and in
vitro DNA binding experiments showed that the vertebrate labial-related protein
Hoxb1 will cooperatively bind to this site in a Pbx/Exd-dependent manner. The
Hoxb2 r4 enhancer can be transactivated in vivo by the ectopic expression of
Hoxb1, Hoxa1, and Drosophila labial in transgenic mice. In contrast, ectopic
Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 are unable to induce expression, indicating that in vivo this
enhancer preferentially responds to labial family members. Mutational analysis
demonstrated that the bipartite Hox/Pbx motif is required for r4 enhancer
activity and the responses to retinoids and ectopic Hox expression. Furthermore, 
three copies of the Hoxb2 motif are sufficient to mediate r4 expression in
transgenic mouse embryos and a labial pattern in Drosophila embryos. This
reporter expression in Drosophila embryos is dependent upon endogenous labial and
exd, suggesting that the ability of this Hox/Pbx site to interact with
labial-related proteins has been evolutionarily conserved. The endogenous Hoxb2
gene is no longer upregulated in r4 in Hoxb1 homozygous mutant embryos. On the
basis of these experiments we conclude that the r4-restricted domain of Hoxb2 in 
the hindbrain is the result of a direct cross-regulatory interaction by Hoxb1
involving vertebrate Pbx proteins as cofactors. This suggests that part of the
functional role of Hoxb1 in maintaining r4 identity may be mediated by the Hoxb2 
gene.

PMID: 9242495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. EMBO J. 1997 Jun 16;16(12):3644-54.

Functional dissection of a transcriptionally active, target-specific Hox-Pbx
complex.

Di Rocco G(1), Mavilio F, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, Milano, Italy.

Hox genes control cell fates and specify regional identities in vertebrate
development. Hox proteins show a relaxed DNA-binding selectivity in vitro,
suggesting that functional specificity is achieved in vivo through the action of 
transcriptional co-factors. Pbx proteins are good candidates for such a role, on 
the basis of both genetic and biochemical evidence. We report that the human Pbx1
and HOXB1 proteins can cooperatively activate transcription through a genetically
characterized Hox target, i.e. an autoregulatory element directing spatially
restricted expression of the murine Hoxb-1 gene (b1-ARE) in the developing
hindbrain. On the b1-ARE, only a restricted subset of HOX proteins (HOXA1, HOXB1,
HOXA2) are able to bind cooperatively with Pbx1 and activate transcription.
Selective recognition of the b1-ARE is mediated by the N-terminal region of the
HOX homeodomain. The DNA-binding and protein-protein interaction functions of
HOXB1 and Pbx1 are all necessary for the assembly of a transcriptionally active
complex on the b1-ARE. Functional dissection of the complex allowed the
localization of the main activation domain in the HOXB1 N-terminal region, and of
an additional one in the C-terminal region of Pbx1 contained in the Pbx1a but not
in the alternatively spliced Pbx1b isoform. Our results indicate that Pbx1 acts
as a transcriptional co-factor of Hox proteins, allowing selective recognition
and cooperative activation of regulatory target sequences.

PMCID: PMC1169988
PMID: 9218805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Development. 1997 Jun;124(12):2297-306.

Cell movements, neuronal organisation and gene expression in hindbrains lacking
morphological boundaries.

Nittenberg R(1), Patel K, Joshi Y, Krumlauf R, Wilkinson DG, Brickell PM, Tickle 
C, Clarke JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
UK.

Rhombomeres are segmental units of the hindbrain that are separated from each
other by a specialised zone of boundary cells. Retinoic acid application to a
recently segmented hindbrain leads to disappearance of posterior rhombomere
boundaries. Boundary loss is preceded by changes in segmental expression of
Krox-20 and Cek-8 and followed by alterations in Hox gene expression. The
characteristic morphology of boundary cells, their expression of follistatin and 
the periodic accumulation of axons normally associated with boundaries are all
lost. In the absence of boundaries, we detect no change in anteroposterior
dispersal of precursor cells and, in most cases, no substantial cell mixing
between former rhombomeric units. This is consistent with the idea that lineage
restriction can be maintained by processes other than a mechanical barrier
composed of boundary cells. Much of the early organisation of the motor nuclei
appears normal despite the loss of boundaries and altered Hox expression.

PMID: 9199356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3013-20.

Distinct retinoid X receptor-retinoic acid receptor heterodimers are
differentially involved in the control of expression of retinoid target genes in 
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Chiba H(1), Clifford J, Metzger D, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch, France.

The F9 murine embryonal carcinoma cell line represents a well-established system 
for the study of retinoid signaling in vivo. We have investigated the functional 
specificity of different retinoid X receptor (RXR)-retinoic acid (RA) receptor
(RAR) isotype pairs for the control of expression of endogenous RA-responsive
genes, by using wild-type (WT), RXR alpha(-/-), RAR alpha(-/-), RAR gamma(-/-),
RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR alpha(-/-), and RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR gamma(-/-) F9 cells, as
well as panRXR and RAR isotype (alpha, beta, and gamma)-selective retinoids. We
show that in these cells the control of expression of different sets of
RA-responsive genes is preferentially mediated by distinct RXR-RAR isotype
combinations. Our data support the conclusion that RXR-RAR heterodimers are the
functional units transducing the retinoid signal and indicate in addition that
these heterodimers exert both specific and redundant functions on the expression 
of particular sets of RA-responsive genes. We also show that the presence of a
given receptor isotype can hinder the activity of another isotype and therefore
that functional redundancy between retinoid receptor isotypes can be
artifactually generated by gene knockouts.

PMCID: PMC232153
PMID: 9154799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Dev Biol. 1997 Apr 15;184(2):351-66.

The role of planar and early vertical signaling in patterning the expression of
Hoxb-1 in Xenopus.

Poznanski A(1), Keller R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley 94720, USA.

In this paper we examine the contributions of planar and vertical signaling to
the patterning of gene expression in neural development and we examine the routes
of this neural induction. We have examined how the expression of Xenopus homeobox
gene, Hoxb-1, is regulated by instruction from the mesoderm and/or endoderm and
ask whether this instruction is by the vertical or planar routes. We investigated
normal expression patterns of Hoxb-1 during early Xenopus development and Hoxb-1 
expression in sandwich explants of the dorsal marginal zone, which putatively
allow only planar signals to pass from the mesodermal and endodermal tissue
(Spemann's organizer) to the prospective neural tissue. In the latter case we
found significant variability of expression. Observations during dissections
suggested that variable degrees of invasion of the mesodermal-endodermal tissue
at the leading edge of the mesodermal mantle might be the cause of this
variability. Alternatively, differing lengths of time that the prospective neural
region spends in planar contact with tissues of the lateral or ventral regions of
the embryo could also contribute to this variability. Analysis of staged Keller
sandwich explants, "skewered" sandwiches, in which the degree of contact with
underlying, involuted mesoderm-endodermal tissues was marked, and "over-the-pole"
and "giant" sandwich explants, in which the degree of planar contact with lateral
or ventral tissues was normalized, suggests that both planar and vertical signals
are involved in induction and patterning of Hoxb-1 expression. The shift in
Hoxb-1 expression from a broad, diffuse pattern to a local, focused pattern,
characteristic of the ultimate expression pattern in vivo, does not reflect
variable degrees of contact with ventral or lateral tissues, but rather reflects 
early vertical contact with underlying mesodermal-endodermal tissues. We observed
such contact at early gastrula stages (stages 10 to 10+), stages commonly assumed
not to have the potential for vertical signaling. As the bottle cells first begin
to form, at stage 10-, a massive rotation of the lower involuting marginal zone
occurs around an internal lip ("levre interne," Nieuwkoop and Florschutz, 1950). 
This rotation initiates the formation of the Cleft of Brachet from the floor of
the blastocoele and brings the prospective mesoderm and endoderm at the leading
edge of the marginal zone into vertical apposition with the prospective neural
region quite early in gastrulation. The consequence and importance of recognizing
these early internal rearrangements are that it pushes backward the time at which
potential vertical inductive interactions between mesoderm and neurectoderm can
occur. This means that a purely planar inductive situation can cease to exist as 
early as the inception of bottle cell formation and that neural patterning
through vertical induction starts at the very beginning of gastrulation.

PMID: 9133441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Apr;41(2):365-74.

Postimplantation mouse embryos cultured in vitro. Assessment with whole-mount
immunostaining and in situ hybridization.

Van Maele-Fabry G(1), Clotman F, Gofflot F, Bosschaert J, Picard JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Catholic University of Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

The postimplantation embryos of rodents have been particularly convenient to
study in culture using the whole embryo culture (WEC) system developed by New.
Two serious limitations of the method will be illustrated in the present paper
and proposals will be made to improve the quality of the information. The first
limitation is that the developmental period amenable to culture has not been
significantly extended in recent years. In the present paper, we show that the
culture of mouse presomitic stages for 48 h leads to poorly reproducible results 
and frequent dysmorphogenic embryos. We also show that early somite stages
cultured for 54 h or less have a normal growth and differentiation. In contrast, 
the culture of these embryos for 72 h results in subtle abnormalities of the head
and the first branchial arch. The second limitation is that the gross morphology 
and histology are often not informative enough to distinguish between overall
toxicity and developmental toxicity. We suggest some improvements by the
association of WEC with two specific techniques: 1) whole-mount immunostaining of
sensory ganglia and nerves and 2) in situ hybridization on histological sections 
using molecular probes for some developmental genes. Embryos reaching about the
30 somite stage at the end of the culture were processed for whole-mount
immunostaining of sensory ganglia and nerves. We show that these structures are
very sensitive to the noxious effects of HgCl2 and valproate. Both developmental 
retardations and dysmorphogeneses of the cervical ganglia and nerves were
observed. Embryos were also exposed in vitro to low concentrations of
all-trans-retinoic acid (AT-RA) and processed for in situ hybridization with
radiolabeled anti-sense RNA probes for the Hoxb-1 and Hoxb-2 developmental genes.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of the expression domains were performed. The
data show that AT-RA induces ectopic expression domains of Hoxb-1. Our
experiments demonstrate that techniques such as immunostaining and in situ
hybridization can significantly expand the information obtained from whole
postimplantation embryo culture.

PMID: 9184346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 1;11(7):900-13.

Positive cross-regulation and enhancer sharing: two mechanisms for specifying
overlapping Hox expression patterns.

Gould A(1), Morrison A, Sproat G, White RA, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC)
National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

Vertebrate Hox genes display nested and overlapping patterns of expression.
During mouse hindbrain development, Hoxb3 and Hoxb4 share an expression domain
caudal to the boundary between rhombomeres 6 and 7. Transgenic analysis reveals
that an enhancer (CR3) is shared between both genes and specifies this domain of 
overlap. Both the position of CR3 within the complex and its sequence are
conserved from fish to mammals, suggesting it has a common role in regulating the
vertebrate HoxB complex. CR3 mediates transcriptional activation by multiple Hox 
genes, including Hoxb4, Hoxd4, and Hoxb5 but not Hoxb1. It also functions as a
selective HOX response element in Drosophila, where activation depends on
Deformed, Sex combs reduced, and Antennapedia but not labial. Taken together,
these data show that a Deformed/Hoxb4 autoregulatory loop has been conserved
between mouse and Drosophila. In addition, these studies reveal the existence of 
positive cross-regulation and enhancer sharing as two mechanisms for reinforcing 
the overlapping expression domains of vertebrate Hox genes. In contrast,
Drosophila Hox genes do not appear to share enhancers and where they overlap in
expression, negative cross-regulatory interactions are observed. Therefore,
despite many well documented aspects of Hox structural and functional
conservation, there are mechanistic differences in Hox complex regulation between
arthropods and vertebrates.

PMID: 9106661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 24;272(4):2167-75.

Retinoic acid-responsive enhancers located 3' of the Hox A and Hox B homeobox
gene clusters. Functional analysis.

Langston AW(1), Thompson JR, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

Homeobox genes control the spatial identity and differentiation of tissues in the
developing vertebrate embryo. Retinoids are signaling molecules involved in the
regulation of Hox genes. We previously identified a 3' enhancer called the
RAIDR5, which contained a DR5 retinoic acid response element (RARE) and was
responsible for the retinoic acid (RA)-associated expression of the murine Hoxa-1
gene in teratocarcinoma cells. We demonstrate that a similar enhancer, which
contains a DR5 RARE, is located at a DNase I-hypersensitive site 3' of the murine
Hoxb-1 gene. This enhancer, the Hoxb-1 RAIDR5, regulates the RA responsiveness of
the Hoxb-1 gene and is different in location and sequence from the RA-regulated
3' Hoxb-1 enhancers previously described. Several DNA elements within the murine 
Hoxa-1 RA-inducible RAIDR5 enhancer, including the DR5 RARE, conserved element
(CE) 1, and CE2, are conserved in the murine Hoxb-1 RAIDR5 enhancer, the human
homolog of Hoxa-1, and in the chicken Hoxb-1 gene. Gel shifts show that the CE2
sequence TATTTACTCA binds an RA-inducible factor, while UV cross-linking
indicates that a 170-kDa protein binds to this sequence. Thus, the Hoxa-1 and
Hoxb-1 genes possess 3' enhancers with similar sequences through which their
expression and responsiveness to endogenous retinoids are controlled.

PMID: 8999919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Development. 1997 Jan;124(1):195-203.

Ligand-bound RXR can mediate retinoid signal transduction during embryogenesis.

Lu HC(1), Eichele G, Thaller C.

Author information: 
(1)V. and M. McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Retinoids regulate various aspects of vertebrate development through the action
of two types of receptors, the retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and the
retinoid-X-receptors (RXRs). Although RXRs bind 9-cis-retinoic acid (9cRA) with
high affinity, in vitro experiments suggest that RXRs are for the most part not
liganded, but serve as auxiliary factors forming heterodimers with liganded
partner receptors such as RAR. Here we have used RXR- and RAR-specific ligands
4-[1-(3,5,5,8,8-pentamethyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-2-napthyl)ethenyl]b enzoic acid
(LG69) and
(E)-4-[2-(5,5,8,8-tetramethyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydro-2-naphthalenyl)-1-prope
nyl]benzoic acid (TTNPB), and show that, in the context of an embryo, liganded
RXR can mediate retinoid signal transduction. This conclusion emerges from
examining the induction of several retinoid-responsive genes in the limb bud
(Hoxb-6/-8, RARbeta) and in the developing central nervous system (Hoxb-1,
otx-2). RARbeta and Hoxb-1 genes were most effectively activated by a combination
of TTNPB and LG69, suggesting that the activation of these genes benefits from
the presence of ligand-bound RAR and ligand-bound RXR. Hoxb-6/-8 genes were most 
efficiently induced by LG69, suggesting that liganded RXR can activate these
genes. The regulation of the expression of the otx-2 gene was complex; expression
was repressed by TTNPB, but such repression was relieved when LG69 was provided
together with TTNPB, suggesting that ligand-bound RXR can overcome repression of 
transcription exerted by liganded RAR. Based on these findings, we propose that
in our experimental system in which ligands are provided exogenously,
transcriptional regulation of several genes involves liganded RXR.

PMID: 9006080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 24;93(26):15352-7.

A novel modifier gene for plasma von Willebrand factor level maps to distal mouse
chromosome 11.

Mohlke KL(1), Nichols WC, Westrick RJ, Novak EK, Cooney KA, Swank RT, Ginsburg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109, USA.

Type 1 von Willebrand disease (VWD), characterized by reduced levels of plasma
von Willebrand factor (VWF), is the most common inherited bleeding disorder in
humans. Penetrance of VWD is incomplete, and expression of the bleeding phenotype
is highly variable. In addition, plasma VWF levels vary widely among normal
individuals. To identify genes that influence VWF level, we analyzed a genetic
cross between RIIIS/J and CASA/Rk, two strains of mice that exhibit a 20-fold
difference in plasma VWF level. DNA samples from F2 progeny demonstrating either 
extremely high or extremely low plasma VWF levels were pooled and genotyped for
41 markers spanning the autosomal genome. A novel locus accounting for 63% of the
total variance in VWF level was mapped to distal mouse chromosome 11, which is
distinct from the murine Vwf locus on chromosome 6. We designated this locus Mvwf
for "modifier of VWF." Additional genotyping of as many as 2407 meioses
established a high resolution genetic map with gene order
Cola1-Itg3a-Ngfr-Mvwf/Gip-Hoxb9-Hoxb1++ +-Cbx'rs2-Cox5a-Gfap. The Mvwf candidate 
interval between Ngfr and Hoxb9 is approximately 0.5 centimorgan (cM). These
results demonstrate that a single dominant gene accounts for the low VWF
phenotype of RIIIS/J mice in crosses with several other strains. The pattern of
inheritance suggests a gain-of-function mutation in a unique component of VWF
biosynthesis or processing. Characterization of the human homologue for Mvwf may 
have relevance for a subset of type 1 VWD cases and may define an important
genetic factor modifying penetrance and expression of mutations at the VWF locus.

PMCID: PMC26408
PMID: 8986815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nature. 1996 Dec 19-26;384(6610):630-4.

Altered segmental identity and abnormal migration of motor neurons in mice
lacking Hoxb-1.

Studer M(1), Lumsden A, Ariza-McNaughton L, Bradley A, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain into rhombomeres is important for the
anterior-posterior arrangement of cranial motor nuclei and efferent nerves.
Underlying this reiterated organization, Hox genes display segmentally restricted
domains of expression, such as expression of Hoxb-1 (refs 5, 6) in rhombomere 4
(r4). Here we report that absence of Hoxb-1 leads to changes in r4 identity. In
mutant mouse embryos, molecular markers indicate that patterning of r4 is
initiated properly but not maintained. Cellular analysis by DiI tracing reveals
that the r4-specific facial branchiomotor (FBM) and contralateral
vestibuloacoustic efferent (CVA) neurons are incorrectly specified. In wild-type 
mice CVA neurons migrate from r4 into the contralateral side, and we found in
lineage analysis that FBM neurons migrate from r4 into r5. In mutants, motor
neurons differentiate but the CVA and FBM neurons fail to migrate into their
proper positions. Instead, they form a motor nucleus which migrates atypically,
and there is a subsequent loss of the facial motor nerve. These results
demonstrate that, as a part of its role in maintaining rhombomere identity,
Hoxb-1 is involved in controlling migratory properties of motor neurons in the
hindbrain.

PMID: 8967950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3817-28.

Targeted disruption of the Hoxb-2 locus in mice interferes with expression of
Hoxb-1 and Hoxb-4.

Barrow JR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Mice with a disruption in the hoxb-2 locus were generated by gene targeting. 75% 
of the hoxb-2 mutant homozygotes died within 24 hours of birth. While a majority 
of these mice had severe sternal defects that compromised their ability to
breathe, some had relatively normal sternum morphology, suggesting that one or
more additional factor(s) contributed to neonatal lethality. At 3-3.5 weeks of
age, half of the remaining hoxb-2 homozygotes became weak and subsequently died. 
All of the mutants that survived to 3 weeks of age showed marked facial paralysis
similar to, but more severe than, that reported for hoxb-1 mutant homozygotes
(Goddard, J. M., Rossel, M., Manley, N. R. and Capecchi, M. R. (1996) Development
122, 3217-3228). As for the hoxb-1 mutations, the facial paralysis observed in
mice homozygous for the hoxb-2 mutation results from a failure to form the
somatic motor component of the VIIth (facial) nerve which controls the muscles of
facial expression. Features of this phenotype closely resemble the clinical signs
associated with Bell's Palsy and Moebius Syndrome in humans. The sternal defects 
seen in hoxb-2 mutant mice are similar to those previously reported for hoxb-4
mutant mice (Ramirez-Solis, R., Zheng, H., Whiting, J., Krumlauf, R. and Bradley.
A. (1993) Cell 73, 279-294). The above results suggest that the hoxb-2 mutant
phenotype may result in part from effects of the hoxb-2 mutation on the
expression of both hoxb-1 and hoxb-4. Consistent with this proposal, we found
that the hoxb-2 mutation disrupts the expression of hoxb-1 in cis. In addition,
the hoxb-2 mutation changes the expression of hoxb-4 and the hoxb-4 mutation, in 
turn, alters the pattern of hoxb-2 expression. Hoxb-2 and hoxb-4 appear to
function together to mediate proper closure of the ventral thoracic body wall.
Failure in this closure results in severe defects of the sternum.

PMID: 9012503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 1996 Oct;122(10):3217-28.

Mice with targeted disruption of Hoxb-1 fail to form the motor nucleus of the
VIIth nerve.

Goddard JM(1), Rossel M, Manley NR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with targeted disruptions in the hoxb-1 gene. Two separate
mutations were created: the first disrupts only the homeodomain and the second
inactivates the first exon as well as the homeodomain. The phenotypes associated 
with these two mutant alleles are indistinguishable in surviving adult mice. The 
predominant defect in these mutant mice is a failure to form the somatic motor
component of the VIIth (facial) nerve, possibly through a failure to specify
these neurons. The phenotype of hoxb-1 mutant homozygotes closely resembles
features of the clinical profile associated with humans suffering from Bell's
Palsy or Moebius Syndrome. These animals should therefore provide a useful animal
model for these human diseases.

PMID: 8898234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. FASEB J. 1996 Jul;10(9):969-78.

Retinoids and Hox genes.

Marshall H(1), Morrison A, Studer M, Pöpperl H, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, London, United Kingdom.

The vertebrate embryonic body plan is constructed through the interaction of many
developmentally regulated genes that supply cells with the essential positional
and functional information they require to migrate to their appropriate
destination and generate the proper structures. Some molecular cues involved in
patterning the central nervous system, particularly in the hindbrain, are
interpreted by the Hox homeobox genes. Retinoids can affect the expression of Hox
genes in cells lines and embryonic tissues; the hindbrain and branchial region of
the head are particularly sensitive to the teratogenic effects of retinoic acid. 
The presence of endogenous retinoic acid, together with the distribution of
retinoid binding proteins and nuclear receptors in the developing embryo,
strongly suggest that retinoic acid is a natural morphogen in vertebrate
development. The molecular basis for the interaction between retinoic acid and
the Hox genes has been aided in part by approaches using deletion analysis in
transgenic mice carrying lacZ reporter constructs. Such studies have identified
functional retinoic acid response elements within flanking sequences of some of
the most 3' Hox genes, suggesting a direct interaction between the genes and
retinoic acid. Furthermore, as demonstrated using transgenic mice carrying
Hoxb-1/lacZ constructs, multiple retinoic acid response elements may cooperate
with positive and negative regulatory enhancers to specify pattern formation in
the vertebrate embryo. These types of studies strongly support the normal roles
of retinoids in patterning vertebrate embryogenesis through the Hox genes.

PMID: 8801179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Int J Dev Biol. 1996 Apr;40(2):463-70.

Expression of Hoxb-1 during gastrulation and segmentation stages of carp
(Cyprinus carpio).

Stevens CJ(1), Samallo J, Schipper H, Stroband HW, te Kronnie G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Animal Morphology and Cell Biology, Wageningen
Agricultural University, The Netherlands.

This report describes the cDNA sequence and embryonic RNA expression pattern of
carp Hoxb-1. Carp Hoxb-1 is a labial-like, homeobox-containing gene of the 3' end
of the Hox gene cluster. The expression pattern in carp is compared to that of
homologs in other vertebrates. As holds for other Hox genes, carp Hoxb-1 is
expressed with highest intensity at a sharp anterior boundary, and expression
fades out towards posterior. At later stages, gaps were found in the domain. The 
gene is expressed from late gastrulation onwards, first mainly in the hypoblast
but later in all germ layers. Its most prominent expression area is rhombomere 4 
(r4) of the hindbrain. Transcripts were also found in the neural tube, mesoderm
(lateral, head and presomite), epidermis and neural crest. At 30 hours post
fertilization, Hoxb-1 was still expressed in r4, in the anterior trunk neural
tube and in the branchial arches posterior to r4. Hox genes are thought to be
involved in the specification of positional values along the embryonic
anterior-posterior axis, and Hoxb-1 expression in r4 is supposed to be important 
for specifying the unique identity of this hindbrain segment. The conserved
expression in r4 suggests that this is also true for carp Hoxb-1.

PMID: 8793616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jan 23;93(2):900-5.

Restricted expression of homeobox genes distinguishes fetal from adult human
smooth muscle cells.

Miano JM(1), Firulli AB, Olson EN, Hara P, Giachelli CM, Schwartz SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Smooth muscle cell plasticity is considered a prerequisite for atherosclerosis
and restenosis following angioplasty and bypass surgery. Identification of
transcription factors that specify one smooth muscle cell phenotype over another 
therefore may be of major importance in understanding the molecular basis of
these vascular disorders. Homeobox genes exemplify one class of transcription
factors that could govern smooth muscle cell phenotypic diversity. Accordingly,
we screened adult and fetal human smooth muscle cell cDNA libraries with a
degenerate oligonucleotide corresponding to a highly conserved region of the
homeodomain with the idea that homeobox genes, if present, would display a smooth
muscle cell phenotype-dependent pattern of expression. No homeobox genes were
detected in the adult human smooth muscle cell library; however, five
nonparalogous homeobox genes were uncovered from the fetal library (HoxA5,
HoxA11, HoxB1, HoxB7, and HoxC9). Northern blotting of adult and fetal tissues
revealed low and restricted expression of all five homeobox genes. No significant
differences in transcripts of HoxA5, HoxA11, and HoxB1 were detected between
adult or fetal human smooth muscle cells in culture. HoxB7 and HoxC9, however,
showed preferential mRNA expression in fetal human smooth muscle cells that
appeared to correlate with the age of the donor. This phenotype-dependent
expression of homeobox genes was also noted in rat pup versus adult smooth muscle
cells. While similar differences in gene expression have been reported between
subsets of smooth muscle cells from rat vessels of different-aged animals or
clones of rat smooth muscle, our findings represent a demonstration of a
transcription factor distinguishing two human smooth muscle cell phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC40155
PMID: 8570656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jan 17;92(2):392-6.

Evidence for two distinct retinoic acid response pathways for HOXB1 gene
regulation.

Ogura T(1), Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037.

We have recently identified a promoter proximal retinoic acid (RA)-responsive
site in the 5' region of the HOXB1 gene. In this report, we have identified the
second RA-responsive site in the 3' region of the HOXB1 gene. This site also
consists of a DR-2-type target of RA receptor.retinoid X receptor complex (DR-2B)
and the binding site for a distinct RA-dependent coactivator termed
retinoid-activating protein, which shows a different tissue-specific spectrum
from the 5' responsive site. This indicates that the activation of the HOXB1 gene
is achieved through two distinct pathways. These data define an unusual
regulatory mechanism leading to the establishment of HOXB1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC42746
PMID: 7831297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jan 17;92(2):387-91.

A retinoic acid-triggered cascade of HOXB1 gene activation.

Ogura T(1), Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Retinoic acid (RA) has been proposed to be a direct regulator of HOX gene
complexes. However, the molecular mechanism of the RA signaling pathway during
normal development is unclear. We have identified an RA-responsive element in the
promoter of HOXB1 gene composed of two functionally separable sites: (i) a DR-2
sequence, which is the direct target of the RA receptor retinoid X receptor
heterodimer; and (ii) a motif for an RA-inducible and tissue-specific coactivator
termed retinoid-inducible protein. Through neither enhancer alone is functional, 
this combined element strongly activates the HOXB1 promoter in a cell-specific
and retinoid-dependent manner. Finally, this activation is potentiated by a
proximal autoregulatory site for HOXB1 gene itself. These data define a
tripartite cascade leading to the establishment of HOXB1 gene activation.

PMCID: PMC42745
PMID: 7831296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4872-7.

Coordinate expression and proliferative role of HOXB genes in activated adult T
lymphocytes.

Carè A(1), Testa U, Bassani A, Tritarelli E, Montesoro E, Samoggia P, Cianetti L,
Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

We investigated the expression of HOXB cluster genes in purified
phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-activated T lymphocytes from normal adult peripheral
blood by reverse transcription PCR and RNase protection. These genes are not
expressed in quiescent T cells, except for barely detectable B1 RNA. After the
PHA stimulus, HOXB gene activation initiates coordinately as a rapid induction
wave in the 3'-->5' cluster direction (i.e., from HOXB1 through B9 genes). Thus, 
(i) expression of the foremost 3'-located B1 and B2 genes peaks 10 min after PHA 
addition and then rapidly declines, (ii) activation of B3, B4, and B5 begins 10
min after PHA addition and peaks at later times (i.e., at 120 min for B5), (iii) 
B6, B7, and B9 are expressed at a low level starting at later times (45 to 60
min), and (iv) B8 remains silent. Treatment of PHA-activated T lymphocytes with
antisense oligonucleotides to B2 or B4 mRNA causes a drastic inhibition of T-cell
proliferation and a decreased expression of T-cell activation markers (i.e.,
interleukin 2 and transferrin receptors). Similarly, treatment of CEM-CCRF, Peer,
and SEZ627 T acute lymphocytic leukemia cell lines with anti-B4 oligomer markedly
inhibits cell proliferation. Finally, T cells stimulated by a low dosage of PHA
in the presence of 1 microM retinoic acid show a marked increase of both HOXB
expression, particularly B2, and cell proliferation. These studies provide novel 
evidence on the role of HOX genes in adult cell proliferation. (i) Coordinate,
early activation of HOXB genes from the 3'-->5' cluster side apparently underlies
T-cell activation. (ii) The expression pattern in adult PHA-activated T cells is 
strikingly similar to that observed in retinoic acid-induced teratocarcinoma
cells (A. Simeone, D. Acampora, L. Arcioni, P. W. Andres, E. Boncinelli, and F.
Mavilio, Nature (London) 346:763-766, 1990), thus suggesting that molecular
mechanisms underlying HOX gene expression in the earliest stages of development
may also operate in activated adult T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC358859
PMID: 7911974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4532-45.

Hox proteins have different affinities for a consensus DNA site that correlate
with the positions of their genes on the hox cluster.

Pellerin I(1), Schnabel C, Catron KM, Abate C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway.

The hox genes, members of a family of essential developmental regulators, have
the intriguing property that their expression in the developing murine embryo is 
colinear with their chromosomal organization. Members of the hox gene family
share a conserved DNA binding domain, termed the homeodomain, which mediates
interactions of Hox proteins with DNA regulatory elements in the transcriptional 
control regions of target genes. In this study, we characterized the DNA binding 
properties of five representative members of the Hox family: HoxA5, HoxB4, HoxA7,
HoxC8, and HoxB1. To facilitate a comparative analysis of their DNA binding
properties, we produced the homeodomain regions of these Hox proteins in
Escherichia coli and obtained highly purified polypeptides. We showed that these 
Hox proteins interact in vitro with a common consensus DNA site that contains the
motif (C/G)TAATTG. We further showed that the Hox proteins recognize the
consensus DNA site in vivo, as determined by their ability to activate
transcription through this site in transient transfection assays. Although they
interact optimally with the consensus DNA site, the Hox proteins exhibit subtle, 
but distinct, preferences for DNA sites that contain variations of the
nucleotides within the consensus motif. In addition to their modest differences
in DNA binding specificities, the Hox proteins also vary in their relative
affinities for DNA. Intriguingly, their relative affinities correlate with the
positions of their respective genes on the hox cluster. These findings suggest
that subtle differences in DNA binding specificity combined with differences in
DNA binding affinity constitute features of the "Hox code" that contribute to the
selective functions of Hox proteins during murine embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC358825
PMID: 7911971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 7;91(12):5335-9.

Inhibition of retinoic acid-induced activation of 3' human HOXB genes by
antisense oligonucleotides affects sequential activation of genes located
upstream in the four HOX clusters.

Faiella A(1), Zappavigna V, Mavilio F, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Most homeobox genes belonging to the Hox family are sequentially activated in
embryonal carcinoma cells upon treatment with retinoic acid. Genes located at the
3' end of each one of the four Hox clusters are activated first, whereas upstream
Hox genes are activated progressively later. This activation has been extensively
studied for human HOX genes in the NT2/D1 cell line and shown to take place at
the transcriptional level. To understand the molecular mechanisms of sequential
HOX gene activation in these cells, we tried to modulate the expression of 3' HOX
genes through the use of antisense oligonucleotides added to the culture medium. 
We chose the HOXB locus. A 5- to 15-fold reduction of the expression of HOXB1 and
HOXB3 was sufficient to produce a significant inhibition of the activation of the
upstream HOXB genes, as well as of their paralogs in the HOXA, HOXC, and HOXD
clusters. Conversely, no effect was detectable on downstream HOX genes. The
extent of this inhibition increased for progressively more-5' genes. The
stability of the corresponding mRNAs appeared to be unaffected, supporting the
idea that the observed effect might be mediated at the transcriptional level.
These data suggest a cascade model of progressive activation of Hox genes, with a
3'-to-5' polarity.

PMCID: PMC43989
PMID: 7911240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


