
1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2016 Mar 15. doi: 10.1111/jop.12438. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunoexpression of hoxb7 and hoxb9 in salivary gland tumours.

Fonseca FP(1,)(2), Bingle L(2), Santos-Silva AR(1), Lopes MA(1), Coletta RD(1),
de Andrade BA(3), Mariano FV(1), Kowalski LP(4), Rangel AL(5), Martins MD(6),
Meurer L(6), Hunter KD(2,)(7), Speight PM(2), Vargas PA(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Piracicaba Dental School and Faculty of Medicine, University of Campinas,
Piracicaba, Brazil. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of 
Clinical Dentistry, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. (3)Dental School,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Piracicaba, Brazil. (4)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, Sao
Paulo, Brazil. (5)Dental School, State University of Western Paraná, Cascavel,
Brazil. (6)Medical and Dental Schools, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul,
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. (7)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Biology,
School of Dentistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Salivary gland carcinomas are uncommon neoplasms and the
identification of new prognostic indicators could improve their management. HOXB7
and HOXB9 are members of the class I homeobox-containing genes important for
normal embryogenesis and that are dysregulated in several human neoplasms. This
study investigated HOXB7 and HOXB9 expressions in salivary gland tumourigenesis, 
their correlation with neoplastic proliferative and angiogenic features and their
importance as prognostic markers.
METHODS: A hundred and fifty salivary gland tumours were organized in tissue
microarray and expressions of CD105, Ki67, HOXB7 and HOXB9 were determined
through immunohistochemistry. Reactions were quantified and correlated with
clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: In normal glands, HOXB7 was found in basal cells, whereas HOXB9 was seen
in serous acinar and scattered ductal cells. Malignancies exhibited an increased 
vascular density, proliferative index, HOXB7 and HOXB9 expressions when compared 
with pleomorphic adenoma and Warthin's tumour. Significant correlation was found 
between HOXB7 and CD105 (P = 0.004) in adenoid cystic carcinomas, and HOXB7
higher expression significantly correlated with the presence of paresthesia (P = 
0.02). No marker exhibited a significant association with survival rates (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: HOXB7 and HOXB9 were expressed in normal salivary gland and were
present in benign and malignant tumours derived from these structures, and HOXB7 
significantly correlated with neoangiogenesis in AdCC. These findings suggest
that both proteins might play a role in salivary gland tumourigenesis, but they
were not significant prognostic determinants in this sample.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26991799  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Mar 16. pii: ASN.2015101126. [Epub ahead of print]

Autoantibodies Targeting a Collecting Duct-Specific Water Channel in
Tubulointerstitial Nephritis.

Landegren N(1), Pourmousa Lindberg M(2), Skov J(3), Hallgren Å(3), Eriksson D(3),
Lisberg Toft-Bertelsen T(4), MacAulay N(4), Hagforsen E(2), Räisänen-Sokolowski
A(5), Saha H(6), Nilsson T(2), Nordmark G(2), Ohlsson S(7), Gustafsson J(8),
Husebye ES(9), Larsson E(10), Anderson MS(11), Perheentupa J(12), Rorsman F(2),
Fenton RA(13), Kämpe O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical
Sciences, Uppsala Unversity, Uppsala, Sweden; nils.landegren@ki.se.
(2)Departments of Medical Sciences. (3)Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska
University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Science for Life
Laboratory, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala Unversity, Uppsala, Sweden;
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark; (5)Department of Pathology, Helsinki University Hospital and
Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland; (6)Department of Medicine, Tampere
University Hospital Medical School, Tampere, Finland; (7)Department of
Nephrology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; (8)Women's and Children's Health, and.
(9)Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen and Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway;
(10)Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden;
(11)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, California; (12)The
Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;
and. (13)Interactions of Proteins in Epithelial Transport Center, Department of
Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Tubulointerstitial nephritis is a common cause of kidney failure and may have
diverse etiologies. This form of nephritis is sometimes associated with
autoimmune disease, but the role of autoimmune mechanisms in disease development 
is not well understood. Here, we present the cases of three patients with
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1 who developed tubulointerstitial
nephritis and ESRD in association with autoantibodies against kidney collecting
duct cells. One of the patients developed autoantibodies targeting the collecting
duct-specific water channel aquaporin 2, whereas autoantibodies of the two other 
patients reacted against the HOXB7 or NFAT5 transcription factors, which regulate
the aquaporin 2 promoter. Our findings suggest that tubulointerstitial nephritis 
developed in these patients as a result of an autoimmune insult on the kidney
collecting duct cells.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 26984885  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Mar 10. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13330. [Epub ahead of
print]

The roles of HOXB7 in promoting migration, invasion and anti-apoptosis in gastric
cancer.

Joo MK(1), Park JJ(1), Yoo HS(1), Lee BJ(1), Chun HJ(2), Lee SW(3), Bak YT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea
University College of Medicine Guro Hospital, 148, Gurodong-ro, Guro-gu, Seoul,
152-703, Republic of Korea. (2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Korea University College of Medicine Anam Hospital, 73,
Inchon-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, Republic of Korea. (3)Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University College of
Medicine Ansan Hospital, 123, Jeokgeum-ro, Danwon-gu, Ansan-si, Gyeonggi-do,
425-707, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The aim of this study was to compare HOXB7 expression level
between gastric cancer and non-cancerous gastric tissues. Additionally, the
functional effects of HOXB7, including its pro-migration or invasion and
anti-apoptosis roles, were evaluated in gastric cancer cells.
METHODS: Both gene and protein expression levels of HOXB7 were examined in
gastric cancer cell lines, and HOXB7 expression was compared between primary or
metastatic gastric cancer tissues and chronic gastritis or intestinal metaplasia 
tissues. Functional studies included a wound healing assay, a Matrigel invasion
assay, and an Annexin-V assay, and Akt/PTEN activity was measured by western
blotting.
RESULTS: Both gene and protein expression levels of HOXB7 could be clearly
detected in various gastric cancer cell lines except MKN-28 cell. HOXB7
expression was significantly higher in primary or metastatic gastric cancer
tissues than in chronic gastritis or intestinal metaplasia tissues. HOXB7
knockdown led to inhibition of cell invasion and migration, had an apoptotic
effect, downregulated phosphor-Akt, and upregulated PTEN in AGS and SNU-638
cells. Reinforced expression of HOXB7 caused the opposite effects in MKN-28 and
MKN-45 cells.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that HOXB7 has an oncogenic role in gastric
cancer, which might be related to the modulation of Akt/PTEN activity to induce
cell migration/invasion and anti-apoptotic effects. This article is protected by 
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26968988  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Feb 25;7:e2109. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.356.

Increased expression of long noncoding RNA TUG1 predicts a poor prognosis of
gastric cancer and regulates cell proliferation by epigenetically silencing of
p57.

Zhang E(1), He X(1), Yin D(2), Han L(3), Qiu M(4), Xu T(5), Xia R(1), Xu L(4),
Yin R(4), De W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (2)Central Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Xuzhou 
Central Hospital, Affiliated Xuzhou Hospital, College of Medicine, Southeast
University, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Jiangsu
Key Laboratory of Molecular and Translational Cancer Research, Nanjing Medical
University Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province,
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (5)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Recent evidence highlights long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) as crucial regulators of
cancer biology that contribute to tumorigenesis. LncRNA TUG1 was initially
detected in a genomic screen for genes upregulated in response to taurine
treatment in developing mouse retinal cells. Our previous study showed that TUG1 
could affect cell proliferation through epigenetically regulating HOXB7 in human 
non-small cell lung cancer. However, the clinical significance and potential role
of TUG1 in GC remains unclear. In this study, we found that TUG1 is significantly
increased and is correlated with outcomes in gastric cancer (GC). Further
experiments revealed that knockdown of TUG1 repressed GC proliferation both in
vitro and in vivo. Mechanistic investigations showed that TUG1 has a key role in 
G0/G1 arrest. We further demonstrated that TUG1 was associated with PRC2 and that
this association was required for epigenetic repression of cyclin-dependent
protein kinase inhibitors, including p15, p16, p21, p27 and p57, thus
contributing to the regulation of GC cell cycle and proliferation. Together, our 
results suggest that TUG1, as a regulator of proliferation, may serve as a
candidate prognostic biomarker and target for new therapies in human GC.

PMID: 26913601  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cancer Lett. 2016 May 1;374(2):208-15. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.02.026. Epub
2016 Feb 19.

Distinct mechanisms for opposite functions of homeoproteins Cdx2 and HoxB7 in
double-strand break DNA repair in colon cancer cells.

Soret C(1), Martin E(1), Duluc I(1), Dantzer F(2), Vanier M(1), Gross I(1),
Freund JN(1), Domon-Dell C(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR_S1113, 3 avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France; Université de
Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, FMTS, 67081 Strasbourg, France. (2)Université de
Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, FMTS, 67081 Strasbourg, France; CNRS UMR7242,
Institut de Recherche de l'Ecole de Biotechnologie de Strasbourg, 67412 Illkirch,
France. (3)INSERM UMR_S1113, 3 avenue Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France;
Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, FMTS, 67081 Strasbourg, France.
Electronic address: Claire.domon@inserm.fr.

Homeobox genes, involved in embryonic development and tissues homeostasis in
adults, are often deregulated in cancer, but their relevance in pathology is far 
from being fully elucidated. In colon cancers, we report that the homeoproteins
HoxB7 and Cdx2 exhibit different heterogeneous patterns, Cdx2 being localized in 
moderately altered neoplasic glands in contrast to HoxB7 which predominates in
poorly-differentiated areas; they are coexpressed in few cancer cells. In human
colon cancer cells, both homeoproteins interact with the DNA repair factor
KU70/80, but functional studies reveal opposite effects: HoxB7 stimulates DNA
repair and cell survival upon etoposide treatment, whereas Cdx2 inhibits both
processes. The stimulatory effect of HoxB7 on DNA repair requires the
transactivation domain linked to the homeodomain involved in the interaction with
KU70/80, whereas the transactivation domain of Cdx2 is dispensable for its
inhibitory function, which instead needs the homeodomain to interact with KU70/80
and the C-terminal domain. Thus, HoxB7 and Cdx2 respectively use
transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms to stimulate and inhibit DNA 
repair. In addition, in cells co-expressing both homeoproteins, Cdx2 lessens DNA 
repair activity through a novel mechanism of inhibition of the transcriptional
function of HoxB7, whereby Cdx2 forms a molecular complex with HoxB7 and prevents
it to recognize its target in the chromatin. These results point out the complex 
interplay between the DSB DNA repair activity and the homeoproteins HoxB7 and
Cdx2 in colon cancer cells, making the balance between these factors a
determinant and a potential indicator of the efficacy of genotoxic drugs.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26902420  [PubMed - in process]


6. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 28;6:324. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00324. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-mRNA Pairs Associated with Outcome in AML: From In Vitro Cell-Based
Studies to AML Patients.

Bhise NS(1), Chauhan L(2), Shin M(2), Cao X(3), Pounds S(3), Lamba V(2), Lamba
JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of
FloridaGainesville, FL, USA; Department of Experimental and Clinical
Pharmacology, University of MinnesotaMinneapolis, MN, USA. (2)Department of
Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of Florida Gainesville,
FL, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Memphis, TN, USA.

Cytarabine is the primary chemotherapeutic agent used for treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Disease relapse after initial remission remains one of
the most pressing therapeutic challenges in the treatment of AML. Relapsed
disease is often resistant to cytarabine and subsequent salvage therapy is
ineffective. Recent studies have shown that some microRNAs (miRNAs) are
associated with prognosis, but have not yet explored the role of miRNAs in
cellular response to cytarabine. We identified 20 miRNAs that associate with the 
in vitro cytarabine chemo-sensitivity or apoptotic response of eight AML cell
lines. Out of the 20 miRNAs, data on 18 miRNAs was available in AML patients from
The Cancer Genome Atlas database. Our stepwise-integrated analyses (step 1 -
miRNA-target mRNA that were significantly correlated in AML patients; step 2 -
mRNAs from step 1 with significant association with overall survival (OS))
identified 23 unique miRNA-mRNA pairs predictive of OS in AML patients. As
expected HOX genes (HOXA9, HOXB7, and HOXA10) were identified to be regulated by 
miRs as well as predictive of worse OS. Additionally, miR107-Myb,
miR-378-granzyme B involved in granzyme signaling and miR10a-MAP4K4 were
identified to be predictive of outcome through integrated analysis. Although
additional functional validations to establish clinical/pharmacologic importance 
of miRNA-mRNA pairs are needed, our results from RNA electrophoretic mobility
shift assay confirmed binding of miR-10a, miR-378, and miR-107 with their target 
genes GALNT1, GZMB, and MYB, respectively. Integration of pathogenic and
pharmacologically significant miRNAs and miRNA-mRNA relationships identified in
our study opens up opportunities for development of targeted/miRNA-directed
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4729948
PMID: 26858643  [PubMed]


7. Oncol Lett. 2015 Nov;10(5):2967-2973. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

Overexpression of HOXB7 is associated with a poor prognosis in patients with
gastric cancer.

Tu W(1), Zhu X(2), Han Y(2), Wen Y(2), Qiu G(2), Zhou C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China. (2)Department of General
Surgery, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China.

Previous studies have indicated that the homeobox gene HOXB7 is overexpressed in 
certain cancers, which promotes tumorigenesis. However, less is known about the
association between the HOXB7 gene and gastric cancer. The purpose of the present
study was to investigate the association between the expression level of HOXB7
and gastric cancer. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
and western blot analysis were used to detect the expression of the homeobox B7
(HOXB7) RNA and protein, respectively. In addition, the association between the
expression of HOXB7 and the clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer
was analyzed by immunohistochemistry. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to
calculate the survival rates, and the COX proportional hazards model was used to 
investigate univariate and multivariate analyses. The expression level of HOXB7
RNA and protein was significantly elevated in cancerous tissues compared with the
corresponding normal mucosa. Increased expression of HOXB7 was significantly
associated with tumor size (P=0.01), T stage (P<0.001) and advanced Union for
International Cancer Control stage (P=0.003). In addition, patients with positive
HOXB7 expression possessed an evident lower overall survival and disease-free
survival rate compared with patients with tumors that did not express HOXB7.
Furthermore, univariate and multivariate analyses indicated that HOXB7 served as 
a significant independent prognostic factor for OS and DFS in patients with
gastric cancer. The present data indicate that the HOXB7 gene may play an
important role in the process of gastric tumorigenesis, and also indicate that
HOXB7 may be an important determinant of patient prognosis in gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC4665169
PMID: 26722273  [PubMed]


8. Oncoscience. 2015 Nov 15;2(11):917-9. eCollection 2015.

A pivotal role for HOXB7 protein in endocrine resistant breast cancer.

Jin K(1), Sukumar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

HOXB7 is a homeodomain containing transcription factor which plays a pivotal role
in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer. Our work has shown that overexpression of
HOXB7 renders cells tamoxifen resistant by mobilizing a number of receptor
tyrosine kinase pathways. EGFR expression is upregulated by direct binding of
HOXB7 to the EGFR promoter, while HOXB7 functions as a cofactor with ERa to cause
overexpression of multiple ER-target genes, including HER2, in tamoxifen
resistant breast cancer cells. Probing the pathway further, we found that
miR-196a and MYC are upstream regulators of HOXB7 expression. Mechanistically,
HOXB7 and ERa jointly upregulate HER2 which phosphorylates MYC. Thus stabilized, 
MYC in turn suppresses miR-196a. Loss of miR-196a results lifts the quelling
influence of miR-196a on HOXB7 expression. Besides shedding light on the
intricate interplay of events occurring in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer, the
work identifies a number of new therapeutic targets capable of restoring
sensitivity of breast cancer cells to tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC4675788
PMID: 26697525  [PubMed]


9. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2015 Jul-Sep;29(3):601-8.

HoxB7 PROMOTES GROWTH AND METASTASIS OF LUNG ADENOCARCINOMA CELLS THROUGH
REGULATION OF THE TGF-ß/SMAD3 SIGNALING.

Zhuang L(1), Li WH(1), Li K(1), Mao Y(1), Gao CL(1), Zhang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Second Department of Internal Medicine, the Tumor Hospital of Yunnan
Province, Kunming City, Yunnan Province, China.

HoxB7 is involved in cell migration and metastasis in many malignant tumors. But,
the role of HoxB7 in lung adenocarcinoma has not been elucidated. In the present 
study, we aimed to clarify the function of HoxB7 in the progression of lung
adenocarcinoma. The protein expression of HoxB7 was examined by
immunohistochemical assay in human lung adenocarcinoma tissues, and
lentivirus-mediated HoxB7 shRNA (Lv-shHoxB7) was transfected into lung
adenocarcinoma cells to evaluate cell proliferation and invasive potential
indicated by MTT and Transwell assays. As a result, the protein expression level 
of HoxB7 was increased in lung adenocarcinoma tissues compared with the adjacent 
non-tumor tissues (56.25% vs 31.25%, P=0.014), and was positively correlated with
the lymph node metastasis in patients with lung adenocarcinoma (P=0.036).
Moreover, knockdown of HoxB7 decreased the proliferation and invasion of lung
adenocarcinoma cells followed by decreased expression of TGF-ß/SMAD3, vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2). Taken
together, our findings demonstrate that increased expression of HoxB7 is
associated with tumor metastasis in patients with lung adenocarcinoma and HoxB7
may be implicated in promoting the development of lung adenocarcinoma through
activation of the TGF-ß/SMAD3 signaling.

PMID: 26403398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jul 15;8(7):10459-70. eCollection 2015.

Homeobox B7 promotes the osteogenic differentiation potential of mesenchymal stem
cells by activating RUNX2 and transcript of BSP.

Gao RT(1), Zhan LP(1), Meng C(1), Zhang N(1), Chang SM(1), Yao R(2), Li C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University Beijing 100050, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Stomatological
Hospita lof Nankai University Tianjin 300041, China. (3)Institute of Biophysics, 
CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
Beijing 100101, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are a reliable cell source for tissue regeneration.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the directed differentiation of MSCs
remain unclear; thus, their use is limited. Here, we investigate HOXB7 function
in the osteogenic differentiation potentials of MSCs using stem cells from apical
papilla (SCAPs) and bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs). The HOXB7 gene is highly
expressed in BMSCs compared with dental tissue-derived MSCs. We found that, in
vitro, over-expression of HOXB7 in SCAPs enhanced alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity and mineralization. HOXB7 over-expression affected the mRNA expression
of osteonectin (ON), collagen alpha-2(I) chain (COL1A2), bone sialoprotein (BSP),
and osteocalcin (OCN), led to the expression of the key transcription factor,
runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), and promoted SCAP osteogenic
differentiation in vitro. The knock-down of HOXB7 inhibited ALP activity,
mineralization, and the expression of ON, BSP, COL1A2, OCN, and RUNX2 in BMSCs in
vitro. In addition, transplant experiments in nude mice confirmed that SCAP
osteogenesis was triggered when HOXB7 was activated. Furthermore, Over-expression
of HOXB7 significantly increased the levels of HOXB7 associated with the BSP
promoter by ChIP assays. Taken together, these results indicate that HOXB7
enhances SCAP osteogenic differentiation by up-regulating RUNX2 and directly
activating transcript of BSP. Thus, the activation of HOXB7 signaling might
improve tissue regeneration mediated by MSCs. These results provide insight into 
the mechanism underlying the directed differentiation of MSCs.

PMCID: PMC4565219
PMID: 26379836  [PubMed]


11. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015 Dec 15;309(12):F1060-9. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00251.2015. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

Double transduction of a Cre/LoxP lentiviral vector: a simple method to generate 
kidney cell-specific knockdown mice.

Nam BY(1), Kim DK(2), Park JT(1), Kang HY(1), Paeng J(1), Kim S(1), Park J(1), Um
JE(1), Oh HJ(1), Han SH(1), Yoo TH(1), Kang SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Severance Biomedical
Science Institute, Brain Korea 21 PLUS, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea; and. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
College of Medicine, Severance Biomedical Science Institute, Brain Korea 21 PLUS,
Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; and kswkidney@yuhs.ac.

In a lentivirus-based gene delivery system, the incorporated gene is continuously
expressed for a long time. In this study, we devised a simple way to knock down a
specific gene in a kidney cell-specific pattern in adult mice by
lentivirus-assisted transfer of short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Kidney collecting duct
(CD)-specific aquaporin-3 (AQP3)-knockdown mice were generated by consecutive
injection of Hoxb7-Cre-expressing lentivirus (LV-Hoxb7 Cre) and loxP-AQP3
shRNA-expressing lentivirus (LV-loxP shAQP3) in adult C57BL6/J mice. LV-Hoxb7 Cre
was designed to express mCherry, while LV-loxP shAQP3 was designed with a floxed 
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-tagged stop sequence, and thus EGFP
would be expressed only in the absence of Cre recombination. In mice treated with
LV-Hoxb7 Cre alone, mCherry protein expression, which indicates the presence of
Cre recombinase, occurred only in CD cells. However, LV-loxP shAQP3 injection
alone resulted in an increase in EGFP expression in all kidney cells, indicating 
the transcription of the floxed region. When LV-Hoxb7 Cre and LV-loxP shAQP3 were
sequentially transduced, EGFP expression was attenuated while mCherry expression 
was sustained in CD cells, demonstrating a CD cell-specific recombination of the 
floxed region. AQP3 expression in mice injected with LV-Hoxb7 Cre or LV-loxP
shAQP3 alone did not differ, but consecutive injection of LV-Hoxb7 Cre and
LV-loxP shAQP3 significantly reduced AQP3 expression in CD cells. However, the
expression levels of AQP3 were not altered in other cell types. Double
transduction of Cre- and loxP-based lentivirus can easily generate kidney
cell-specific knockdown mice, and this method might be applicable to other
species.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26377795  [PubMed - in process]


12. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):28938-48. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4727.

Inhibition of 13-cis retinoic acid-induced gene expression of reactive-resistance
genes by thalidomide in glioblastoma tumours in vivo.

Milanovic D(1,)(2,)(3), Sticht C(4), Röhrich M(5), Maier P(6), Grosu
AL(1,)(2,)(3), Herskind C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany. (2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Freiburg, Germany. (3)German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Centre for Medical Research,
Universitaetsmedizin Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University,
Mannheim, Germany. (5)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology,
Ruprecht-Karls-University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Universitaetsmedizin Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim,
Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.

The cell differentiation potential of 13-cis retinoic acid (RA) has not succeeded
in the clinical treatment of glioblastoma (GBM) so far. However, RA may also
induce the expression of resistance genes such as HOXB7 which can be suppressed
by Thalidomide (THAL). Therefore, we tested if combined treatment with RA+THAL
may inhibit growth of glioblastoma in vivo. Treatment with RA+THAL but not RA or 
THAL alone significantly inhibited tumour growth. The synergistic effect of RA
and THAL was corroborated by the effect on proliferation of glioblastoma cell
lines in vitro. HOXB7 was not upregulated but microarray analysis validated by
real-time PCR identified four potential resistance genes (IL-8, HILDPA, IGFBPA,
and ANGPTL4) whose upregulation by RA was suppressed by THAL. Furthermore, genes 
coding for small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNA) were identified as a target for RA for
the first time, and their upregulation was maintained after combined treatment.
Pathway analysis showed upregulation of the Ribosome pathway and downregulation
of pathways associated with proliferation and inflammation. In conclusion,
combined treatment with RA + THAL delayed growth of GBM xenografts and suppressed
putative resistance genes associated with hypoxia and angiogenesis. This
encourages further pre-clinical and clinical studies of this drug combination in 
GBM.

PMCID: PMC4745702
PMID: 26362268  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cancer Discov. 2015 Sep;5(9):909-11. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0871.

Targeting a Novel ER/HOXB7 Signaling Loop in Tamoxifen-Resistant Breast Cancer.

Heideman MR(1), Frei A(2), Hynes NE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (3)Friedrich Miescher Institute for
Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
nancy.hynes@fmi.ch.

Comment on
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Sep;5(9):944-59.

The majority of patients with breast cancer present with an estrogen
receptor-positive (ER(+)) tumor, and the endocrine agent tamoxifen is a mainstay 
for their treatment. Unfortunately, however, resistance remains a major problem
because most patients who respond eventually have a recurrence. Thus, an enduring
challenge in the breast cancer field is to identify mechanisms underlying
tamoxifen resistance. Jin and colleagues describe a novel ER/HOXB7 signaling loop
in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer models. Importantly, they reveal that
targeting this signaling loop has great promise as an approach to treat patients 
with tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26334046  [PubMed - in process]


14. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Upregulation of HOXB7 promotes the tumorigenesis and progression of gastric
cancer and correlates with clinical characteristics.

Cai JQ(1), Xu XW, Mou YP, Chen K, Pan Y, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, 3 East Qingchun Road, Hangzhou, 310016, Zhejiang Province,
China, jiaqincai1986@163.com.

Several examples of aberrant homeobox gene expression have been found across a
range of cancers, and it is also confirmed that homeobox genes play a critical
roles in tumorigenesis and progression. Notwithstanding homeobox B7 (HOXB7) has
been documented that its deregulation promotes carcinogenesis and development in 
gastrointestinal tract, its function in gastric cancer has not been investigated.
In this study, HOXB7 expression was examined to be distinctly upregulated in
gastric carcinoma GC cell lines and in the tumor relative to normal gastric
tissue. High HOXB7 expression was correlated with tumor differentiation
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025) and TNM stage (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008). HOXB7 knockdown in BGC-823 and SGC-7901
resulted in decreased migration and invasion with alteration of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) proteins and influenced proliferation,
apoptosis, and cell cycle. Furthermore, complementary DNA (cDNA) microarray,
qPCR, and Western blotting were performed to explore potential downstream target 
genes of HOXB7. HOXB7 is generally overexpressed in GC, associated with patient
clinical characteristics, and specifically promotes GC cell malignant biological 
properties through PIK3R3/AKT signaling pathways, indicating HOXB7 as a causal
factor in promoting tumor progression.

PMID: 26307396  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2015 Sep 15;309(6):R650-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00313.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Vascular versus tubular renin: role in kidney development.

Sequeira-Lopez ML(1), Nagalakshmi VK(2), Li M(2), Sigmund CD(3), Gomez RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia; and msl7u@virginia.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia; and.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics Center
for Hypertension Research, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.

Renin, the key regulated enzyme of the renin-angiotensin system regulates blood
pressure, fluid-electrolyte homeostasis, and renal morphogenesis. Whole body
deletion of the renin gene results in severe morphological and functional
derangements, including thickening of renal arterioles, hydronephrosis, and
inability to concentrate the urine. Because renin is found in vascular and
tubular cells, it has been impossible to discern the relative contribution of
tubular versus vascular renin to such a complex phenotype. Therefore, we deleted 
renin independently in the vascular and tubular compartments by crossing Ren1(c
fl/fl) mice to Foxd1-cre and Hoxb7-cre mice, respectively. Deletion of renin in
the vasculature resulted in neonatal mortality that could be rescued with daily
injections of saline. The kidneys of surviving mice showed the absence of renin, 
hypertrophic arteries, hydronephrosis, and negligible levels of plasma renin. In 
contrast, lack of renin in the collecting ducts did not affect kidney morphology,
intra-renal renin, or circulating renin in basal conditions or in response to a
homeostatic stress, such as sodium depletion. We conclude that renin generated in
the renal vasculature is fundamental for the development and integrity of the
kidney, whereas renin in the collecting ducts is dispensable for normal kidney
development and cannot compensate for the lack of renin in the vascular
compartment. Further, the main source of circulating renin is the kidney
vasculature.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4591368 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26246508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Oct;24(10):1574-84. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1270. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Network-Based Integration of GWAS and Gene Expression Identifies a HOX-Centric
Network Associated with Serous Ovarian Cancer Risk.

Kar SP, Tyrer JP, Li Q, Lawrenson K, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N,
Chenevix-Trench G; Australian Cancer Study; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study
Group, Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean YT, Beckmann MW, Berchuck A, Bisogna M, Bjørge
L, Bogdanova N, Brinton L, Brooks-Wilson A, Butzow R, Campbell I, Carty K,
Chang-Claude J, Chen YA, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer D, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C,
Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Dürst
M, Eccles D, Easton DF, Edwards RP, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT,
Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J,
Harrington P, Harter P, Hein A, Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E,
Hogdall CK, Hosono S, Iversen ES, Jakubowska A, Paul J, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan
BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley J, Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C,
Kupryjanczyk J, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Lele S, Leminen A,
Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall L, Massuger
L, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, McNeish IA, Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich
KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Nevanlinna H, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I,
Orsulic S, Weber RP, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM,
Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph
A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Shu XO,
Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston-Campbell LE,
Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tsai YY, Tworoger SS, van
Altena AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C,
Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu A, Yang H,
Zheng W, Ziogas A, Sellers TA, Monteiro AN, Freedman ML, Gayther SA, Pharoah PD.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have so far reported 12 loci
associated with serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. We hypothesized that
some of these loci function through nearby transcription factor (TF) genes and
that putative target genes of these TFs as identified by coexpression may also be
enriched for additional EOC risk associations.
METHODS: We selected TF genes within 1 Mb of the top signal at the 12 genome-wide
significant risk loci. Mutual information, a form of correlation, was used to
build networks of genes strongly coexpressed with each selected TF gene in the
unified microarray dataset of 489 serous EOC tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Genes represented in this dataset were subsequently ranked using a gene-level
test based on results for germline SNPs from a serous EOC GWAS meta-analysis
(2,196 cases/4,396 controls).
RESULTS: Gene set enrichment analysis identified six networks centered on TF
genes (HOXB2, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7 at 17q21.32 and HOXD1, HOXD3 at 2q31) that were
significantly enriched for genes from the risk-associated end of the ranked list 
(P < 0.05 and FDR < 0.05). These results were replicated (P < 0.05) using an
independent association study (7,035 cases/21,693 controls). Genes underlying
enrichment in the six networks were pooled into a combined network.
CONCLUSION: We identified a HOX-centric network associated with serous EOC risk
containing several genes with known or emerging roles in serous EOC development.
IMPACT: Network analysis integrating large, context-specific datasets has the
potential to offer mechanistic insights into cancer susceptibility and prioritize
genes for experimental characterization.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592449
PMID: 26209509  [PubMed - in process]


17. Cancer Discov. 2015 Sep;5(9):944-59. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0090. Epub 2015
Jul 15.

HOXB7 Is an ERa Cofactor in the Activation of HER2 and Multiple ER Target Genes
Leading to Endocrine Resistance.

Jin K(1), Park S(1), Teo WW(1), Korangath P(1), Cho SS(1), Yoshida T(1), Gyorffy 
B(2), Goswami CP(3), Nakshatri H(3), Cruz LA(1), Zhou W(4), Ji H(4), Su Y(5),
Ekram M(5), Wu Z(6), Zhu T(6), Polyak K(5), Sukumar S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)MTA TTK Lendület
Cancer Biomarker Research Group and 2nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary. (3)Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana. (4)Department of
Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland. (5)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Hefei
National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of Life
Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, People's
Republic of China. (7)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
saras@jhmi.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2015 Sep;5(9):909-11.

Why breast cancers become resistant to tamoxifen despite continued expression of 
the estrogen receptor-a (ERa) and what factors are responsible for high HER2
expression in these tumors remains an enigma. HOXB7 chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis followed by validation showed that HOXB7 physically interacts with ERa, 
and that the HOXB7-ERa complex enhances transcription of many ERa target genes,
including HER2. Investigating strategies for controlling HOXB7, our studies
revealed that MYC, stabilized via phosphorylation mediated by EGFR-HER2
signaling, inhibits transcription of miR-196a, a HOXB7 repressor. This leads to
increased expression of HOXB7, ER target genes, and HER2. Repressing MYC using
small-molecule inhibitors reverses these events and causes regression of breast
cancer xenografts. The MYC-HOXB7-HER2 signaling pathway is eminently targetable
in endocrine-resistant breast cancer.SIGNIFICANCE: HOXB7 acts as an ERa cofactor 
regulating a myriad of ER target genes, including HER2, in tamoxifen-resistant
breast cancer. HOXB7 expression is controlled by MYC via transcriptional
regulation of the HOXB7 repressor miR-196a; consequently, antagonists of MYC
cause reversal of selective ER modulator resistance both in vitro and in vivo.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4560624
PMID: 26180042  [PubMed - in process]


18. Clin Exp Hypertens. 2016 Jan;38(1):1-9. doi: 10.3109/10641963.2015.1047945. Epub 
2015 Jul 7.

Conditional knockout of collecting duct bradykinin B2 receptors exacerbates
angiotensin II-induced hypertension during high salt intake.

Kopkan L(1), Husková Z(1), Jíchová (1), Cervenková L(1), Cervenka L(1,)(2),
Saifudeen Z(3), El-Dahr SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Center of Experimental Medicine, Institute for Clinical and Experimental
Medicine , Prague , Czech Republic . (2)b Department of Pathophysiology, 2nd
Faculty of Medicine , Charles University , Prague , Czech Republic , and. (3)c
Department of Pediatrics , Tulane University School of Medicine , New Orleans ,
LA , USA.

We elucidated the role of collecting duct kinin B2 receptor (B2R) in the
development of salt-sensitivity and angiotensin II (ANG II)-induced hypertension.
To this end, we used a Cre-Lox recombination strategy to generate mice lacking
Bdkrb2 gene for B2R in the collecting duct (Hoxb7-Cre(tg/+):Bdkrb2(flox/flox)).
In 3 groups of control (Bdkrb2(flox/flox)) and 3 groups of UB(Bdkrb2-/-) mice,
systolic blood pressure (SBP) responses to high salt intake (4 or 8% NaCl; HS)
were monitored by radiotelemetry in comparison with standard salt diet (0.4%
NaCl) prior to and during subcutaneous ANG II infusion (1000<U+2009>ng/min/kg) via
osmotic minipumps. High salt intakes alone for 2 weeks did not alter SBP in
either strain. ANG II significantly increased SBP equally in control (121<U+2009>±<U+2009>2 to 
156<U+2009>±<U+2009>3<U+2009>mmHg) and UB(Bdkrb2-/-) mice (120<U+2009>±<U+2009>2 to 153<U+2009>±<U+2009>2<U+2009>mmHg). The development
of ANG II-induced hypertension was exacerbated by 4%HS in both control (125<U+2009>±<U+2009>3
to 164<U+2009>±<U+2009>5<U+2009>mmHg) and UB(Bdkrb2-/-) mice (124<U+2009>±<U+2009>2 to 162<U+2009>±<U+2009>3<U+2009>mmHg) during 2 weeks.
Interestingly, 8%HS caused a more profound and earlier ANG II-induced
hypertension in UB(Bdkrb2-/-) (129<U+2009>±<U+2009>2 to 166<U+2009>±<U+2009>3<U+2009>mmHg) as compared to control
(128<U+2009>±<U+2009>2 to 158<U+2009>±<U+2009>2<U+2009>mmHg) and it was accompanied by body weight loss and
increased mortality. In conclusion, targeted inactivation of B2R in the renal
collecting duct does not cause salt-sensitivity; however, collecting duct B2R
attenuates the hypertensive actions of ANG II under conditions of very high salt 
intake.

PMID: 26151827  [PubMed - in process]


19. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):4901-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4009. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

HOXB7-S3 inhibits the proliferation and invasion of MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells.

Ma R(1), Zhang D(1), Hu PC(2), Li Q(3), Lin CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Hubei Cancer
Clinical Study Center, Key Laboratory of Tumor Biological Behavior of Hubei,
Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, 
Research Center of Food and Drug Evaluation, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China. (3)Renmin Hospital of Wuhan
University, The First College of Clinical Medicine of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
Hubei 430071, P.R. China.

Homeobox B7 (HOXB7) has been found to be overexpressed in numerous types of human
cancer. However, the role of HOXB7 in breast cancer remains to be elucidated. The
aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of HOXB7 on the
proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells. Initially, reverse
transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blotting were
respectively employed to detect the mRNA and protein expression levels of the
HOXB7 gene in the MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 human breast cancer cell lines.
Subsequently, small interfering RNAs designed to interfere with the expression of
HOXB7 were used to knockdown the expression of HOXB7 in the MCF-7 cell line, the 
effects of which on cell proliferation, the apoptotic rate and invasion capacity 
were measured using a Cell Counting kit-8 assay, flow cytometry and transwell
chambers, respectively. The results demonstrated that HOXB7 mRNA and protein were
all overexpressed in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, 
HOXB7-S3 effectively inhibited the proliferation and invasion of MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. In conclusion, these results demonstrated that HOXB7 may be a
potential therapeutic target in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4581815
PMID: 26135503  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0130551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130551.
eCollection 2015.

Deregulated HOXB7 Expression Predicts Poor Prognosis of Patients with Esophageal 
Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Regulates Cancer Cell Proliferation In Vitro and In
Vivo.

Li H(1), Shen LY(1), Yan WP(1), Dong B(2), Kang XZ(1), Dai L(1), Yang YB(1), Fu
H(1), Yang HL(1), Zhou HT(1), Huang C(1), Liang Z(1), Xiong HC(1), Chen KN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Thoracic Surgery I, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Department of 
Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: We observed abnormal HOXB7 expression in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) previously. This study was to evaluate the prognostic
significance of HOXB7 and reveal the potential mechanism.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to confirm the abnormal expression of
HOXB7 in ESCC. The prognostic significance of HOXB7 expression was analyzed in
two independent cohorts. RNAi was used to establish two stable HOXB7-knockdown
cell strains. CCK8 assay, cell growth curve assay, colony formation assay, flow
cycle analysis and tumorigenicity assay in nude mice were employed to investigate
the effect of HOXB7 on proliferation in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry confirmed the abnormal expression of HOXB7 in ESCC 
compared with paracancerous mucosa (18/23 vs. 9/23, p=0.039). HOXB7 expression
was positively correlated with the T stage, lymph node metastasis and TNM stage. 
The median survival of patients with high HOXB7 expression was significantly
shorter than that with low expression (45 months vs. 137 months, p = 0.007 for
cohort 1; 19 months vs. 34 months, p = 0.001 for cohort 2). Multivariate survival
analysis showed that HOXB7 expression was another independent prognostic factor
(HR [95% CI] = 0.573 [0.341-0.963], p = 0.036 for cohort 1; HR [95%CI] = 0.543
[0.350-0.844], p = 0.024 for cohort 2). Experiments in vitro and in vivo showed
that after knockdown of HOXB7, the proliferation rate dropped, growth rate
descended, colony-formation ability reduced, G1-phase arrest occurred and the
tumorigenicity reduced remarkably.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB7 could promote cancer cell proliferation and might be an
independent prognostic factor for patients with ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4468077
PMID: 26076456  [PubMed - in process]


21. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129242.
eCollection 2015.

Maintenance of Mouse Nephron Progenitor Cells in Aggregates with Gamma-Secretase 
Inhibitor.

Yuri S(1), Nishikawa M(1), Yanagawa N(1), Jo OD(1), Yanagawa N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Research Services, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Healthcare
System at Sepulveda, North Hills, California, United States of America;
University of California at Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.

Knowledge on how to maintain and expand nephron progenitor cells (NPC) in vitro
is important to provide a potentially valuable source for kidney replacement
therapies. In our present study, we examined the possibility of optimizing NPC
maintenance in the "re-aggregate" system. We found that Six2-expressing
(Six2(+))-NPC could be maintained in aggregates reconstituted with dispersed
cells from E12.5 mouse embryonic kidneys for at least up to 21 days in culture.
The maintenance of Six2(+)-NPC required the presence of ureteric bud cells. The
number of Six2(+)-NPC increased by more than 20-fold at day 21, but plateaued
after day 14. In an attempt to further sustain NPC proliferation by passage
subculture, we found that the new (P1) aggregates reconstituted from the original
(P0) aggregates failed to maintain NPC. However, based on the similarity between 
P1 aggregates and aggregates derived from E15.5 embryonic kidneys, we suspected
that the differentiated NPC in P1 aggregates may interfere with NPC maintenance. 
In support of this notion, we found that preventing NPC differentiation by DAPT, 
a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor that inhibits Notch signaling pathway, was effective to
maintain and expand Six2(+)-NPC in P1 aggregates by up to 65-fold. The
Six2(+)-NPC in P1 aggregates retained their potential to epithelialize upon
exposure to Wnt signal. In conclusion, we demonstrated in our present study that 
the "re-aggregation" system can be useful for in vitro maintenance of NPC when
combined with <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC4468097
PMID: 26075891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 5;412:131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.06.003. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Roles of miR-196a on gene regulation of neuroendocrine tumor cells.

Li SC(1), Shi H(1), Khan M(2), Caplin M(3), Meyer T(4), Öberg K(5), Giandomenico 
V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Neuroendocrine Tumour Unit, Centre for Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK; The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. (3)Neuroendocrine
Tumour Unit, Centre for Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Department of Oncology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London,
London, UK. (5)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,Endocrine Oncology Clinic, Uppsala University
Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. (6)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,Endocrine Oncology Clinic, Uppsala
University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address:
valeria.giandomenico@medsci.uu.se.

This study aims at investigating miR-196a roles using in vitro models. miR-196a
was detected in small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) and lung NETs.
miR-196a target prediction analysis suggested HOXA9, HOXB7, LRP4 and RSPO2 genes 
for further investigation. The level of these four genes is detectable in SI-NET 
tissue specimens at different disease stages and serum samples of untreated and
somatostatin analogs treated patients with liver metastases. A miR-196a inhibitor
was used to silence its effects in NET cells. We show that the four target genes 
were significantly upregulated at transcriptional level in silenced NET cells.
HOXA9, HOXB7, LRP4 and RSPO2 encoded proteins are also upregulated at
translational level in miR-196a silenced NET cells. miR-196a downstream genes
BMP4, ETS1, CTNNB1, FZD5, LRP5 and LRP6 were significantly upregulated at
transcriptional level in miR-196a silenced CNDT2.5 and NCI-H727 cells. In
addition, miR-196a clearly does not play a role in NET cell growth control.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26052033  [PubMed - in process]


23. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2401. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0936.

Correction: HOXB7, a Homeodomain Protein, Is Overexpressed in Breast Cancer and
Confers Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9527-34.

PMID: 26032426  [PubMed]


24. Int J Cancer. 2015 Nov 15;137(10):2374-83. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29616. Epub 2015 Jun 
17.

Identification of several potential chromatin binding sites of HOXB7 and its
downstream target genes in breast cancer.

Heinonen H(1), Lepikhova T(1), Sahu B(2), Pehkonen H(1), Pihlajamaa P(2), Louhimo
R(1), Gao P(3), Wei GH(3), Hautaniemi S(1), Jänne OA(2), Monni O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Programs' Unit, Genome-Scale Biology and Institute of Biomedicine,
Medical Biochemistry and Developmental Biology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. (2)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. (3)Biocenter Oulu and Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular
Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

HOXB7 encodes a transcription factor that is overexpressed in a number of cancers
and encompasses many oncogenic functions. Previous results have shown it to
promote cell proliferation, angiogenesis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, DNA 
repair and cell survival. Because of its role in many cancers and tumorigenic
processes, HOXB7 has been suggested to be a potential drug target. However, HOXB7
binding sites on chromatin and its targets are poorly known. The aim of our study
was to identify HOXB7 binding sites on breast cancer cell chromatin and to
delineate direct target genes located nearby these binding sites. We found 1,504 
HOXB7 chromatin binding sites in BT-474 breast cancer cell line that
overexpresses HOXB7. Seventeen selected binding sites were validated by ChIP-qPCR
in several breast cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we analyzed expression of a
large number of genes located nearby HOXB7 binding sites and found several new
direct targets, such as CTNND2 and SCGB1D2. Identification of HOXB7 chromatin
binding sites and target genes is essential to understand better the role of
HOXB7 in breast cancer and mechanisms by which it regulates tumorigenic
processes.

© 2015 The Authors. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of UICC.

PMCID: PMC4744995
PMID: 26014856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Dev Biol. 2015 Apr 1;400(1):139-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.01.023. Epub 2015
Feb 9.

Region-specific regulation of cell proliferation by FGF receptor signaling during
the Wolffian duct development.

Okazawa M(1), Murashima A(2), Harada M(3), Nakagata N(4), Noguchi M(5), Morimoto 
M(5), Kimura T(6), Ornitz DM(7), Yamada G(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka, Japan. (2)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. (3)Department of Clinical Anatomy, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo, Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku 113-8519, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Reproductive
Engineering, Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Lung Development, RIKEN 
Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuou-ku, Kobe
650-0047, Hyogo, Japan. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka,
Japan. (7)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (8)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. Electronic address: transg8@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

The Wolffian duct (WD) is a primordium of the male reproductive tract and kidney 
collecting duct system. Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs), members of
the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family, are essential for kidney development. 
Although the functions of FGFR signaling in kidney morphogenesis have been
analyzed, their function in WD development has not been comprehensively
investigated. Here, we demonstrate that Fgfr2 is the major Fgfr gene expressed
throughout the WD epithelia and that it is essential for the maintenance of the
WD, specifically in the caudal part of the WD. Hoxb7-Cre mediated inactivation of
Fgfr2 in the mouse WD epithelia resulted in the regression of the caudal part of 
the WD and abnormal male reproductive tract development. Cell proliferation and
expression of the downstream target genes of RTK signaling (Etv4 and Etv5) were
decreased in the caudal part of the WD epithelia in the mutant embryos. Cranial
(rostral) WD formation and ureteric budding were not affected. Ret, Etv4, and
Etv5 expression were sustained in the ureteric bud of the mutant embryos. Taken
together, these data suggest region-specific requirements for FGFR2 signaling in 
the developing caudal WD epithelia.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4382079
PMID: 25678108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Histol Histopathol. 2015 Jun;30(6):751-62. doi: 10.14670/HH-30.751. Epub 2015 Jan
16.

Altered response of pendrin-positive intercalated cells in the kidney of
Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f mice.

Nam SA(1), Kim WY(2), Kim YM(2), Kim H(3), Kong YY(4), Lee SM(5), Kim J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Death Disease Research Center, College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, and Department of Applied Veterinary 
Medicine, The Graduate School of Agriculture and Animal Science, Konkuk
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Death
Disease Research Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Nephrology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, School of Medicine, Sungkyunkwan
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Applied
Veterinary Medicine, The Graduate School of Agriculture and Animal Science,
Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (6)Department of Anatomy and Cell
Death Disease Research Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea. jinkim@catholic.ac.kr.

The anion exchanger pendrin is exclusively expressed by non-type A intercalated
cells (ICs), type B ICs and non A-non B ICs. Pendrin-positive ICs are mainly
localized in the cortical collecting duct (CCD) and connecting tubule (CNT)
rather than the outer medullary collecting duct (OMCD). Our previous study
reported that Notch signaling is required for the specification of ureteric bud
cells to the principal cells (PCs) and ICs in the medullary collecting duct. The 
purpose of this study was to determine whether the deletion of Mind bomb-1
(Mib1), an E3 ubiquitin ligase required for the initiation of Notch signaling,
would affect the differentiation of pendrin-positive type B and non A-non B ICs
in Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f mice. In Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f mice, there was a significant
increase in the fraction of pendrin-negative/AE1-positive type A ICs not only in 
the OMCD (67.02±2.04% vs. 33.78±0.71%; Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f vs. Mib1f/f) but also in
the CCD (23.70±2.68% vs. 19.71±0.43%; Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f vs. Mib1f/f) and CNT
(23.70±2.68% vs. 19.71±0.43%; Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f vs. Mib1f/f) as compared with
Mib1f/f. In contrast, there were no significant differences in the fraction of
pendrin-positive type B ICs (7.11±3.84% vs. 7.61±4.45%; Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f vs.
Mib1f/f) between the two groups in the cortex including CCD and CNT. Furthermore,
there was a significant decrease in the fraction of non A-non B ICs (8.95±2.28%
vs. 13.06±4.81%; Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f vs. Mib1f/f) in these tubules in the
Hoxb7-Cre;Mib1f/f mice. These results suggest that the degree of differentiation 
of subtypes of ICs may vary depending on the Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 25594189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Epigenetics. 2015;10(1):92-101. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2014.998531. Epub 2015 Jan 
29.

DNA methylation analysis of Homeobox genes implicates HOXB7 hypomethylation as
risk factor for neural tube defects.

Rochtus A(1), Izzi B, Vangeel E, Louwette S, Wittevrongel C, Lambrechts D, Moreau
Y, Winand R, Verpoorten C, Jansen K, Van Geet C, Freson K.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Cardiovascular Sciences; Center for Molecular and Vascular
Biology ; University of Leuven ; Leuven , Belgium.

Neural tube defects (NTDs) are common birth defects of complex etiology. Though
family- and population-based studies have confirmed a genetic component, the
responsible genes for NTDs are still largely unknown. Based on the hypothesis
that folic acid prevents NTDs by stimulating methylation reactions, epigenetic
factors, such as DNA methylation, are predicted to be involved in NTDs. Homeobox 
(HOX) genes play a role in spinal cord development and are tightly regulated in a
spatiotemporal and collinear manner, partly by epigenetic modifications. We have 
quantified DNA methylation for the different HOX genes by subtracting values from
a genome-wide methylation analysis using leukocyte DNA from 10 myelomeningocele
(MMC) patients and 6 healthy controls. From the 1575 CpGs profiled for the 4 HOX 
clusters, 26 CpGs were differentially methylated (P-value < 0.05; ß-difference > 
0.05) between MMC patients and controls. Seventy-seven percent of these CpGs were
located in the HOXA and HOXB clusters, with the most profound difference for 3
CpGs within the HOXB7 gene body. A validation case-control study including 83 MMC
patients and 30 unrelated healthy controls confirmed a significant association
between MMC and HOXB7 hypomethylation (-14.4%; 95% CI: 11.9-16.9%; P-value <
0.0001) independent of the MTHFR 667C>T genotype. Significant HOXB7
hypomethylation was also present in 12 unaffected siblings, each related to a MMC
patient, suggestive of an epigenetic change induced by the mother. The inclusion 
of a neural tube formation model using zebrafish showed that Hoxb7a
overexpression but not depletion resulted in deformed body axes with dysmorphic
neural tube formation. Our results implicate HOXB7 hypomethylation as risk factor
for NTDs and highlight the importance for future genome-wide DNA methylation
analyses without preselecting candidate pathways.

PMCID: PMC4622610
PMID: 25565354  [PubMed - in process]


28. Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;75(4):709-19. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3100. Epub
2014 Dec 26.

HOXB7 promotes malignant progression by activating the TGFß signaling pathway.

Liu S(1), Jin K(2), Hui Y(3), Fu J(1), Jie C(4), Feng S(5), Reisman D(1), Wang
Q(5), Fan D(3), Sukumar S(6), Chen H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
South Carolina. Center for Colon Cancer Research, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, South Carolina. (2)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina.
(4)Department of Surgery, Transplant Surgery Division, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (5)Department of Chemistry 
and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina.
(6)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
hchen@biol.sc.edu saras@jhmi.edu. (7)Department of Biological Science, University
of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina. Center for Colon Cancer Research,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina. hchen@biol.sc.edu
saras@jhmi.edu.

Overexpression of HOXB7 in breast cancer cells induces an epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition and promotes tumor progression and lung metastasis. However, the
underlying mechanisms for HOXB7-induced aggressive phenotypes in breast cancer
remain largely unknown. Here, we report that phosphorylation of SMAD3 was
detected in a higher percentage in primary mammary tumor tissues from
double-transgenic MMTV-Hoxb7/Her2 mice than tumors from single-transgenic
Her2/neu mice, suggesting activation of TGFß/SMAD3 signaling by HOXB7 in breast
tumor tissues. As predicted, TGFß2 was high in four MMTV-Hoxb7/Her2 transgenic
mouse tumor cell lines and two breast cancer cell lines transfected with HOXB7,
whereas TGFß2 was low in HOXB7-depleted cells. HOXB7 directly bound to and
activated the TGFß2 promoter in luciferase and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays. Increased migration and invasion as a result of HOXB7 overexpression in
breast cancer cells were reversed by knockdown of TGFß2 or pharmacologic
inhibition of TGFß signaling. Furthermore, knockdown of TGFß2 in
HOXB7-overexpressing MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells dramatically inhibited
metastasis to the lung. Interestingly, HOXB7 overexpression also induced
tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) recruitment and acquisition of an M2
tumor-promoting phenotype. TGFß2 mediated HOXB7-induced activation of
macrophages, suggesting that TAMs may contribute to HOXB7-promoted tumor
metastasis. Providing clinical relevance to these findings, by real-time PCR
analysis, there was a strong correlation between HOXB7 and TGFß2 expression in
primary breast carcinomas. Taken together, our results suggest that HOXB7
promotes tumor progression in a cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous manner
through activation of the TGFß signaling pathway.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4352303
PMID: 25542862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Stem Cells. 2015 Mar;33(3):939-50. doi: 10.1002/stem.1897.

Mesenchymal progenitors aging highlights a miR-196 switch targeting HOXB7 as
master regulator of proliferation and osteogenesis.

Candini O(1), Spano C, Murgia A, Grisendi G, Veronesi E, Piccinno MS, Ferracin M,
Negrini M, Giacobbi F, Bambi F, Horwitz EM, Conte P, Paolucci P, Dominici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences for Children & Adults,
University-Hospital of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Human aging is associated with a decrease in tissue functions combined with a
decline in stem cells frequency and activity followed by a loss of regenerative
capacity. The molecular mechanisms behind this senescence remain largely obscure,
precluding targeted approaches to counteract aging. Focusing on mesenchymal
stromal/stem cells (MSC) as known adult progenitors, we identified a specific
switch in miRNA expression during aging, revealing a miR-196a upregulation which 
was inversely correlated with MSC proliferation through HOXB7 targeting. A forced
HOXB7 expression was associated with an improved cell growth, a reduction of
senescence, and an improved osteogenesis linked to a dramatic increase of
autocrine basic fibroblast growth factor secretion. These findings, along with
the progressive decrease of HOXB7 levels observed during skeletal aging in mice, 
indicate HOXB7 as a master factor driving progenitors behavior lifetime,
providing a better understanding of bone senescence and leading to an
optimization of MSC performance.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25428821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Aug 15;7(9):5968-77. eCollection 2014.

Clinicopathological and immunohistochemical evaluation of oral and oropharyngeal 
squamous cell carcinoma in Chilean population.

Rivera C(1), González-Arriagada WA(2), Loyola-Brambilla M(3), de Almeida OP(4),
Coletta RD(4), Venegas B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Histology and Embryology, Department of Basic Biomedical Sciences,
University of Talca (UTALCA) Talca, Maule Region, Chile ; Department of Oral
Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil ; Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Brazilian
Biosciences National Laboratory - CNPEM Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Oral
Pathology and Diagnosis, Faculty of Dentistry, Universidad de Valparaíso
Valparaíso, Valparaíso Region, Chile. (3)Morpho-physiopathology and Cytodiagnosis
Laboratory, San Sebastián University (USS) Concepción, Bío-Bío Region, Chile.
(4)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas (UNICAMP) Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Unit of Oral Pathology,
Department of Stomatology, University of Talca Talca, Maule Region, Chile ;
Carlos Van Buren Hospital Valparaíso, Valparaíso Region, Chile.

In oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OCSCC and OPSCC) exist an
association between clinical and histopathological parameters with cell
proliferation, basal lamina, connective tissue degradation and surrounding stroma
markers. We evaluated these associations in Chilean patients. A convenience
sample of 37 cases of OCSCC (n=16) and OPSCC (n=21) was analyzed clinically (TNM,
clinical stage) and histologically (WHO grade of differentiation, pattern of
tumor invasion). We assessed the expression of p53, Ki67, HOXA1, HOXB7, type IV
collagen (ColIV) and carcinoma-associated fibroblast (a-SMA-positive cells).
Additionally we conducted a univariate/bivariate analysis to assess the
relationship of these variables with survival rates. Males were mostly affected
(56.2% OCSCC, 76.2% OPSCC). Patients were mainly diagnosed at III/IV clinical
stages (68.8% OCSCC, 90.5% OPSCC) with a predominantly infiltrative pattern
invasion (62.9% OCSCC, 57.1% OPSCC). Significant association between regional
lymph nodes (N) and clinical stage with OCSCC-HOXB7 expression (Chi-Square test P
< 0.05) was observed. In OPSCC a statistically significant association exists
between p53, Ki67 with gender (Chi-Square test P < 0.05). In OCSCC and OPSCC was 
statistically significant association between ki67 with HOXA1, HOXB7, and between
these last two antigens (Pearson's Correlation test P < 0.05). Furthermore
OPSCC-p53 showed significant correlation when it was compared with a-SMA
(Kendall's Tau-c test P < 0.05). Only OCSCC-pattern invasion and OPSCC-primary
tumor (T) pattern resulted associated with survival at the end of the follow up
period (Chi-Square Likelihood Ratio, P < 0.05). Clinical, histological and
immunohistochemical features are similar to seen in other countries. Cancer
proliferation markers were associated strongly from each other. Our sample
highlights prognostic value of T and pattern of invasion, but the conclusions may
be limited and should be considered with caution (small sample). Many cases were 
diagnosed in the advanced stages of the disease, which suggests that the
diagnosis of OCSCC and OPSCC is made late.

PMCID: PMC4203212
PMID: 25337241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Diagn Pathol. 2014 Sep 3;9:171. doi: 10.1186/s13000-014-0171-2.

miR-337 regulates the proliferation and invasion in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma by targeting HOXB7.

Zhang R(1), Leng H, Huang J, Du Y, Wang Y, Zang W, Chen X, Zhao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of emergency, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, No,1 Jianshe Road, Zhengzhou 450052, Henan, China.
ruizhang0001@126.com.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs are involved in coordinating a variety of cellular processes
by regulating their target genes. Aberrant expression of miRNAs is correlated
with various cancers. Previous studies have shown that miR-337 is significantly
down-regulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and that its expression
is negatively correlated to the expression of HOXB7. Both miR-337 and HOXB7 are
associated with the prognosis of PDAC patients. The purpose of this study was to 
identify the molecular mechanisms by which miR-337 acts as a tumor suppressor in 
PDAC.
METHODS: Synthetic miR-337 mimics were transfected into PANC-1 and As-PC-1 cells 
using Lipofectamine 2000. The expression of HOXB7 protein was analyzed by
Western blot. Luciferase reporter plasmids were constructed to confirm that HOXB7
3'UTR was the target of miR-337. The effect of miR-337 on cell proliferation was 
evaluated by CCK8 assay and colony formation assay, and cell invasion was
evaluated by wound healing assay and transwell assay.
RESULTS: Western blot and luciferase activity assays identified HOXB7 as the
target of miR-337. A CCK-8 assay showed the absorbance of cells transfected with 
miR-337 mimics to be less than that of control cells, and that the number of cell
clones was significantly decreased by miR-337 expression. A wound healing assay
showed the invasion rate of cells transfected with miR-337 mimics at 36 h to be
markedly lower than in controls. The average number of cells penetrating the
Matrigel was significantly lower than the controls.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that miR-337 targets HOXB7 and effects
significant suppression of PDAC cell proliferation and invasion.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/13000_2014_171.

PMCID: PMC4164712
PMID: 25183455  [PubMed - in process]


32. Oncogene. 2015 May 14;34(20):2631-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.197. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Conditional inactivation of the mouse von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene
results in wide-spread hyperplastic, inflammatory and fibrotic lesions in the
kidney.

Pritchett TL(1), Bader HL(1), Henderson J(2), Hsu T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)1] Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. (3)1] Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA [2] Institute of Systems Biology and
Bioinformatics, National Central University, Jhongli, Taiwan.

Mutations of the tumor suppressor gene von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) can lead to benign
and malignant tumors, including clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). To
understand the progression of ccRCC, we generated a novel mouse Vhlh conditional 
knockout, using Hoxb7-driven Cre that is specific for the collecting ducts and a 
subset of distal tubules. These mice exhibited wide-spread epithelial disruption 
and interstitial inflammation as early as 2 months of age with high penetrance.
Lesions are cystic, show severe fibrosis and display significant hyperplasia. An 
abundance of infiltrating macrophages and lymphocytes was detected.
Interestingly, the Vhlh mutant lesions could be rescued when Hif-1a, but not
Hif-2a, was also knocked out. In addition, administration of a JAK1/2 kinase
inhibitor alleviated the Vhlh knockout phenotypes. Taken together, these results 
suggest that HIF-1a-dependent inflammation and fibrosis may be an early event in 
the development of ccRCC.

PMID: 25023703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Jan;26(1):81-94. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013050517. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

Collecting duct-derived cells display mesenchymal stem cell properties and retain
selective in vitro and in vivo epithelial capacity.

Li J(1), Ariunbold U(1), Suhaimi N(1), Sunn N(2), Guo J(3), McMahon JA(3),
McMahon AP(3), Little M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Queensland, Australia; (2)Diamantina Institute, University of Queensland,
Woolloongabba, Queensland, Australia; and. (3)Department of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Broad-CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell 
Research, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California. (4)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Queensland, Australia; M.Little@uq.edu.au.

We previously described a mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-like population within the 
adult mouse kidney that displays long-term colony-forming efficiency,
clonogenicity, immunosuppression, and panmesodermal potential. Although
phenotypically similar to bone marrow (BM)-MSCs, kidney MSC-like cells display a 
distinct expression profile. FACS sorting from Hoxb7/enhanced green fluorescent
protein (GFP) mice identified the collecting duct as a source of kidney MSC-like 
cells, with these cells undergoing an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition to
form clonogenic, long-term, self-renewing MSC-like cells. Notably, after
extensive passage, kidney MSC-like cells selectively integrated into the
aquaporin 2-positive medullary collecting duct when microinjected into the
kidneys of neonatal mice. No epithelial integration was observed after injection 
of BM-MSCs. Indeed, kidney MSC-like cells retained a capacity to form epithelial 
structures in vitro and in vivo, and conditioned media from these cells supported
epithelial repair in vitro. To investigate the origin of kidney MSC-like cells,
we further examined Hoxb7(+) fractions within the kidney across postnatal
development, identifying a neonatal interstitial GFP(lo) (Hoxb7(lo)) population
displaying an expression profile intermediate between epithelium and
interstitium. Temporal analyses with Wnt4(GCE/+):R26(tdTomato/+) mice revealed
evidence for the intercalation of a Wnt4-expressing interstitial population into 
the neonatal collecting duct, suggesting that such intercalation may represent a 
normal developmental mechanism giving rise to a distinct collecting duct
subpopulation. These results extend previous observations of papillary stem cell 
activity and collecting duct plasticity and imply a role for such cells in
collecting duct formation and, possibly, repair.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4279727
PMID: 24904087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1243. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.201.

P53-regulated long non-coding RNA TUG1 affects cell proliferation in human
non-small cell lung cancer, partly through epigenetically regulating HOXB7
expression.

Zhang EB(1), Yin DD(2), Sun M(1), Kong R(1), Liu XH(1), You LH(1), Han L(3), Xia 
R(1), Wang KM(4), Yang JS(5), De W(1), Shu YQ(3), Wang ZX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (2)Central Laboratory, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of Oncology, First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (5)Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Nanjing Hospital of Nanjing Medical Univeraity, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Recently, a novel class of transcripts, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), is being 
identified at a rapid pace. These RNAs have critical roles in diverse biological 
processes, including tumorigenesis. Here we report that taurine-upregulated gene 
1 (TUG1), a 7.1-kb lncRNA, recruiting and binding to polycomb repressive complex 
2 (PRC2), is generally downregulated in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
tissues. In a cohort of 192 NSCLC patients, the lower expression of TUG1 was
associated with a higher TNM stage and tumor size, as well as poorer overall
survival (P<0.001). Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that TUG1
expression serves as an independent predictor for overall survival (P<0.001).
Further experiments revealed that TUG1 expression was induced by p53, and
luciferase and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays confirmed that TUG1
was a direct transcriptional target of p53. TUG1 knockdown significantly promoted
the proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the lncRNA-mediated regulation 
of the expression of HOX genes in tumorigenesis and development has been recently
receiving increased attention. Interestingly, inhibition of TUG1 could upregulate
homeobox B7 (HOXB7) expression; ChIP assays demonstrated that the promoter of
HOXB7 locus was bound by EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2), a key component of
PRC2, and was H3K27 trimethylated. This TUG1-mediated growth regulation is in
part due to specific modulation of HOXB7, thus participating in AKT and MAPK
pathways. Together, these results suggest that p53-regulated TUG1 is a growth
regulator, which acts in part through control of HOXB7. The p53/TUG1/PRC2/HOXB7
interaction might serve as targets for NSCLC diagnosis and therapy.

PMCID: PMC4047917
PMID: 24853421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 15;390(2):160-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.03.014. Epub 2014
Mar 31.

DLG1 influences distal ureter maturation via a non-epithelial cell autonomous
mechanism involving reduced retinoic acid signaling, Ret expression, and
apoptosis.

Kim ST(1), Ahn SY(2), Swat W(3), Miner JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid
Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Children<U+05F3>s National Medical Center and the George
Washington University, Washington, DC 20010, USA. (3)Department of Pathology &
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Renal Division, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address:
minerj@wustl.edu.

The absence of Discs-large 1 (DLG1), the mouse ortholog of the Drosophila
discs-large tumor suppressor, results in congenital hydronephrosis characterized 
by urinary tract abnormalities, reduced ureteric bud branching, and delayed
disconnection of the ureter from the common nephric duct (CND). To define the
specific cellular requirements for Dlg1 expression during urogenital development,
we used a floxed Dlg1 allele and Pax2-Cre, Pax3-Cre, Six2-Cre, and HoxB7-Cre
transgenes to generate cell type-restricted Dlg1 mutants. In addition, we used
Ret(GFP) knockin and retinoic acid response element-lacZ transgenic mice to
determine the effects of Dlg1 mutation on the respective morphogenetic signaling 
pathways. Mutation of Dlg1 in urothelium and collecting ducts (via HoxB7-Cre or
Pax2-Cre) and in nephron precursors (via Pax2-Cre and Six2-Cre) resulted in no
apparent abnormalities in ureteric bud branching or in distal ureter maturation, 
and no hydronephrosis. Mutation in nephrons, ureteric smooth muscle, and
mesenchyme surrounding the lower urinary tract (via the Pax3-Cre transgene)
resulted in congenital hydronephrosis accompanied by reduced branching, abnormal 
distal ureter maturation and insertion, and smooth muscle orientation defects,
phenotypes very similar to those in Dlg1 null mice. Dlg1 null mice showed reduced
Ret expression and apoptosis during ureter maturation and evidence of reduced
retinoic acid signaling in the kidney. Taken together, these results suggest that
Dlg1 expression in ureter and CND-associated mesenchymal cells is essential for
ensuring distal ureter maturation by facilitating retinoic acid signaling, Ret
expression, and apoptosis of the urothelium.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4038003
PMID: 24699546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Diagn Pathol. 2014 Mar 18;9:61. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-9-61.

Levels of HOXB7 and miR-337 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma patients.

Zhang R(1), Zheng S, Du Y, Wang Y, Zang W, Zhao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of emergency, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, No,1 Jianshe Road, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China.
ruizhang0001@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Many studies have revealed that homeobox-B7 (HOXB7) and miR-337 play 
important roles in different types of human cancers. However, the relationship of
HOXB7 and miR-337 in PDAC with clinicopathological factors has not yet been
examined and their biological roles remain to be explored.
METHODS: Using quantitative real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemical staining,
the expression of HOXB7 mRNA, miR-337, and HOXB7 protein in 44 PDAC samples was
detected. Survival curves were made using follow-up data. The relationship
between clinical or pathological characteristics and the prognosis was analyzed.
RESULTS: The expression levels of HOXB7 mRNA and HOXB7 protein were significantly
elevated in PDAC samples than that in non-malignant adjacent tissues. There were 
obvious differences in HOXB7 mRNA and proteins between tumors of different
diameters, differentiation, TNM stage, and lymph node status. The level of
miR-337 was markedly lower in tumor samples than in non-malignant adjacent
tissues. The expression of miR-337 was related to TNM stage and lymph node
status. There were significant differences in survival curves between patients
with tumors <4 cm in diameter and patients with tumors =4 cm, among groups of
well, moderately, and poorly differentiated tumors, between groups with TNM
stages I, II and III or IV, between groups with metastatic lymph nodes and
non-metastatic lymph nodes, among groups of HOXB7 protein expression negative (or
weak) and positive, between groups with low levels of miR-337 expression and with
high levels of miR-337 expression. The levels of HOXB7 mRNA, HOXB7 protein, and
miR-337 were found to be associated with longer survival.
CONCLUSION: The present study showed that HOXB7 was over-expressed and miR-337
was minimally expressed in PDAC tissues, and their levels were related to TNM
stage and lymph node status. The levels of HOXB7 mRNA, HOXB7 protein, and miR-337
were associated with survival in PDAC patients. Results suggested that HOXB7 and 
miR-337 could be used as determinants of PDAC patient prognosis.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slides for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1509730773118658.

PMCID: PMC3995144
PMID: 24641834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(4):1563-6.

HOXB7 predicts poor clinical outcome in patients with advanced esophageal
squamous cell cancer.

Long QY(1), Zhou J, Zhang XL, Cao JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
E-mail : longqy2005@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) accounts for most
esophageal cancer in Asia, and is the sixth common cause of cancer-related deaths
worldwide. Previous studies indicated HOXB7 is overexpressed in ESCC tissues, but
data on prognostic value are limited.
METHODS: A total of 76 advanced ESCC cases were investigated.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to detect the expression levels of HOXB7 and 
Kaplan-Meier curves and Cox regression models to determine prognostic
significance. Stratified analysis was also performed according to lymph node (LN)
status.
RESULTS: Kaplan-Meier curve analysis indicated that HOXB7 positive patients had
significantly shorter overall survival (OS) than HOXB7 negative patients.
Multivariate analysis using the Cox proportional hazards model indicated only TNM
stage and HOXB7 expression to be independent predictors of overall survival of
advanced ESCC patients. HOXB7 indicated poor OS in both lymph node negative (LN?)
and lymph node positive (LN+) patients.
CONCLUSION: HOXB7 predicts poor prognosis of advanced ESCC patients and can be
applied as an independent prognostic predictor.

PMID: 24641368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e89337. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089337. eCollection
2014.

A novel predictive equation for potential diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma.

Kraiklang R(1), Pairojkul C(2), Khuntikeo N(3), Imtawil K(1), Wongkham S(1),
Wongkham C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand ; Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Faculty of
Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand. (2)Department of Pathology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand ; Liver Fluke and 
Cholangiocarcinoma Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University,
Khon Kaen, Thailand. (3)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand ; Liver Fluke and Cholangiocarcinoma Research
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is the second most common-primary liver cancer. The
difficulties in diagnosis limit successful treatment of CCA. At present,
histological investigation is the standard diagnosis for CCA. However, there are 
some poor-defined tumor tissues which cannot be definitively diagnosed by general
histopathology. As molecular signatures can define molecular phenotypes related
to diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment outcome, and CCA is the second most common 
cancer found after hepatocellularcarcinoma (HCC), the aim of this study was to
develop a predictive model which differentiates CCA from HCC and normal liver
tissues. An in-house PCR array containing 176 putative CCA marker genes was
tested with the training set tissues of 20 CCA and 10 HCC cases. The molecular
signature of CCA revealed the prominent expression of genes involved in cell
adhesion and cell movement, whereas HCC showed elevated expression of genes
related to cell proliferation/differentiation and metabolisms. A total of 69
genes differentially expressed in CCA and HCC were optimized statistically to
formulate a diagnostic equation which distinguished CCA cases from HCC cases.
Finally, a four-gene diagnostic equation (CLDN4, HOXB7, TMSB4 and TTR) was
formulated and then successfully validated using real-time PCR in an independent 
testing set of 68 CCA samples and 77 non-CCA controls. Discrimination analysis
showed that a combination of these genes could be used as a diagnostic marker for
CCA with better diagnostic parameters with high sensitivity and specificity than 
using a single gene marker or the usual serum markers (CA19-9 and CEA). This new 
combination marker may help physicians to identify CCA in liver tissues when the 
histopathology is uncertain.

PMCID: PMC3938437
PMID: 24586698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Oct;229(10):1405-16. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24577.

Altered histone mark deposition and DNA methylation at homeobox genes in human
oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Marcinkiewicz KM(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College and Weill Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, New York.

We recently reported a role of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and PRC2
trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in the regulation of homeobox
(HOX) (Marcinkiewicz and Gudas, 2013, Exp Cell Res) gene transcript levels in
human oral keratinocytes (OKF6-TERT1R) and tongue squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
cells. Here, we assessed both the levels of various histone modifications at a
subset of homeobox genes and genome wide DNA methylation patterns in OKF6-TERT1R 
and SCC-9 cells by using ERRBS (enhanced reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing). We detected the H3K9me3 mark at HOXB7, HOXC10, HOXC13, and HOXD8 at 
levels higher in OKF6-TERT1R than in SCC-9 cells; at IRX1 and SIX2 the H3K9me3
levels were conversely higher in SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R. The H3K79me3 mark was
detectable only at IRX1 in OKF6-TERT1R and at IRX4 in SCC-9 cells. The levels of 
H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 marks correlate with the transcript levels of the assessed
homeobox genes in both OKF6-TERT1R and SCC-9. We detected generally lower CpG
methylation levels on DNA in SCC-9 cells at annotated genomic regions which were 
differentially methylated between OKF6-TERT1R and SCC-9 cells; however, some
genomic regions, including the HOX gene clusters, showed DNA methylation at
higher levels in SCC-9 than OKF6-TERT1R. Thus, both altered histone modification 
patterns and changes in DNA methylation are associated with dysregulation of
homeobox gene expression in human oral cavity SCC cells, and this dysregulation
potentially plays a role in the neoplastic phenotype of oral keratinocytes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4206563
PMID: 24519855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Feb 21;444(4):473-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.068. Epub 2014 Jan 25.

Impaired glomerulogenesis and endothelial cell migration in Pkd1-deficient renal 
organ cultures.

Rowe I(1), Chiaravalli M(1), Piontek KB(2), Germino GG(2), Boletta A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milan, Italy. (2)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Division of
Nephrology, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
boletta.alessandra@hsr.it.

The PKD1 gene is essential for a number of biological functions, and its
loss-of-function causes autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). The
gene is developmentally regulated and believed to play an essential role in renal
development. Previous studies have shown that manipulating murine renal organ
cultures with dominant-negative forms of the Pkd1 gene impaired ureteric bud (UB)
branching. In the current study, we analyzed different stages of renal
development in two distinct mouse models carrying either a null mutation or
inactivation of the last two exons of Pkd1. Surprisingly, metanephric explants
from Pkd1-deleted kidneys harvested at day E11.5 did not show defects of UB
branching and elongation, estimated by cytokeratin staining on fixed tissues or
by Hoxb7-GFP time-lapse imaging. However, renal explants from Pkd1-mutants
isolated at day E14.5 showed impaired nephrogenesis. Notably, we observed cell
migratory defects in the developing endothelial compartment. Previous studies had
implicated the Pkd1 gene in controlling cell migration and collagen deposition
through PI3 kinases. In line with these studies, our results show that wild-type 
explants treated with PI3-kinase inhibitors recapitulate the endothelial defects 
observed in Pkd1 mutants, whereas treatment with VEGF only partially rescued the 
defects. Our data are consistent with a role for the Pkd1 gene in the endothelium
that may be required for proper nephrogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3945815
PMID: 24472557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 1;386(1):216-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.026. Epub 2013
Dec 24.

Midline-derived Shh regulates mesonephric tubule formation through the paraxial
mesoderm.

Murashima A(1), Akita H(2), Okazawa M(3), Kishigami S(4), Nakagata N(5),
Nishinakamura R(6), Yamada G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Wakayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Wakayama, Japan; Faculty 
of Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa 649-6493, 
Wakayama, Japan. (3)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced
Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509,
Wakayama, Japan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa
649-6493, Wakayama, Japan. (5)Division of Reproductive Engineering, Center for
Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Kumamoto, Japan. (6)Department of Kidney Development, Institute of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Kumamoto, Japan. (7)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of 
Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama
641-8509, Wakayama, Japan. Electronic address: transg8@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

During organogenesis, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) possesses dual functions: Shh
emanating from midline structures regulates the positioning of bilateral
structures at early stages, whereas organ-specific Shh locally regulates organ
morphogenesis at later stages. The mesonephros is a transient embryonic kidney in
amniote, whereas it becomes definitive adult kidney in some anamniotes. Thus,
elucidating the regulation of mesonephros formation has important implications
for our understanding of kidney development and evolution. In Shh knockout (KO)
mutant mice, the mesonephros was displaced towards the midline and ectopic
mesonephric tubules (MTs) were present in the caudal mesonephros.
Mesonephros-specific ablation of Shh in Hoxb7-Cre;Shh(flox/-) and
Sall1(CreERT2/+);Shh(flox/-) mice embryos indicated that Shh expressed in the
mesonephros was not required for either the development of the mesonephros or the
differentiation of the male reproductive tract. Moreover, stage-specific ablation
of Shh in Shh(CreERT2/flox) mice showed that notochord- and/or floor
plate-derived Shh were essential for the regulation of the number and position of
MTs. Lineage analysis of hedgehog (Hh)-responsive cells, and analysis of gene
expression in Shh KO embryos suggested that Shh regulated nephrogenic gene
expression indirectly, possibly through effects on the paraxial mesoderm. These
data demonstrate the essential role of midline-derived Shh in local tissue
morphogenesis and differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3985168
PMID: 24370450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Cell. 2013 Nov 11;27(3):245-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.10.016.

Disinherited daughters travel by tube.

Davies JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD,
UK. Electronic address: jamie.davies@ed.ac.uk.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2013 Nov 11;27(3):319-30.

Reporting in Developmental Cell, Packard et al. (2013) identify a peculiar
mitotic behavior in ureteric bud tips whereby dividing cells leave the epithelium
for the lumen, retaining only a slender connection with basement membrane. One
daughter inherits its mother's location, whereas the other moves along the lumen 
and reintegrates there.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24229641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Cell. 2013 Nov 11;27(3):319-30. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

Luminal mitosis drives epithelial cell dispersal within the branching ureteric
bud.

Packard A(1), Georgas K, Michos O, Riccio P, Cebrian C, Combes AN, Ju A,
Ferrer-Vaquer A, Hadjantonakis AK, Zong H, Little MH, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Nov 11;27(3):245-6.

The ureteric bud is an epithelial tube that undergoes branching morphogenesis to 
form the renal collecting system. Although development of a normal kidney depends
on proper ureteric bud morphogenesis, the cellular events underlying this process
remain obscure. Here, we used time-lapse microscopy together with several genetic
labeling methods to observe ureteric bud cell behaviors in developing mouse
kidneys. We observed an unexpected cell behavior in the branching tips of the
ureteric bud, which we term "mitosis-associated cell dispersal." Premitotic
ureteric tip cells delaminate from the epithelium and divide within the lumen;
although one daughter cell retains a basal process, allowing it to reinsert into 
the epithelium at the site of origin, the other daughter cell reinserts at a
position one to three cell diameters away. Given the high rate of cell division
in ureteric tips, this cellular behavior causes extensive epithelial cell
rearrangements that may contribute to renal branching morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3926506
PMID: 24183650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 22;3:2178. doi: 10.1038/srep02178.

Hox genes are involved in vascular wall-resident multipotent stem cell
differentiation into smooth muscle cells.

Klein D(1), Benchellal M, Kleff V, Jakob HG, Ergün S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
University Hospital, 45122 Essen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

Human vascular wall-resident CD44+ multipotent stem cells (VW-MPSCs) within the
vascular adventitia are capable to differentiate into pericytes and smooth muscle
cells (SMC). This study demonstrates HOX-dependent differentiation of CD44(+)
VW-MPSCs into SMC that involves epigenetic modification of transgelin as a
down-stream regulated gene. First, HOXB7, HOXC6 and HOXC8 were identified to be
differentially expressed in VW-MPSCs as compared to terminal differentiated human
aortic SMC, endothelial cells and undifferentiated pluripotent embryonic stem
cells. Silencing these HOX genes in VW-MPSCs significantly reduced their
sprouting capacity and increased expression of the SMC markers transgelin and
calponin and the histone gene histone H1. Furthermore, the methylation pattern of
the TAGLN promoter was altered. In summary, our findings suggest a role for
certain HOX genes in regulating differentiation of human VW-MPSC into SMCs that
involves epigenetic mechanisms. This is critical for understanding
VW-MPSC-dependent vascular disease processes such as neointima formation and
tumor vascularization.

PMCID: PMC3804857
PMID: 24145756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Dec;8(6):1747-54. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1741. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

MicroRNA and gene networks in human Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Zhu M(1), Xu Z, Wang K, Wang N, Zhu M, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
130012, P.R. China.

There has been significant progress in gene and microRNA (miRNA) research with
regard to the morbidity of Hodgkin's lymphoma (HL). However, the regulatory
mechanisms of genes and miRNAs have yet to be determined. In the current study,
the regulatory association between genes, miRNAs and transcription factors (TFs) 
was investigated to gain an understanding of the mechanisms and key pathways of
HL. The association between TFs and miRNAs, miRNAs and target genes and miRNA and
its host gene was examined. To show the regulatory correlation clearly, three
regulatory networks were hierarchically constructed: Differentially expressed,
associated and global networks. Following comparison and analysis of the
similarities and differences among the three networks, a number of key pathways, 
which showed self-adaptation associations were identified. This included NF<U+03BA>B1
and hsa-miR-9, hsa-miR-196a-1 and its host gene HOXB7, which separately forms a
self-adaptation association. The differentially expressed network illuminated the
pathogenesis of HL. In addition, the associated network further described the
regulatory mechanism associated with HL, including prevention, diagnosis,
development and therapy. The current study systematically explains the regulatory
mechanisms of HL and supplies comprehensive data associated with HL for further
studies. With increasing knowledge of the occurrence, mechanism, improvement,
metastasis and treatment, an increased understanding of HL may be achieved.

PMID: 24145479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncol Lett. 2013 Oct;6(4):1133-1139. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

microRNA and gene networks in human pancreatic cancer.

Zhu M(1), Xu Z, Wang K, Wang N, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
130012, P.R. China ; Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge
Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
130012, P.R. China.

To date, scientists have obtained a substantial amount of knowledge with regard
to genes and microRNAs (miRNAs) in pancreatic cancer (PC). However, deciphering
the regulatory mechanism of these genes and miRNAs remains difficult. In the
present study, three regulatory networks consisting of a differentially-expressed
network, a related network and a global network, were constructed in order to
identify the mechanisms and certain key miRNA and gene pathways in PC. The
interactions between transcription factors (TFs) and miRNAs, miRNAs and target
genes and an miRNA and its host gene were investigated. The present study
compared and analyzed the similarities and differences between the three networks
in order to distinguish the key pathways. Certain pathways involving the
differentially-expressed genes and miRNAs demonstrated specific features. TP53
and hsa-miR-125b were observed to form a self-adaptation association. A further
16 significant differentially-expressed miRNAs were obtained and it was observed 
that an miRNA and its host gene exhibit specific features in PC, for example,
hsa-miR-196a-1 and its host gene, HOXB7, form a self-adaptation association. The 
differentially-expressed network partially illuminated the mechanism of PC. The
present study provides comprehensive data that is associated with PC and may aid 
future studies in obtaining pertinent data results with regards to PC. In the
future, an improved understanding of PC may be obtained through an increased
knowledge of the occurrence, mechanism, improvement, metastasis and treatment of 
the disease.

PMCID: PMC3796390
PMID: 24137477  [PubMed]


47. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 2;13:451. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-451.

HOXB7 mRNA is overexpressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas and its
knockdown induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.

Chile T(1), Fortes MA, Corrêa-Giannella ML, Brentani HP, Maria DA, Puga RD, de
Paula Vde J, Kubrusly MS, Novak EM, Bacchella T, Giorgi RR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cellular and Molecular Endocrinology (LIM-25), University of
São Paulo Medical School, Av, Dr, Arnaldo, 455 # 4305, São Paulo, SP, 01246-903, 
Brazil. rrgiorgi2@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Human homeobox genes encode nuclear proteins that act as
transcription factors involved in the control of differentiation and
proliferation. Currently, the role of these genes in development and tumor
progression has been extensively studied. Recently, increased expression of HOXB7
homeobox gene (HOXB7) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) was shown to
correlate with an invasive phenotype, lymph node metastasis and worse survival
outcomes, but no influence on cell proliferation or viability was detected. In
the present study, the effects arising from the knockdown of HOXB7 in PDAC cell
lines was investigated.
METHODS: Real time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) (Taqman) was employed to assess
HOXB7 mRNA expression in 29 PDAC, 6 metastatic tissues, 24 peritumoral tissues
and two PDAC cell lines. siRNA was used to knockdown HOXB7 mRNA in the cell lines
and its consequences on apoptosis rate and cell proliferation were measured by
flow cytometry and MTT assay respectively.
RESULTS: Overexpression of HOXB7 mRNA was observed in the tumoral tissues and in 
the cell lines MIA PaCa-2 and Capan-1. HOXB7 knockdown elicited (1) an increase
in the expression of the pro-apoptotic proteins BAX and BAD in both cell lines;
(2) a decrease in the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2 and in
cyclin D1 and an increase in the number of apoptotic cells in the MIA PaCa-2 cell
line; (3) accumulation of cell in sub-G1 phase in both cell lines; (4) the
modulation of several biological processes, especially in MIA PaCa-2, such as
proteasomal ubiquitin-dependent catabolic process and cell cycle.
CONCLUSION: The present study confirms the overexpression of HOXB7 mRNA
expression in PDAC and demonstrates that decreasing its protein level by siRNA
could significantly increase apoptosis and modulate several biological processes.
HOXB7 might be a promising target for future therapies.

PMCID: PMC3851693
PMID: 24088503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jan 1;320(1):128-43. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Altered epigenetic regulation of homeobox genes in human oral squamous cell
carcinoma cells.

Marcinkiewicz KM(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of
Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

To gain insight into oral squamous cell carcinogenesis, we performed deep
sequencing (RNAseq) of non-tumorigenic human OKF6-TERT1R and tumorigenic SCC-9
cells. Numerous homeobox genes are differentially expressed between OKF6-TERT1R
and SCC-9 cells. Data from Oncomine, a cancer microarray database, also show that
homeobox (HOX) genes are dysregulated in oral SCC patients. The activity of
Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC), which causes epigenetic modifications, and
retinoic acid (RA) signaling can control HOX gene transcription. HOXB7, HOXC10,
HOXC13, and HOXD8 transcripts are higher in SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R cells;
using ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) we detected PRC2 protein SUZ12 and the
epigenetic H3K27me3 mark on histone H3 at these genes in OKF6-TERT1R, but not in 
SCC-9 cells. In contrast, IRX1, IRX4, SIX2 and TSHZ3 transcripts are lower in
SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R cells. We detected SUZ12 and the H3K27me3 mark at these
genes in SCC-9, but not in OKF6-TERT1R cells. SUZ12 depletion increased HOXB7,
HOXC10, HOXC13, and HOXD8 transcript levels and decreased the proliferation of
OKF6-TERT1R cells. Transcriptional responses to RA are attenuated in SCC-9 versus
OKF6-TERT1R cells. SUZ12 and H3K27me3 levels were not altered by RA at these HOX 
genes in SCC-9 and OKF6-TERT1R cells. We conclude that altered activity of PRC2
is associated with dysregulation of homeobox gene expression in human SCC cells, 
and that this dysregulation potentially plays a role in the neoplastic
transformation of oral keratinocytes.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3880227
PMID: 24076275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e67846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067846. Print 2013.

MicroRNA-196b regulates the homeobox B7-vascular endothelial growth factor axis
in cervical cancer.

How C(1), Hui AB, Alajez NM, Shi W, Boutros PC, Clarke BA, Yan R, Pintilie M,
Fyles A, Hedley DW, Hill RP, Milosevic M, Liu FF.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Hospital, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The down-regulation of microRNA-196b (miR-196b) has been reported, but its
contribution to cervical cancer progression remains to be investigated. In this
study, we first demonstrated that miR-196b down-regulation was significantly
associated with worse disease-free survival (DFS) for cervical cancer patients
treated with combined chemo-radiation. Secondly, using a tri-modal approach for
target identification, we determined that homeobox-B7 (HOXB7) was a bona fide
target for miR-196b, and in turn, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was a
downstream transcript regulated by HOXB7. Reconstitution of miR-196b expression
by transient transfection resulted in reduced cell growth, clonogenicity,
migration and invasion in vitro, as well as reduced tumor angiogenesis and tumor 
cell proliferation in vivo. Concordantly, siRNA knockdown of HOXB7 or VEGF
phenocopied the biological effects of miR-196b over-expression. Our findings have
demonstrated that the miR-196b/HOXB7/VEGF pathway plays an important role in
cervical cancer progression; hence targeting this pathway could be a promising
therapeutic strategy for the future management of this disease.

PMCID: PMC3701631
PMID: 23861821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jul;140(2):219-32. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2622-y. 
Epub 2013 Jul 9.

A meta-analysis of gene expression-based biomarkers predicting outcome after
tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer.

Mihály Z(1), Kormos M, Lánczky A, Dank M, Budczies J, Szász MA, Gyorffy B.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

To date, three molecular markers (ER, PR, and CYP2D6) have been used in clinical 
setting to predict the benefit of the anti-estrogen tamoxifen therapy. Our aim
was to validate new biomarker candidates predicting response to tamoxifen
treatment in breast cancer by evaluating these in a meta-analysis of available
transcriptomic datasets with known treatment and follow-up. Biomarker candidates 
were identified in Pubmed and in the 2007-2012 ASCO and 2011-2012 SABCS
abstracts. Breast cancer microarray datasets of endocrine therapy-treated
patients were downloaded from GEO and EGA and RNAseq datasets from TCGA. Of the
biomarker candidates, only those identified or already validated in a clinical
cohort were included. Relapse-free survival (RFS) up to 5 years was used as
endpoint in a ROC analysis in the GEO and RNAseq datasets. In the EGA dataset,
Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed for overall survival. Statistical
significance was set at p < 0.005. The transcriptomic datasets included 665
GEO-based and 1,208 EGA-based patient samples. All together 68 biomarker
candidates were identified. Of these, the best performing genes were PGR
(AUC = 0.64, p = 2.3E-07), MAPT (AUC = 0.62, p = 7.8E-05), and SLC7A5
(AUC = 0.62, p = 9.2E-05). Further genes significantly correlated to RFS include 
FOS, TP53, BTG2, HOXB7, DRG1, CXCL10, and TPM4. In the RNAseq dataset, only
ERBB2, EDF1, and MAPK1 reached statistical significance. We evaluated
tamoxifen-resistance genes in three independent platforms and identified PGR,
MAPT, and SLC7A5 as the most promising prognostic biomarkers in tamoxifen treated
patients.

PMID: 23836010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063835. Print 2013.

Deletion of the prorenin receptor from the ureteric bud causes renal
hypodysplasia.

Song R(1), Preston G, Ichihara A, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension and Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane 
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

The role of the prorenin receptor (PRR) in the regulation of ureteric bud (UB)
branching morphogenesis is unknown. Here, we investigated whether PRR acts
specifically in the UB to regulate UB branching, kidney development and function.
We demonstrate that embryonic (E) day E13.5 mouse metanephroi, isolated intact
E11.5 UBs and cultured UB cells express PRR mRNA. To study its role in UB
development, we conditionally ablated PRR in the developing UB (PRR (UB-/-))
using Hoxb7 (Cre) mice. On E12.5, PRR (UB-/-) mice had decreased UB branching and
increased UB cell apoptosis. These defects were associated with decreased
expression of Ret, Wnt11, Etv4/Etv5, and reduced phosphorylation of Erk1/2 in the
UB. On E18.5, mutants had marked kidney hypoplasia, widespread apoptosis of
medullary collecting duct cells and decreased expression of Foxi1, AE1 and
H(+)-ATPase a4 mRNA. Ultimately, they developed occasional small cysts in
medullary collecting ducts and had decreased nephron number. To test the
functional consequences of these alterations, we determined the ability of PRR
(UB-/-) mice to acidify and concentrate the urine on postnatal (P) day P30. PRR
(UB-/-) mice were polyuric, had lower urine osmolality and a higher urine pH
following 48 hours of acidic loading with NH4Cl. Taken together, these data show 
that PRR present in the UB epithelia performs essential functions during UB
branching morphogenesis and collecting duct development via control of Ret/Wnt11 
pathway gene expression, UB cell survival, activation of Erk1/2, terminal
differentiation and function of collecting duct cells needed for maintaining
adequate water and acid-base homeostasis. We propose that mutations in PRR could 
possibly cause renal hypodysplasia and renal tubular acidosis in humans.

PMCID: PMC3660567
PMID: 23704941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 May 1;6(1):11. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-11.

The histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium valproate causes limited transcriptional
change in mouse embryonic stem cells but selectively overrides Polycomb-mediated 
Hoxb silencing.

Boudadi E(1), Stower H, Halsall JA, Rutledge CE, Leeb M, Wutz A, O'Neill LP,
Nightingale KP, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Institute of Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT,
UK. b.m.turner@bham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) cause histone hyperacetylation
and H3K4 hypermethylation in various cell types. They find clinical application
as anti-epileptics and chemotherapeutic agents, but the pathways through which
they operate remain unclear. Surprisingly, changes in gene expression caused by
HDACi are often limited in extent and can be positive or negative. Here we have
explored the ability of the clinically important HDACi valproic acid (VPA) to
alter histone modification and gene expression, both globally and at specific
genes, in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
RESULTS: Microarray expression analysis of ES cells exposed to VPA (1 mM, 8 h),
showed that only 2.4% of genes showed a significant, >1.5-fold transcriptional
change. Of these, 33% were down-regulated. There was no correlation between gene 
expression and VPA-induced changes in histone acetylation or H3K4 methylation at 
gene promoters, which were usually minimal. In contrast, all Hoxb genes showed
increased levels of H3K9ac after exposure to VPA, but much less change in other
modifications showing bulk increases. VPA-induced changes were lost within 24 h
of inhibitor removal. VPA significantly increased the low transcription of Hoxb4 
and Hoxb7, but not other Hoxb genes. Expression of Hoxb genes increased in ES
cells lacking functional Polycomb silencing complexes PRC1 and PRC2.
Surprisingly, VPA caused no further increase in Hoxb transcription in these
cells, except for Hoxb1, whose expression increased several fold. Retinoic acid
(RA) increased transcription of all Hoxb genes in differentiating ES cells within
24 h, but thereafter transcription remained the same, increased progressively or 
fell progressively in a locus-specific manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Hoxb genes in ES cells are unusual in being sensitive to VPA, with
effects on both cluster-wide and locus-specific processes. VPA increases H3K9ac
at all Hoxb loci but significantly overrides PRC-mediated silencing only at Hoxb4
and Hoxb7. Hoxb1 is the only Hoxb gene that is further up-regulated by VPA in
PRC-deficient cells. Our results demonstrate that VPA can exert both cluster-wide
and locus-specific effects on Hoxb regulation.

PMCID: PMC3769143
PMID: 23634885  [PubMed]


53. Biomarkers. 2013 Jun;18(4):297-303. doi: 10.3109/1354750X.2013.773380. Epub 2013 
Apr 29.

Prognostic value of HOXB7 mRNA expression in human oesophageal squamous cell
cancer.

Xie X(1), Zhang SS, Wen J, Yang H, Luo KJ, Yang F, Hu Y, Fu JH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou 510060, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: This study was to determine the role of HOXB7 in predicting outcomes
of patients with oesophageal squamous cell cancer (OSCC).
METHODS: Samples were collected from 179 OSCC patients. HOXB7 mRNA expression was
measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: HOXB7 mRNA expression was up-regulated in 85.1% of OSCC tumorous
tissues, and correlated with age, pathological T and N category, as well as
cancer-specific survival (CSS). However, subgroup analysis revealed its
discernibility on CSS was only pronounced in early stage.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB7 mRNA expression might serve as a novel prognostic biomarker
for resected OSCC patients in early stage.

PMID: 23627614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Eur Spine J. 2013 Jun;22(6):1300-11. doi: 10.1007/s00586-013-2728-2. Epub 2013
Mar 7.

Microarray expression profiling identifies genes with altered expression in
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis.

Fendri K(1), Patten SA, Kaufman GN, Zaouter C, Parent S, Grimard G, Edery P,
Moldovan F.

Author information: 
(1)Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center, 3175, Chemin de la Cote
Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1C5, Canada.

PURPOSE: Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) is considered a complex genetic
disease, in which malfunctioning or dysregulation of one or more genes has been
proposed to be responsible for the expressed phenotype. However, to date, no
disease causing genes has been identified and the pathogenesis of AIS remains
unknown. The aim of this study is, therefore, to identify specific molecules with
differing expression patterns in AIS compared to healthy individuals.
METHODS: Microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR have examined differences in
the gene transcription profile between primary osteoblasts derived from spinal
vertebrae of AIS patients and those of healthy individuals.
RESULTS: There are 145 genes differentially expressed in AIS osteoblasts. A
drastic and significant change has been noted particularly in the expression
levels of Homeobox genes (HOXB8, HOXB7, HOXA13, HOXA10), ZIC2, FAM101A, COMP and 
PITX1 in AIS compared to controls. Clustering analysis revealed the interaction
of these genes in biological pathways crucial for bone development, in particular
in the differentiation of skeletal elements and structural integrity of the
vertebrae.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports on the expression of molecules that have not been
described previously in AIS. We also provide for the first time gene interaction 
pathways in AIS pathogenesis. These genes are involved in various bone regulatory
and developmental pathways and many of them can be grouped into clusters to
participate in a particular biological pathway. Further studies can be built on
our findings to further elucidate the association between different biological
pathways and the pathogenesis of AIS.

PMCID: PMC3676547
PMID: 23467837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Mar;24(4):618-26. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012090902. Epub 2013
Feb 28.

Brg1 determines urothelial cell fate during ureter development.

Weiss RM(1), Guo S, Shan A, Shi H, Romano RA, Sinha S, Cantley LG, Guo JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Developing and adult ureters express the epigenetic regulator Brg1, but the role 
of Brg1 in ureter development is not well understood. We conditionally ablated
Brg1 in the developing ureter using Hoxb7-Cre and found that Brg1 expression is
upstream of p63, Ppar<U+03B3>, and sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression in the ureteral
epithelium. In addition, epithelial stratification in the basal cells required
Brg1-dependent p63 expression, whereas terminal differentiation of the umbrella
cells required Brg1-dependent Ppar<U+03B3> expression. Furthermore, the loss of ureteric
Brg1 resulted in failure of Shh expression, which correlated with reduced smooth 
muscle cell development and hydroureter. Taken together, we conclude that Brg1
expression unifies three aspects of ureter development: maintenance of the basal 
cell population, guidance for terminal differentiation of urothelial cells, and
proper investment of ureteral smooth muscle cells.

PMCID: PMC3609140
PMID: 23449535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Cancer. 2013 Aug 15;133(4):879-92. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28097. Epub 2013 Mar
13.

The abrogation of the HOXB7/PBX2 complex induces apoptosis in melanoma through
the miR-221&222-c-FOS pathway.

Errico MC(1), Felicetti F, Bottero L, Mattia G, Boe A, Felli N, Petrini M,
Bellenghi M, Pandha HS, Calvaruso M, Tripodo C, Colombo MP, Morgan R, Carè A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Cutaneous melanoma is the fastest increasing cancer worldwide. Although several
molecular abnormalities have been associated with melanoma progression, the
underlying mechanisms are still largely unknown and few targeted therapies are
under evaluation. Here we show that the HOXB7/PBX2 dimer acts as a positive
transcriptional regulator of the oncogenic microRNA-221 and -222. In addition,
demonstrating c-FOS as a direct target of miR-221&222, we identify a
HOXB7/PBX2<U+2192>miR-221&222 <U+2192>c-FOS regulatory link, whereby the abrogation of
functional HOXB7/PBX2 dimers leads to reduced miR-221&222 transcription and
elevated c-FOS expression with consequent cell death. Taking advantage of the
treatment with the peptide HXR9, an antagonist of HOX/PBX dimerization, we
recognize miR-221&222 as effectors of its action, in turn confirming the HXR9
efficacy in the treatment of human melanoma malignancy, whilst sparing normal
human melanocytes. Our findings, besides suggesting the potential therapeutic of 
HXR9 or its derivatives in malignant melanoma, suggest the disruption of the
HOXB7/PBX2 complexes, miR-221&222 inhibition or even better their combination, as
innovative therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3812682
PMID: 23400877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;98(1):362-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2953. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

Distinct developmental signatures of human abdominal and gluteal subcutaneous
adipose tissue depots.

Karastergiou K(1), Fried SK, Xie H, Lee MJ, Divoux A, Rosencrantz MA, Chang RJ,
Smith SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

CONTEXT: Fat distribution differs in men and women, but in both sexes, a
predominantly gluteal-femoral compared with abdominal (central) fat distribution 
is associated with lower metabolic risk. Differences in cellular characteristics 
and metabolic functions of these depots have been described, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify depot- and sex-dependent differences in 
gene expression in human abdominal and gluteal sc adipose tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Abdominal and gluteal adipose tissue aspirates were obtained 
from 14 premenopausal women [age 27.5 ± 7.0 yr, body mass index (BMI) 27.3 ± 6.2 
kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.82 ± 0.04] and 21 men (age 29.7±7.4 yr, BMI
27.2 ± 4.5 kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.91 ± 0.07) and transcriptomes were
analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Expression of selected genes was determined 
in isolated adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions from each depot, and in in 
vitro cultures before and after adipogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: A total of 284 genes were differentially expressed between the abdominal
and gluteal depot, either specifically in males (n = 66) or females (n = 159) or 
in both sexes (n = 59). Most notably, gene ontology and pathway analysis
identified homeobox genes (HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXB8,
HOXC8, and IRX2) that were down-regulated in the gluteal depot in both sexes (P =
2 × 10(-10)). Conversely, HOXA10 was up-regulated in gluteal tissue and HOXC13
was detected exclusively in this depot. These differences were independent of
BMI, were present in both adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions of adipose
tissue, and were retained throughout in vitro differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that developmentally programmed differences may
contribute to the distinct phenotypic characteristics of peripheral fat.

PMCID: PMC3537084
PMID: 23150689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer. 2013 Feb 1;119(3):529-39. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27725. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

HOXB7 promotes invasion and predicts survival in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Nguyen Kovochich A(1), Arensman M, Lay AR, Rao NP, Donahue T, Li X, French SW,
Dawson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1732, USA.

BACKGROUND: The homeobox gene HOXB7 is overexpressed across a range of cancers
and promotes tumorigenesis through varying effects on proliferation, survival,
invasion, and angiogenesis. Although published microarray data suggest HOXB7 is
overexpressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), its function in
pancreatic cancer has not been studied.
METHODS: HOXB7 message and protein levels were examined in PDAC cell lines and
patient samples, as well as in normal pancreas. HOXB7 protein expression in
patient tumors was determined by immunohistochemistry and correlated with
clinicopathologic factors and survival. The impact of HOXB7 on cell
proliferation, growth, and invasion was assessed by knockdown and overexpression 
in PDAC cell lines. Candidate genes whose expression levels were altered
following HOXB7 knockdown were determined by microarray analysis.
RESULTS: HOXB7 message and protein levels were significantly elevated in PDAC
cell lines and patient tumor samples relative to normal pancreas. Evaluation of a
tissue microarray of 145 resected PDACs found high HOXB7 protein expression was
correlated with lymph node metastasis (P = .034) and an independent predictor of 
worse overall survival in multivariate analysis (hazard ratio = 1.56, 95%
confidence interval = 1.02-2.39). HOXB7 knockdown or overexpression in PDAC cell 
lines resulted in decreased or increased invasion, respectively, without
influencing proliferation or cell viability.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB7 is frequently overexpressed in PDAC, specifically promotes
invasive phenotype, and is associated with lymph node metastasis and worse
survival outcome. HOXB7 and its downstream targets may represent novel clinical
biomarkers or targets of therapy for inhibiting the invasive and metastatic
capacity of PDAC.

Copyright © 2012 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3867310
PMID: 22914903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043098. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Conditional expression of Wnt9b in Six2-positive cells disrupts stomach and
kidney function.

Kiefer SM(1), Robbins L, Rauchman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St Louis, Missouri,
United States of America.

During kidney development, canonical Wnt signaling activates differentiation,
while the transcription factor Six2 maintains the progenitor pool. These opposing
signals help to regulate nephron formation and ensure the full complement of
nephrons are formed. Since these two factors control differing fates in kidney
mesenchyme, we hypothesized that overexpression of Wnt9b in Six2-expressing cells
would disrupt kidney formation and may alter cell differentiation decisions in
other tissues. We created a transgenic mouse that conditionally expressed the
canonical Wnt ligand in the developing kidney, Wnt9b. The transgene is activated 
by cre recombinase and expresses GFP. We first tested its biological activity
using Hoxb7-cre and found that transgenic Wnt9b was capable of inducing
differentiation genes and of rescuing kidney development in Wnt9b(-/-) homozygous
deficient mice. In contrast, expression of Wnt9b in cells using Six2-cre caused
gastrointestinal distress and severe renal failure in adult mice. Transgenic
kidneys had numerous cystic tubules and elevated creatinine values (0.652 ±
0.044) compared to wild-type mice (0.119 ± 0.002). These animals also exhibited a
malformed pyloric sphincter, duodenogastric reflux, and a transformation of the
distal stomach into proximal fate. The gene expression changes observed for the
Wnt9b:EGFP transgene were compared to a stabilized ß-catenin allele to determine 
that Wnt9b is activating the canonical Wnt pathway in the tissues analyzed. These
results demonstrate that expression of Wnt9b in Six2-positive cells disrupts cell
fate decisions in the kidney and the gastrointestinal tract.

PMCID: PMC3422342
PMID: 22912798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Jan;53(1):49-57. doi: 10.1002/mc.21947. Epub 2012 Aug 21.

Role of HOXB7 in regulation of progression and metastasis of human lung
adenocarcinoma.

Yuan W(1), Zhang X, Xu Y, Li S, Hu Y, Wu S.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of The Third 
Military Medical University, Chongqing, P.R. China; Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, Edison Biotechnology Institute, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio.

Dysregulation of homeobox B7 (HOXB7), a member of the homeobox genes family, was 
suggested to play a role in regulation of tumorigenesis and metastases of some
cancers. However, the functions of HOXB7 in association with lung adenocarcinoma 
(LAC) have not been investigated. The correlation between the level of HOXB7
expression and cancer progression in patients is not known. In this study,
through analysis of 75 LAC samples and their corresponding normal lung epithelium
tissues immunohistochemistry (IHC), we demonstrate that HOXB7 was overexpressed
in LAC specimens compared to their paired normal lung epithelium tissues.
Increased expression of HOXB7 was associated with poor clinical outcomes,
correlating significantly with a short survival time in patients who had LAC.
Moreover, HOXB7 expression level was correlated with the tumor status
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028), nodal status (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012) and tumor stage (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.029) in lung
adenocarcinoma. Silencing HOXB7 inhibited cell growth and metastases in vitro and
in vivo. In conclusion, our results suggest that HOXB7 promotes LAC progression
by enhancing proliferation and metastasis. The increased expression of HOXB7 in
LAC is a potential prognostic indicator for patients, and HOXB7 could be a novel 
target for treatment of LAC patients.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22911672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042141. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Detection of IGF2BP3, HOXB7, and NEK2 mRNA expression in brush cytology specimens
as a new diagnostic tool in patients with biliary strictures.

Nischalke HD(1), Schmitz V, Luda C, Aldenhoff K, Berger C, Feldmann G, Sauerbruch
T, Spengler U, Nattermann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: It is a challenging task to distinguish between benign and
malignant lesions in patients with biliary strictures. Here we analyze whether
determination of target gene mRNA levels in intraductal brush cytology specimens 
may be used to improve the diagnosis of bile duct carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Brush cytology specimens from 119 patients with biliary
strictures (malignant: n = 72; benign: n = 47) were analyzed in a retrospective
cohort study. mRNA of IGF-II mRNA-binding protein 3 (IGF2BP3), homeobox B7
(HOXB7), Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), kinesin family member 2C (KIF2C) and
serine/threonine kinase NEK2 was determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR using the
<U+0394>Ct method.
RESULTS: IGF2BP3 (p<0.0001), HOXB7 (p<0.0001), and NEK2 (p<0.0001) mRNA
expression levels were significantly increased in patients with
cholangiocarcinoma or pancreatic cancer. Median <U+0394>Ct values differed by 3.5 cycles
(IGF2BP3), 2.8 cycles (HOXB7) and 1.3 cycles (NEK2) corresponding to 11-fold,
7-fold and 2.5-fold increased mRNA levels in malignant versus benign samples.
Sensitivity to detect biliary cancer was 76.4% for IGF2BP3 (80.9% specificity);
72.2% for HOXB7 (78.7% specificity) and 65.3% for NEK2 (72.3% specificity),
whereas routine cytology reached only 43.1% sensitivity (85.4% specificity).
Diagnostic precision was further improved, when all three molecular markers were 
assessed in combination (77.8% sensitivity, 87.2% specificity) and achieved 87.5%
sensitivity and 87.2% specificity when molecular markers were combined with
routine cytology.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that measuring IGF2BP3, HOXB7 and NEK2 mRNA levels 
by RT-PCR in addition to cytology has the potential to improve detection of
malignant biliary disorders from brush cytology specimens.

PMCID: PMC3413695
PMID: 22879911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040644. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

ADP ribosylation by PARP-1 suppresses HOXB7 transcriptional activity.

Wu X(1), Ellmann S, Rubin E, Gil M, Jin K, Han L, Chen H, Kwon EM, Guo J, Ha HC, 
Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. xinyan@jhmi.edu

Interactions with cofactors regulate transcriptional activity and also help HOX
proteins to achieve the specificity required for transcriptional regulation of
target genes. In this study, we describe a novel protein/protein interaction of
HOXB7 with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) that involves the homeodomain 
of HOXB7 and the first zinc finger domain of PARP-1. Upon binding to PARP-1,
HOXB7 undergoes poly(ADP-ribosyl)altion resulting in a reduction of its
transcriptional activity. Since aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues are
acceptors of the ADP ribose moiety transferred by PARP-1, deletion of the
evolutionarily conserved C-terminal Glu-rich tail of HOXB7 dramatically
attenuates ADP-ribosylation of HOXB7 by PARP-1. Further, a mutant of HOXB7
without the Glu-rich tail loses the ability to be negatively regulated by PARP-1 
and becomes transcriptionally more active in luciferase reporter assays. Since
the homeodomain is highly conserved among HOX proteins, five other HOX proteins
were tested. All six showed interaction with, and were poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated by
PARP-1. However, among them, this modification altered the DNA binding activity
of only HOXA7 and HOXB7. In summary, this study identifies a new interacting
partner of HOX proteins. More importantly, this study reveals a novel mechanism
whereby polyADP-ribosylation regulates transcriptional activities of HOX proteins
such as HOXB7 and HOXA7.

PMCID: PMC3402478
PMID: 22844406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Diabetes. 2012 Oct;61(10):2565-74. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Catalase prevents maternal diabetes-induced perinatal programming via the
Nrf2-HO-1 defense system.

Chang SY(1), Chen YW, Zhao XP, Chenier I, Tran S, Sauvé A, Ingelfinger JR, Zhang 
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CRCHUM), Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2012 Oct;61(10):2400-2.

We investigated whether overexpression of catalase (CAT) in renal proximal
tubular cells (RPTCs) could prevent the programming of hypertension and kidney
disease in the offspring of dams with maternal diabetes. Male offspring of
nondiabetic and diabetic dams from two transgenic (Tg) lines (Hoxb7-green
fluorescent protein [GFP]-Tg [controls] and Hoxb7/CAT-GFP-Tg, which overexpress
CAT in RPTCs) were studied from the prenatal period into adulthood.
Nephrogenesis, systolic blood pressure, renal hyperfiltration, kidney injury, and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation were assessed. Gene expression of
transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1), nuclear factor erythroid 2p45-related
factor-2 (Nrf2), and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) was tested in both in vitro and in
vivo studies. Renal dysmorphogenesis was observed in offspring of Hoxb7-GFP-Tg
dams with severe maternal diabetes; the affected male offspring displayed higher 
renal ROS generation and developed hypertension and renal hyperfiltration as well
as renal injury with heightened TGF-ß1 expression in adulthood. These changes
were ameliorated in male offspring of diabetic Hoxb7/CAT-GFP-Tg dams via the
Nrf2-HO-1 defense system. CAT promoted Nrf2 nuclear translocation and HO-1 gene
expression, seen in both in vitro and in vivo studies. In conclusion, CAT
overexpression in the RPTCs ameliorated maternal diabetes-induced perinatal
programming, mediated, at least in part, by triggering the Nrf2-HO-1 defense
system.

PMCID: PMC3447903
PMID: 22733796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jul 10;107(2):315-24. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.263. Epub 2012 Jun 
19.

Mixed lineage leukaemia-4 regulates cell-cycle progression and cell viability and
its depletion suppresses growth of xenografted tumour in vivo.

Ansari KI(1), Kasiri S, Mishra BP, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mixed lineage leukaemia-4 (MLL4) is one of the MLL family of histone 
H3 lysine-4 (H3K4)-specific methyl transferases that have critical roles in gene 
expression and epigenetics in human. Though MLLs are well recognised as crucial
players in histone methylation and gene regulation; little is known about the
biochemical functions of MLL4 and its roles in cancer.
METHODS: Herein, we have investigated the roles of MLL4 in cell viability,
cell-cycle progression and explored its potential roles in tumour growth using
antisense-mediated knockdown experiments, flow-cytometry analysis, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence staining and animal models.
RESULTS: Our studies demonstrated that knockdown of MLL4 severely affects
cell-cycle progression and induces apoptotic cell death in cultured tumour cells.
Knockdown of MLL4 induced nuclear condensation, fragmentation, cytochrome-c
release from mitochondria to cytosol and activated caspase-3/7 indicating
apoptotic cell death. The MLL4 regulates expression of various critical
cell-cycle regulatory genes such as cyclin D, cyclin E, p27, HOXA5 and HOXB7 via 
histone H3K4 trimethylation and recruitment of RNA polymerase II. Interestingly, 
application of MLL4 antisense suppressed tumour growth in vivo in colon cancer
xenograft implanted in nude mouse. The MLL4 antisense specifically knocked down
MLL4 in tumour tissue and also downregulated the expression of various growth and
angiogenic factors resulting in tumour suppression.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that MLL4 is a crucial player in cell
viability, cell-cycle progression and is critical for tumour growth in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3394987
PMID: 22713656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9077-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116933109. Epub 2012 May 17.

Evidence for a functional role of epigenetically regulated midcluster HOXB genes 
in the development of Barrett esophagus.

di Pietro M(1), Lao-Sirieix P, Boyle S, Cassidy A, Castillo D, Saadi A, Eskeland 
R, Fitzgerald RC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison Medical Research Council 
Research Centre, CB2 0XZ Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Barrett esophagus (BE) is a human metaplastic condition that is the only known
precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma. BE is characterized by a posterior
intestinal-like phenotype in an anterior organ and therefore it is reminiscent of
homeotic transformations, which can occur in transgenic animal models during
embryonic development as a consequence of mutations in HOX genes. In humans,
acquired deregulation of HOX genes during adulthood has been linked to
carcinogenesis; however, little is known about their role in the pathogenesis of 
premalignant conditions. We hypothesized that HOX genes may be implicated in the 
development of BE. We demonstrated that three midcluster HOXB genes (HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB7) are overexpressed in BE, compared with the anatomically
adjacent normal esophagus and gastric cardia. The midcluster HOXB gene signature 
in BE is identical to that seen in normal colonic epithelium. Ectopic expression 
of these three genes in normal squamous esophageal cells in vitro induces markers
of intestinal differentiation, such as KRT20, MUC2, and VILLIN. In BE-associated 
adenocarcinoma, the activation midcluster HOXB gene is associated with loss of
H3K27me3 and gain of AcH3, compared with normal esophagus. These changes in
histone posttranslational modifications correlate with specific chromatin
decompaction at the HOXB locus. We suggest that epigenetically regulated
alterations of HOX gene expression can trigger changes in the transcriptional
program of adult esophageal cells, with implications for the early stages of
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3384195
PMID: 22603795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8296-308. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00222-12. Epub 2012 May 2.

Functional cooperation between human adenovirus type 5 early region 4, open
reading frame 6 protein, and cellular homeobox protein HoxB7.

Müller D(1), Schreiner S, Schmid M, Groitl P, Winkler M, Dobner T.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich Pette Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany.

Human adenovirus type 5 (HAdV5) E4orf6 (early region 4 open reading frame 6
protein) is a multifunctional early viral protein promoting efficient replication
and progeny production. E4orf6 complexes with E1B-55K to assemble cellular
proteins into a functional E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that not only mediates
proteasomal degradation of host cell substrates but also facilitates export of
viral late mRNA to promote efficient viral protein expression and host cell
shutoff. Recent findings defined the role of E4orf6 in RNA splicing independent
of E1B-55K binding. To reveal further functions of the early viral protein in
infected cells, we used a yeast two-hybrid system and identified the homeobox
transcription factor HoxB7 as a novel E4orf6-associated protein. Using a HoxB7
knockdown cell line, we observed a positive role of HoxB7 in adenoviral
replication. Our experiments demonstrate that the absence of HoxB7 leads to
inefficient viral progeny production, as HAdV5 gene expression is highly
regulated by HoxB7-mediated activation of various adenoviral promoters. We have
thus identified a novel role of E4orf6 in HAdV5 gene transcription via regulation
of homeobox protein-dependent modulation of viral promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC3421667
PMID: 22553335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Jul 1;303(1):F45-55. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00030.2012. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

ENaC inhibition stimulates Cl- secretion in the mouse cortical collecting duct
through an NKCC1-dependent mechanism.

Pech V(1), Thumova M, Kim YH, Agazatian D, Hummler E, Rossier BC, Weinstein AM,
Nanami M, Wall SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA.

In cortical collecting ducts (CCDs) perfused in vitro, inhibiting the epithelial 
Na(+) channel (ENaC) reduces Cl(-) absorption. Since ENaC does not transport
Cl(-), the purpose of this study was to determine how ENaC modulates Cl(-)
absorption. Thus, Cl(-) absorption was measured in CCDs perfused in vitro that
were taken from mice given aldosterone for 7 days. In wild-type mice, we observed
no effect of luminal hydrochlorothiazide on either Cl(-) absorption or
transepithelial voltage (V(T)). However, application of an ENaC inhibitor
[benzamil (3 µM)] to the luminal fluid or application of a Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase
inhibitor to the bath reduced Cl(-) absorption by ~66-75% and nearly obliterated 
lumen-negative V(T). In contrast, ENaC inhibition had no effect in CCDs from
collecting duct-specific ENaC-null mice (Hoxb7:CRE, Scnn1a(loxlox)). Whereas
benzamil-sensitive Cl(-) absorption did not depend on CFTR, application of a
Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-) cotransport inhibitor (bumetanide) to the bath or ablation of
the gene encoding Na(+)-K(+)-2Cl(-) cotransporter 1 (NKCC1) blunted
benzamil-sensitive Cl(-) absorption, although the benzamil-sensitive component of
V(T) was unaffected. In conclusion, first, in CCDs from aldosterone-treated mice,
most Cl(-) absorption is benzamil sensitive, whereas thiazide-sensitive Cl(-)
absorption is undetectable. Second, benzamil-sensitive Cl(-) absorption occurs by
inhibition of ENaC, possibly due to elimination of lumen-negative V(T). Finally, 
benzamil-sensitive Cl(-) flux occurs, at least in part, through transcellular
transport through a pathway that depends on NKCC1.

PMCID: PMC3431594
PMID: 22496413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genesis. 2012 Sep;50(9):693-9. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22028. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Conditional expression of Lodavin, an avidin-tagged LDL receptor, for
biotin-mediated applications in vivo.

Murugan S(1), Saarela U, Airenne K, Shan J, Skovorodkin I, Ylä-Herttuala S,
Vainio SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oulu Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu, Laboratory of
Developmental Biology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Lodavin represents an engineered fusion protein that consists of a cytoplasmic
and a transmembrane domain of the human low-density lipoprotein receptor coupled 
to an extracellular avidin monomer. Biotinylated compounds have been successfully
targeted to Lodavin-expressing cells that have been transduced by a
Lodavin-containing virus, and the targeting is based on the high affinity between
biotin and avidin. We engineered a Rosa26 (R26R) knock-in Lodavin mouse to
develop biotin-based applications such as targeted drug delivery, cell
purification, and tissue imaging in vivo. A cDNA encoding Lodavin was inserted
downstream of a floxed ßgeo resistance gene in the R26R locus in embryonic stem
cells, and a germ line-derived R26RLodavin mouse line was generated. Efficient
removal of the floxed ßgeo cassette and conditional activation of Lodavin
expression was achieved as a result of crossing the R26RLodavin mice with
HoxB7-Cre, Wnt4-Cre, or Tie1-Cre mice. In summary, the R26RLodavin mouse line may
provide a useful tool for testing and developing applications with the aid of
avidin and biotin interaction.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22467513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 May 1;302(9):F1112-20. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00435.2011. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Angiotensin II regulates growth of the developing papillas ex vivo.

Song R(1), Preston G, Khalili A, El-Dahr SS, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension, and 
Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that lack of angiotensin (ANG) II production in
angiotensinogen (AGT)-deficient mice or pharmacologic antagonism of ANG II AT(1) 
receptor (AT(1)R) impairs growth of the developing papillas ex vivo, thus
contributing to the hypoplastic renal medulla phenotype observed in AGT- or
AT(1)R-null mice. Papillas were dissected from Hoxb7(GFP+) or AGT(+/+), (+/-),
(-/-) mouse metanephroi on postnatal day P3 and grown in three-dimentional
collagen matrix gels in the presence of media (control), ANG II (10(-5) M), or
the specific AT(1)R antagonist candesartan (10(-6) M) for 24 h. Percent reduction
in papillary length was attenuated in AGT(+/+) and in AGT(+/-) compared with
AGT(-/-) (-18.4 ± 1.3 vs. -32.2 ± 1.6%, P < 0.05, -22.8 ± 1.3 vs. -32.2 ± 1.6%, P
< 0.05, respectively). ANG II blunted the decrease in papilla length observed in 
respective media-treated controls in Hoxb7(GFP+) (-1.5 ± 0.3 vs. -10.0 ± 1.4%, P 
< 0.05) or AGT(+/+), (+/-), and (-/-) papillas (-12.8 ± 0.7 vs. -18.4 ± 1.3%, P <
0.05, -16.8 ± 1.1 vs. -23 ± 1.2%, P < 0.05; -26.2 ± 1.6 vs. -32.2 ± 1.6%, P <
0.05, respectively). In contrast, percent decrease in the length of Hoxb7(GFP+)
papillas in the presence of the AT(1)R antagonist candesartan was higher compared
with control (-24.3 ± 2.1 vs. -10.5 ± 1.8%, P < 0.05). The number of
proliferating phospho-histone H3 (pH3)-positive collecting duct cells was lower, 
whereas the number of caspase 3-positive cells undergoing apoptosis was higher in
candesartan- vs. media-treated papillas (pH3: 12 ± 1.4 vs. 21 ± 2.1, P < 0.01;
caspase 3: 3.8 ± 0.5 vs. 1.7 ± 0.2, P < 0.01). Using quantitative RT-PCR, we
demonstrate that AT(1)R signaling regulates the expression of genes implicated in
morphogenesis of the renal medulla. We conclude that AT(1)R prevents shrinkage of
the developing papillas observed ex vivo via control of Wnt7b, FGF7, ß-catenin,
calcineurin B1, and a3 integrin gene expression, collecting duct cell
proliferation, and survival.

PMCID: PMC3362172
PMID: 22301625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Apr;23(4):641-51. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2011080829. Epub 2012
Jan 26.

Disruption of IFT complex A causes cystic kidneys without mitotic spindle
misorientation.

Jonassen JA(1), SanAgustin J, Baker SP, Pazour GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Intraflagellar transport (IFT) complexes A and B build and maintain primary
cilia. In the mouse, kidney-specific or hypomorphic mutant alleles of IFT complex
B genes cause polycystic kidneys, but the influence of IFT complex A proteins on 
renal development is not well understood. In the present study, we found that
HoxB7-Cre-driven deletion of the complex A gene Ift140 from collecting ducts
disrupted, but did not completely prevent, cilia assembly. Mutant kidneys
developed collecting duct cysts by postnatal day 5, with rapid cystic expansion
and renal dysfunction by day 15 and little remaining parenchymal tissue by day
20. In contrast to many models of polycystic kidney disease, precystic
Ift140-deleted collecting ducts showed normal centrosomal positioning and no
misorientation of the mitotic spindle axis, suggesting that disruption of
oriented cell division is not a prerequisite to cyst formation in these kidneys. 
Precystic collecting ducts had an increased mitotic index, suggesting that cell
proliferation may drive cyst expansion even with normal orientation of the
mitotic spindle. In addition, we observed significant increases in expression of 
canonical Wnt pathway genes and mediators of Hedgehog and tissue fibrosis in
highly cystic, but not precystic, kidneys. Taken together, these studies indicate
that loss of Ift140 causes pronounced renal cystic disease and suggest that
abnormalities in several different pathways may influence cyst progression.

PMCID: PMC3312512
PMID: 22282595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Histopathology. 2012 Mar;60(4):662-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04102.x. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

HOXB7 expression is a prognostic factor for oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Bitu CC, Carrera M, Lopes MA, Kowalski LP, Soares FA, Coletta RD.

PMID: 22239410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):310-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.029. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 acts downstream of GDNF/Ret in branching
morphogenesis of the developing mouse kidney.

Willecke R(1), Heuberger J, Grossmann K, Michos O, Schmidt-Ott K, Walentin K,
Costantini F, Birchmeier W.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 
13125 Berlin, Germany.

The tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 acts downstream of various growth factors, hormones
or cytokine receptors. Mutations of the Shp2 gene are associated with several
human diseases. Here we have ablated Shp2 in the developing kidneys of mice,
using the ureteric bud epithelium-specific Hoxb7/Cre. Mutant mice produced a
phenotype that is similar to mutations of the genes of the GDNF/Ret receptor
system, that is: strongly reduced ureteric bud branching and downregulation of
the Ret target genes Etv4 and Etv5. Shp2 mutant embryonic kidneys also displayed 
reduced cell proliferation at the branch tips and branching defects, which could 
not be overcome by GDNF in organ culture. We also examined compound mutants of
Shp2 and Sprouty1, which is an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in
the kidney. Sprouty1 single mutants produce supernumerary ureteric buds, which
branch excessively. Sprouty1 mutants rescued branching deficits in Ret(-/-) and
GDNF(-/-) kidneys. Sprouty1; Shp2 double mutants showed no rescue of kidney
branching. Our data thus indicate an intricate interplay of Shp2 and Sprouty1 in 
signaling downstream of receptor tyrosine kinases during kidney development.
Apparently, Shp2 mediates not only GDNF/Ret but also signaling by other receptor 
tyrosine kinases in branching morphogenesis of the embryonic kidney.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22015719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Hematol. 2011 Dec;86(12):E64-6. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22164. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Overexpression of HOXB7 and homeobox genes characterizes multiple myeloma
patients lacking the major primary immunoglobulin heavy chain locus
translocations.

Agnelli L(1), Storti P, Todoerti K, Sammarelli G, Dalla Palma B, Bolzoni M, Rocci
A, Piazza F, Semenzato G, Palumbo A, Neri A, Giuliani N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Milano and Hematology 1,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Homeobox (HOX) gene transcription factors are frequently deregulated in
hematologic malignancies and involved in leukemogenic transformation [1].
Moreover, their overexpression has been associated with tumoral-induced
neoangiogenesis in solid cancer [2]. The expression and the role of these genes
have not yet been completely elucidated in multiple myeloma (MM). Recently, we
reported that a small fraction of MM patients shows a HOXB7 overexpression as
compared with normal samples and that HOXB7 expression correlates with bone
marrow angiogenesis and the production of the proangiogenic factors by MM cells
[3]. Other authors previously reported that HOXA cluster genes are expressed in a
small fraction of MM patients [4]. Herein, we extended our previous evidences
with the evaluation of the expression level of HOXB7 and the other gene family
members in a large number of primary MM cells in relationship with the different 
molecular subgroups of MM and the presence of specific chromosome translocations.
We found that HOXB7 and other genes of HOX family have a preferential
distribution based on the characteristics of molecular MM subtypes based on the
translocations/cyclins (TC) classification, suggesting a potential relationship
between HOX genes expression, angiogenesis, and molecular features of MM
patients.

PMID: 21953534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2736-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018859108. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

The HOXB7 protein renders breast cancer cells resistant to tamoxifen through
activation of the EGFR pathway.

Jin K(1), Kong X, Shah T, Penet MF, Wildes F, Sgroi DC, Ma XJ, Huang Y,
Kallioniemi A, Landberg G, Bieche I, Wu X, Lobie PE, Davidson NE, Bhujwalla ZM,
Zhu T, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Department of Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

Multiple factors including long-term treatment with tamoxifen are involved in the
development of selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulator resistance in
ERa-positive breast cancer. Many underlying molecular events that confer
resistance are known but a unifying theme is yet to be revealed. In this report, 
we provide evidence that HOXB7 overexpression renders MCF-7 cells resistant to
tamoxifen via cross-talk between receptor tyrosine kinases and ERa signaling.
HOXB7 is an ERa-responsive gene. Extended treatment of MCF-7 cells with tamoxifen
resulted in progressively increasing levels of HOXB7 expression, along with EGFR 
and EGFR ligands. Up-regulation of EGFR occurs through direct binding of HOXB7 to
the EGFR promoter, enhancing transcriptional activity. Finally, higher expression
levels of HOXB7 in the tumor significantly correlated with poorer disease-free
survival in ERa-positive patients with breast cancer on adjuvant tamoxifen
monotherapy. These studies suggest that HOXB7 acts as a key regulator,
orchestrating a major group of target molecules in the oncogenic hierarchy.
Functional antagonism of HOXB7 could circumvent tamoxifen resistance.

PMCID: PMC3286915
PMID: 21690342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Jun;78(6):436-49. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21321. Epub 2011 May 12.

HOX genes are expressed in bovine and mouse oocytes and early embryos.

Paul D(1), Bridoux L, Rezsöhazy R, Donnay I.

Author information: 
(1)Université Catholique de Louvain, Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Embryologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire Animale, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

HOX proteins are transcription factors that play a major role in patterning the
body axis of vertebrates from the gastrulation stage. While nothing has been
reported so far about their roles at earlier stages, there is evidence that some 
HOX genes are expressed before gastrulation. The objective of this work was to
study the pattern of expression of several HOX genes during oocyte maturation and
early embryonic development up to the blastocyst stage. Using nested PCR, HOXD1, 
HOXA3, HOXD4, HOXB7, HOXB9, and HOXC9 transcripts were detected in bovine oocytes
and early embryos at various frequencies depending on the stage of development.
Quantitative PCR was performed on bovine oocytes and early embryos: relative
expression of HOXD1, HOXA3, and HOXC9 decreased sharply after the 5-8 cell stage.
HOXB9 relative expression increased between the oocyte and the morula stage. All 
transcripts seemed to be of maternal origin before the maternal to embryonic
transition, as demonstrated by blocking transcription with a-amanitin. Reverse
transcription was performed with either hexamers or oligo-dT, allowing for the
determination that HOXC9 transcripts were slightly deadenylated during oocyte
maturation; HOXD1, HOXA3, and HOXB9 transcripts were not, indicating that they
could be translated. Hoxd1, Hoxa3, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 expression was also detected 
in mouse oocytes and early embryos. A similar pattern of expression was found in 
the two species. In conclusion, mammalian HOX genes might be implicated in the
control of oocyte maturation, the maternal-to-embryonic transition or the first
steps of embryo differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21567651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Urol. 2011 Jun;185(6):2320-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2011.02.044. Epub 2011 Apr
21.

Cell death serves as a single etiological cause of a wide spectrum of congenital 
urinary tract defects.

Guo Q(1), Tripathi P, Poyo E, Wang Y, Austin PF, Bates CM, Chen F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Renal Division, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

PURPOSE: We genetically disrupted the wolffian duct in mice to study the affected
organogenesis processes and to test the hypothesis that cell loss can be the
developmental basis for a wide spectrum of congenital anomalies in the kidney and
urinary tract.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used Hoxb7-Cre transgenic lines (HC1 and HC2) to induce
diphtheria toxin production from a ROSA(DTA) allele, disrupting the wolffian duct
and derivatives.
RESULTS: The first set of mutants (HC1;ROSA(DTA/+)) exhibited agenesis of the
kidney, ureter and reproductive tracts. The second set of mutants
(HC2;ROSA(DTA/+)) exhibited diverse defects, including renal agenesis/hypoplasia,
hydronephrosis, hydroureter, ureter-vas deferens fistulas in males and
ureter-oviduct/uterus fistulas in females. The phenotypic differences correspond 
to the degree of apoptosis induced caudal truncation of the wolffian duct, which 
is less severe and more variable in HC2;ROSA(DTA/+) mice. Whenever the wolffian
duct failed to reach the urogenital sinus, the ureter failed to separate from the
wolffian duct, suggesting that ureteral migration along the common nephric duct
to the cloaca and the subsequent common nephric duct degeneration constitute the 
only pathway for separating the ureter and wolffian duct derivatives.
CONCLUSIONS: The diverse and severe defects observed emphasize the central role
of the wolffian duct in providing progenitors and signals for urogenital
development. These results also indicate that the quantitative difference in cell
death induced caudal truncation of the wolffian duct can lead to a wide range of 
qualitatively distinct defects, and that cell death can serve as a single
etiological cause of a wide spectrum of congenital kidney and urinary tract
defects.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3169200
PMID: 21511282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;17(11):3569-78. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2533.
Epub 2011 Apr 7.

HOXB7 as a prognostic factor and mediator of colorectal cancer progression.

Liao WT(1), Jiang D, Yuan J, Cui YM, Shi XW, Chen CM, Bian XW, Deng YJ, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: This study was to investigate the clinicopathologic significance and
potential role of HOXB7 in the development and progression of colorectal cancer
(CRC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The relationship between HOXB7 expression and clinical
characteristics of CRC was analyzed in 224 paraffin-embedded archived CRC
specimens by immunohistochemistry (IHC). The effects of HOXB7 on cell growth and 
proliferation, as well as on tumorigenesis, were examined both in vitro and in
vivo, using MTT assay, colony formation assay, cell cycle analysis, soft agar
assay, and tumorigenesis in nude mice. Western blotting and real-time reverse
transcriptase-PCR were performed to examine the impact of HOXB7 on the PI3K/Akt
and MAPK signaling pathways.
RESULTS: HOXB7 protein level was significantly correlated with advanced Dukes
stage (P < 0.001), T stage (P = 0.012), distant metastasis (P = 0.042), higher
proliferation index (P = 0.007) and poor survival of patients (P = 0.005).
Enforced expression of HOXB7 in CRC cell lines significantly enhanced cell
growth, proliferation and tumorigenesis. Conversely, knockdown of HOXB7 caused an
inhibition of cell growth, proliferation, and tumorigenesis. We also showed that 
HOXB7 accelerated G(0)-G(1) to S-phase transition concomitantly with upregulation
of cyclin D1 and downregulation of p27Kip1. On the contrary, knockdown of HOXB7
caused G(1)-S-phase arrest, downregulation of cyclin D1 and upregulation of
p27Kip1. Enforced expression of HOXB7 could enhance PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathway
activity.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HOXB7 protein, as a valuable marker of CRC 
prognosis, plays an important role in the development and progression of human
CRC.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21474578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Leukemia. 2011 Mar;25(3):527-37. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.270. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

HOXB7 expression by myeloma cells regulates their pro-angiogenic properties in
multiple myeloma patients.

Storti P(1), Donofrio G, Colla S, Airoldi I, Bolzoni M, Agnelli L, Abeltino M,
Todoerti K, Lazzaretti M, Mancini C, Ribatti D, Bonomini S, Franceschi V, Pistoia
V, Lisignoli G, Pedrazzini A, Cavicchi O, Neri A, Rizzoli V, Giuliani N.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and BMT Center, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

The deregulation of the homeobox genes as homeoboxB (HOXB)-7 has been previously 
associated to tumor progression and angiogenesis; here we investigated the
potential role of HOXB7 in the pro-angiogenic properties of multiple myeloma (MM)
cells. We found that HOXB7 was expressed in 10 out of 22 MM patients analyzed at 
the diagnosis related to high bone marrow angiogenesis and overexpressed in about
40% of myeloma cell lines compared with normal plasma cells. Enforced HOXB7
expression in MM cells by a lentiviral vector significantly modified their
transcriptional and angiogenic profile, checked by combined microarray and
angiogenesis PCR analyses, upregulating VEGFA, FGF2, MMP2, WNT5a and PDGFA and
downregulating thrombospoindin-2. The pro- and anti-angiogenic HOXB7-related gene
signature was also validated in a large independent dataset of MM patients.
Accordingly, MM-induced vessel formation was significantly increased by HOXB7
overexpression both in vitro angiogenic and chorioallantoic membrane assays, as
well as the HOXB7 silencing by small interfering RNA inhibited the production of 
angiogenic factors, and the pro-angiogenic properties of MM cells. Finally, in
SCID-NOD mice we confirmed that HOXB7 overexpression by MM cells stimulated tumor
growth, increased MM-associated angiogenesis and the expression of pro-angiogenic
genes by microarray analysis supporting the critical role of HOXB7 in the
angiogenic switch in MM.

PMID: 21183939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2010 Oct;137(19):3233-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.052845.

Integrin-linked kinase regulates p38 MAPK-dependent cell cycle arrest in ureteric
bud development.

Smeeton J(1), Zhang X, Bulus N, Mernaugh G, Lange A, Karner CM, Carroll TJ,
Fässler R, Pozzi A, Rosenblum ND, Zent R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The integrin-linked kinase (ILK), pinch and parvin ternary complex connects the
cytoplasmic tails of beta1 integrins to the actin cytoskeleton. We recently
showed that constitutive expression of ILK and alpha parvin in both the ureteric 
bud and the metanephric mesenchyme of the kidney is required for kidney
development. In this study, we define the selective role of ILK in the ureteric
bud of the mouse kidney in renal development by deleting it in the ureteric cell 
lineage before the onset of branching morphogenesis (E10.5). Although deleting
ILK resulted in only a moderate decrease in branching, the mice died at 8 weeks
of age from obstruction due to the unprecedented finding of intraluminal
collecting duct cellular proliferation. ILK deletion in the ureteric bud resulted
in the inability of collecting duct cells to undergo contact inhibition and to
activate p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in vivo and in vitro. p38
MAPK activation was not dependent on the kinase activity of ILK. Thus, we
conclude that ILK plays a crucial role in activating p38 MAPK, which regulates
cell cycle arrest of epithelial cells in renal tubulogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2934735
PMID: 20823064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;30(20):4851-63. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00521-10. Epub 2010 Aug 
16.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 regulates the embryonic transcriptome and CoREST
stability.

Foster CT(1), Dovey OM, Lezina L, Luo JL, Gant TW, Barlev N, Bradley A, Cowley
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, United
Kingdom.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1), which demethylates mono- and dimethylated
histone H3-Lys4 as part of a complex including CoREST and histone deacetylases
(HDACs), is essential for embryonic development in the mouse beyond embryonic day
6.5 (e6.5). To determine the role of LSD1 during this early period of
embryogenesis, we have generated loss-of-function gene trap mice and conditional 
knockout embryonic stem (ES) cells. Analysis of postimplantation gene trap
embryos revealed that LSD1 expression, and therefore function, is restricted to
the epiblast. Conditional deletion of LSD1 in mouse ES cells, the in vitro
counterpart of the epiblast, revealed a reduction in CoREST protein and
associated HDAC activity, resulting in a global increase in histone H3-Lys56
acetylation, but not H3-Lys4 methylation. Despite this biochemical perturbation, 
ES cells with LSD1 deleted proliferate normally and retain stem cell
characteristics. Loss of LSD1 causes the aberrant expression of 588 genes,
including those coding for transcription factors with roles in anterior/posterior
patterning and limb development, such as brachyury, Hoxb7, Hoxd8, and retinoic
acid receptor <U+03B3> (RAR<U+03B3>). The gene coding for brachyury, a key regulator of
mesodermal differentiation, is a direct target gene of LSD1 and is overexpressed 
in e6.5 Lsd1 gene trap embryos. Thus, LSD1 regulates the expression and
appropriate timing of key developmental regulators, as part of the
LSD1/CoREST/HDAC complex, during early embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2950538
PMID: 20713442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Oct;67(20):3535-48. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0394-7. Epub 
2010 May 18.

MicroRNA miR-196a is a central regulator of HOX-B7 and BMP4 expression in
malignant melanoma.

Braig S(1), Mueller DW, Rothhammer T, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, Regensburg, Germany.

Since bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play an important role in melanoma
progression, we aimed to determine the molecular mechanisms leading to
overexpression of BMP4 in melanoma cells compared to normal melanocytes. With our
experimental approach we revealed that loss of expression of a microRNA
represents the starting point for a signaling cascade finally resulting in
overexpression of BMP4 in melanoma cells. In detail, strongly reduced expression 
of the microRNA miR-196a in melanoma cells compared to healthy melanocytes leads 
to enhanced HOX-B7 mRNA and protein levels, which subsequently raise Ets-1
activity by inducing basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). Ets-1 finally
accounts for induction of BMP4 expression. We were furthermore able to
demonstrate that bFGF-mediated induction of migration is achieved via activation 
of BMP4, thus determining BMP4 as major modulator of migration in melanoma. In
summary, our study provides insights into the early steps of melanoma progression
and might thereby harbor therapeutic relevance.

PMID: 20480203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Jul;5(1):40-50. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.03.004. Epub 2010 Mar
27.

The HOX Code as a "biological fingerprint" to distinguish functionally distinct
stem cell populations derived from cord blood.

Liedtke S(1), Buchheiser A, Bosch J, Bosse F, Kruse F, Zhao X, Santourlidis S,
Kögler G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics,
Heinrich-Heine-University Medical Center, Düsseldorf, Germany.
liedtke@itz.uni-duesseldorf.de

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been isolated from almost every adult tissue.
In cord blood (CB), different non-hematopoietic CD45-, CD34- adherent cell
populations can be generated: the cord blood derived MSC (CB-MSC), that behave
almost like MSC from bone marrow (BM-MSC), and unrestricted somatic stem cells
(USSC) which show a distinct differentiation potential into all three germ
layers. However, distinguishing these populations easily by molecular markers is 
still a concern. In this study we were able to present the HOX expression pattern
of USSC, CB-MSC and BM-MSC, which in fact allows a discrimination of these
populations. Briefly, RT-PCR analysis of the HOX code revealed a high similarity 
between BM-MSC and CB-MSC, which are both HOX-positive, whereas USSC resembled H9
embryonic stem cells HOX-negative.Especially HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXC10 and HOXD8 are
good candidate markers to discriminate MSC from USSC. Thus, our data suggest that
the "biological fingerprint" based on the HOX code can be used to distinguish
functionally distinct MSC populations derived from bone marrow and cord blood.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20434420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Aug;16(8):2441-55. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2009.0548.

Constructing kidney-like tissues from cells based on programs for organ
development: toward a method of in vitro tissue engineering of the kidney.

Rosines E(1), Johkura K, Zhang X, Schmidt HJ, Decambre M, Bush KT, Nigam SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California , San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.

The plausibility of constructing vascularized three-dimensional (3D) kidney
tissue from cells was investigated. The kidney develops from mutual inductive
interactions between cells of the ureteric bud (UB), derived from the Wolffian
duct (WD), and the metanephric mesenchyme (MM). We found that isolated MMs were
capable of inducing branching morphogenesis of the WD (an epithelial tube) in
recombination cultures; suggesting that the isolated MM retains inductive
capacity for WD-derived epithelial tubule cells other than those from the UB.
Hanging drop aggregates of embryonic and adult renal epithelial cells from UB and
mouse inner medullary collecting duct cell (IMCD) lines, which are ultimately of 
WD origin, were capable of inducing MM epithelialization and tubulogenesis with
apparent connections (UB cells) and collecting duct-like tubules with lumens
(IMCD). This supports the view that the collecting system can be constructed from
certain epithelial cells (those ultimately of WD origin) when stimulated by MM.
Although the functions of the MM could not be replaced by cultured mesenchymal
cells, primary MM cells and one MM-derived cell line (BSN) produced factors that 
stimulate UB branching morphogenesis, whereas another, rat inducible metanephric 
mesenchyme (RIMM-18), supported WD budding as a feeder layer. This indicates that
some MM functions can be recapitulated by cells. Although engineering of a
kidney-like tissue from cultured cells alone remains to be achieved, these
results suggest the feasibility of such an approach following the normal
developmental progression of the UB and MM. Consistent with this notion, implants
of kidney-like tissues constructed in vitro from recombinations of the UB and MM 
survived for over 5 weeks and achieved an apparently host-derived glomerular
vasculature. Lastly, we addressed the issue of optimal macro- and
micro-patterning of kidney-like tissue, which might be necessary for function of 
an organ assembled using a tissue engineering approach. To identify suitable
conditions, 3D reconstructions of HoxB7-green fluorescent protein mouse rudiments
(E12) cultured on a filter or suspended in a collagen gel (type I or type IV)
revealed that type IV collagen 3D culture supports the deepest tissue growth (600
+/- 8 microm) and the largest kidney volume (0.22 +/- 0.02 mm(3)), and enabled
the development of an umbrella-shaped collecting system such as occurs in vivo.
Taken together with prior work (Rosines et al., 2007; Steer et al., 2002), these 
results support the plausibility of a developmental strategy for constructing and
propagating vascularized 3D kidney-like tissues from recombinations of cultured
renal progenitor cells and/or primordial tissue.

PMCID: PMC2947461
PMID: 20214453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Oncol. 2009;2009:581939. doi: 10.1155/2009/581939. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Autoantibodies to tumor-associated antigens in epithelial ovarian carcinoma.

Piura B(1), Piura E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soroka 
Medical Center and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel.

This review will focus on recent knowledge related to circulating autoantibodies 
(AAbs) to tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. So
far, the following TAAs have been identified to elicit circulating AAbs in
epithelial ovarian carcinoma: p53, homeobox proteins (HOXA7, HOXB7), heat shock
proteins (HSP-27, HSP-90), cathepsin D, cancer-testis antigens (NY-ESO-1/LAGE-1),
MUC1, GIPC-1, IL-8, Ep-CAM, and S100A7. Since AAbs to TAAs have been identified
in the circulation of patients with early-stage cancer, it has been speculated
that the assessment of a panel of AAbs specific for epithelial ovarian carcinoma 
TAAs might hold great potential as a novel tool for early diagnosis of epithelial
ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2817389
PMID: 20145720  [PubMed]


87. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Apr;21(4):573-8. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009070719. Epub 2010
Feb 4.

Targeted inactivation of EGF receptor inhibits renal collecting duct development 
and function.

Zhang Z(1), Pascuet E, Hueber PA, Chu L, Bichet DG, Lee TC, Threadgill DW,
Goodyer P.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute and Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The ureteric bud (UB) expresses high levels of the EGF receptor (EGFR) during
kidney development, but its function in this setting is unclear. Here, Egfr mRNA 
was abundant in medullary portions of the UB trunk but absent from the branching 
UB tips during embryogenesis. Homozygous Egfr knockout did not affect the pattern
of UB arborization, but renal papillae were hypoplastic and exhibited widespread 
apoptosis of tubular cells. Because these EGFR-deficient mice die within 1 week
of life, we targeted Egfr inactivation to the renal collecting ducts using
Cre-lox technology with a Hoxb7-Cre transgene. This targeted inactivation of Egfr
led to a thin renal medulla, and at 7 weeks of age, the mice had moderate
polyuria and reduced urine-concentrating ability. At 30 to 33 weeks, water
deprivation demonstrated a continued urine-concentrating defect despite similar
levels of vasopressin between knockout mice and littermate controls. Taken
together, these results suggest that unlike other tyrosine kinases expressed at
the UB tip, EGFR functions primarily to drive elongation of the emerging
collecting ducts and to optimize urine-concentrating ability.

PMCID: PMC2844304
PMID: 20133479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Pathol. 2010 Jan;176(1):85-97. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090517. Epub 2009
Dec 11.

Fate tracing reveals the pericyte and not epithelial origin of myofibroblasts in 
kidney fibrosis.

Humphreys BD(1), Lin SL, Kobayashi A, Hudson TE, Nowlin BT, Bonventre JV,
Valerius MT, McMahon AP, Duffield JS.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2010 Jan;176(1):22-4.

Understanding the origin of myofibroblasts in kidney is of great interest because
these cells are responsible for scar formation in fibrotic kidney disease. Recent
studies suggest epithelial cells are an important source of myofibroblasts
through a process described as the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; however,
confirmatory studies in vivo are lacking. To quantitatively assess the
contribution of renal epithelial cells to myofibroblasts, we used Cre/Lox
techniques to genetically label and fate map renal epithelia in models of kidney 
fibrosis. Genetically labeled primary proximal epithelial cells cultured in vitro
from these mice readily induce markers of myofibroblasts after transforming
growth factor beta(1) treatment. However, using either red fluorescent protein or
beta-galactosidase as fate markers, we found no evidence that epithelial cells
migrate outside of the tubular basement membrane and differentiate into
interstitial myofibroblasts in vivo. Thus, although renal epithelial cells can
acquire mesenchymal markers in vitro, they do not directly contribute to
interstitial myofibroblast cells in vivo. Lineage analysis shows that during
nephrogenesis, FoxD1-positive((+)) mesenchymal cells give rise to adult CD73(+), 
platelet derived growth factor receptor beta(+), smooth muscle actin-negative
interstitial pericytes, and these FoxD1-derivative interstitial cells expand and 
differentiate into smooth muscle actin(+) myofibroblasts during fibrosis,
accounting for a large majority of myofibroblasts. These data indicate that
therapeutic strategies directly targeting pericyte differentiation in vivo may
productively impact fibrotic kidney disease.

PMCID: PMC2797872
PMID: 20008127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Oncol. 2010 Jan;36(1):141-9.

Overexpression of HOXB7 homeobox gene in oral cancer induces cellular
proliferation and is associated with poor prognosis.

De Souza Setubal Destro MF(1), Bitu CC, Zecchin KG, Graner E, Lopes MA, Kowalski 
LP, Coletta RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.

A growing body of evidence has confirmed the involvement of dysregulated
expression of HOX genes in cancer. HOX genes are a family of 39 transcription
factors, divided in 4 clusters (HOXA to HOXD), that during normal development
regulate cell proliferation and specific cell fate. In the present study it was
investigated whether genes of the HOXB cluster play a role in oral cancer. We
showed that most of the genes in the HOXB network are inactive in oral tissues,
with exception of HOXB2, HOXB7 and HOXB13. Expression of HOXB7 was significantly 
higher in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) compared to normal oral mucosas.
We further demonstrated that HOXB7 overexpression in HaCAT human epithelial cell 
line promoted proliferation, whereas downregulation of HOXB7 endogenous levels in
human oral carcinoma cells (SCC9 cells) decreased proliferation. In OSCCs,
expression of HOXB7 and Ki67, a marker of proliferation, correlate strongly with 
each other (rs=0.79, p<0.006). High immunohistochemical expression of HOXB7 was
correlated with T stage (p=0.06), N stage (p=0.07), disease stage (p=0.09) and
Ki67 expression (p=0.01), and patients with tumors showing high number of
HOXB7-positive cells had shorter overall survival (p=0.08) and shorter
disease-free survival after treatment (p=0.10) compared with patients with tumors
exhibiting low amount of HOXB7-positive cells. Our data suggest that HOXB7 may
contribute to oral carcinogenesis by increasing tumor cell proliferation, and
imply that HOXB7 may be an important determinant of OSCC patient prognosis.

PMID: 19956843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Eur J Haematol. 2010 Feb 1;84(2):185-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01366.x.
Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Differential expression of HOXB7 gene in multiple myeloma and extramedullary
multiple myeloma patients.

Novak EM, Linardi C, Metzger M, Maria DA, Giorgi RR, Moura F, Martinez GA,
Bydlowski SP.

PMID: 19878270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. BMC Cancer. 2009 Oct 14;9:363. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-363.

Establishment of canine hemangiosarcoma xenograft models expressing endothelial
growth factors, their receptors, and angiogenesis-associated homeobox genes.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Matsuura S, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Kimura T,
Masegi T, Yanai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Gifu
University, Gifu, Japan. l5102402@edu.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Human hemangiosarcoma (HSA) tends to have a poor prognosis; its
tumorigenesis has not been elucidated, as there is a dearth of HSA clinical
specimens and no experimental model for HSA. However, the incidence of
spontaneous HSA is relatively high in canines; therefore, canine HSA has been
useful in the study of human HSA. Recently, the production of angiogenic growth
factors and their receptors in human and canine HSA has been reported. Moreover, 
the growth-factor environment of HSA is very similar to that of
pathophysiological angiogenesis, which some homeobox genes regulate in the
transcription of angiogenic molecules. In the present study, we established 6
xenograft canine HSA tumors and detected the expression of growth factors, their 
receptors, and angiogenic homeobox genes.
METHODS: Six primary canine HSAs were xenografted to nude mice subcutaneously and
serially transplanted. Subsequently, the expressions of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-A, basic fibroblast growth factors (bFGF), flt-1 and flk-1
(receptors of VEGF-A), FGFR-1, and angiogenic homeobox genes HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7,
HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 were investigated in original and xenograft tumors by
histopathology, immunostaining, and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), using canine-specific primer sets.
RESULTS: Histopathologically, xenograft tumors comprised a proliferation of
neoplastic cells that were varied in shape, from spindle-shaped and polygonal to 
ovoid; some vascular-like structures and vascular clefts of channels were
observed, similar to those in the original tumors. The expression of endothelial 
markers (CD31 and vWF) was detected in xenograft tumors by immunohistochemistry
and RT-PCR. Moreover, the expression of VEGF-A, bFGF, flt-1, flk-1, FGFR-1,
HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7, HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 was detected in xenograft tumors.
Interestingly, expressions of bFGF tended to be higher in 3 of the xenograft HSA 
tumors than in the other tumors.
CONCLUSION: We established 6 xenograft canine HSA tumors in nude mice and found
that the expressions of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors in
xenograft HSAs were similar to those in spontaneous HSA. Furthermore, we detected
the expression of angiogenic homeobox genes; therefore, xenograft models may be
useful in analyzing malignant growth in HSA.

PMCID: PMC2768746
PMID: 19825192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Kidney Int. 2009 Oct;76(8):868-76. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.304. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

Deletion of the Met receptor in the collecting duct decreases renal repair
following ureteral obstruction.

Ma H(1), Saenko M, Opuko A, Togawa A, Soda K, Marlier A, Moeckel GW, Cantley LG, 
Ishibe S.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor, Met, activate biological pathways
necessary for repair and regeneration following kidney injury. The Met receptor
is expressed in multiple cell types within the kidney, each of which is capable
of regulating fibrotic responses. To specifically address the role of the Met
receptor in the adult collecting duct during renal injury, a conditional knockout
mouse (Met(fl/fl);HoxB7-Cre) was generated and tested using unilateral ureteral
obstruction, a model of nephron injury, fibrosis, and repair. Following
obstruction in these mice there was increased expression of collagens I and IV
along with plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, a known regulator of matrix
degradation, compared to ureteral obstructed non-flox littermates. There were
trends toward increased interstitial fibrosis, infiltration of the interstitium, 
and acute tubular necrosis in the knockout mice despite similar degrees of
hydronephrosis to the control littermates. The Met(fl/fl);HoxB7-Cre mice;
however, had reduced tubular cell proliferation and kidney regenerative capacity 
after release of the obstruction, thus leading to diminished functional recovery.
We suggest that Met receptor signaling in the collecting duct acts as a major
regulator of cell survival and propagation of the repair process with a possible 
secondary role to diminish inflammatory and fibrotic responses.

PMID: 19675527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Sep;48(9):828-41. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20687.

DNA hypermethylation accompanied by transcriptional repression in follicular
lymphoma.

Bennett LB(1), Schnabel JL, Kelchen JM, Taylor KH, Guo J, Arthur GL, Papageorgio 
CN, Shi H, Caldwell CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of
Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
bennettlb@health.missouri.edu

High-throughput microarray technologies were used to study DNA methylation
accompanied by transcriptional changes in follicular lymphoma (FL). Using
Methylated CpG Island Amplification with Microarrays to study CpG Island DNA
methylation in FL, we discovered widespread hypermethylation of homeobox genes
and previously identified targets of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in cell
lines and primary tumors, but not in benign follicular hyperplasia (BFH). DNA
methylation for HOXA11, HOXD10, HOXB7, HOXC12, PAX6, LHX9, SFMBT2, EN2, and PAX7 
was independently validated in the RL cell line and HOXA11, HOXD10, PAX6, and EN2
in primary tumors. Combined Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) also
established DNA methylation for the previously identified PRC2 targets DCC, DES, 
GAD2, AQP5, GPR61, GRIA4, GJD2, and AMPH in FL but not in BFH. Gene expression
analyses revealed 411 genes that were hypermethylated and transcriptionally
repressed in RL, 74% of which were reactivated by the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaD) plus or minus the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA). Forty genes were also downregulated in primary FL. Our
results suggest that extensive hypermethylation in promoters of polycomb target
genes is a characteristic of FL and that loss of expression of certain SUZ12
target genes could be functionally relevant for lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2738630
PMID: 19530241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Comp Pathol. 2009 Aug-Oct;141(2-3):199-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2009.04.004.
Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Immunohistochemical demonstration of angiogenesis-associated homeobox proteins in
canine vascular tumours.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Yanai T, Masegi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty
of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193,
Japan.

Angiogenic homeobox genes regulate the behaviour of endothelial cells (ECs)
during angiogenesis, so the aim of this study was to determine whether expression
of these genes may be a determinant of malignancy in canine haemangiosarcoma
(HSA). Homeobox proteins were evaluated immunohistochemically in tissue samples
from canine HSAs (n=78), haemangiomas (HAs; n=30) and samples of granulation
tissue (n=8). Active ECs in granulation tissue were positively labelled by
antisera specific for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3, HoxB7, Pbx1 and Meis1. Quiescent ECs
in granulation tissue did not express HoxD3 and Pbx1. There were significantly
more neoplastic cells positively labelled for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3 and Pbx1 in HSA
compared with HA. Almost all tumours were positive for HoxB7 and Meis1. HoxB3,
HoxD3, Pbx1 and Meis1 proteins were detected in 80-90% of the HSAs, but in <20%
of the HAs. Overall, homeobox protein expression in HSA appears to have a
phenotype similar to that of active ECs in angiogenesis. The expression of
homeobox genes associated with angiogenesis might be associated with the
malignant growth of HSA.

PMID: 19505696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 26;106(21):8585-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810952106. Epub 2009 May 11.

A distinct role for secreted fibroblast growth factor-binding proteins in
development.

Gibby KA(1), McDonnell K, Schmidt MO, Wellstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

FGFs modulate diverse biological processes including embryonic development.
Secreted FGF-binding proteins (BPs) can release FGFs from their local
extracellular matrix storage, chaperone them to their cognate receptors, and thus
modulate FGF signaling. Here we describe 2 chicken BP homologs (chBP) that show
distinct expression peaks at embryonic days E7.5 (chBP2) and E11.5 (chBP1),
although their tissue distribution is similar (skin = intestine>lung>heart,
liver). Embryos were grown ex ovo to monitor the phenotypic impact of a timed in 
vivo knockdown of expression peaks by microinjection of specific siRNAs targeted 
to either of the chBPs. Knockdown of peak expression of chBP2 caused embryonic
lethality within <5 days. Surviving embryos showed defective ventral wall closure
indicative of altered dorsoventral patterning. This defect coincided with reduced
expression of HoxB7 but not HoxB8 that are involved in the control of
thoracic/abdominal segment morphology. Also, MAPK phosphatase 3, a negative
regulator of FGF signaling, and sonic hedgehog that can participate in feedback
control of the FGF pathway were reduced, reflecting altered FGF signaling.
Knockdown of the chBP1 expression peak caused embryonic lethality within <3 days 
although no distinct morphologic phenotype or pathways alterations were apparent.
We conclude that BPs play a significant role in fine-tuning the complex FGF
signaling network during distinct phases of embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2689014
PMID: 19433791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mech Dev. 2009 May-Jun;126(5-6):337-49. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.02.005. Epub 2009
Mar 4.

NRAGE: a potential rheostat during branching morphogenesis.

Nikopoulos GN(1), Martins JF, Adams TL, Karaczyn A, Adams D, Vary C, Oxburgh L,
Verdi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Center for Molecular Medicine,
Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.

Branching morphogenesis is a developmental process characteristic of many organ
systems. Specifically, during renal branching morphogenesis, its been postulated 
that the final number of nephrons formed is one key clinical factor in the
development of hypertension in adulthood. As it has been established that BMPs
regulate, in part, renal activity of p38 MAP kinase (p38(MAPK)) and it has
demonstrated that the cytoplasmic protein Neurotrophin Receptor MAGE homologue
(NRAGE) augments p38(MAPK) activation, it was hypothesized that a decrease in the
expression of NRAGE during renal branching would result in decreased branching of
the UB that correlated with changes in p38(MAPK) activation. To verify this, the 
expression of NRAGE was reduced in ex vivo kidney explants cultures using
antisense morpholino. Morpholino treated ex vivo kidney explants expression were 
severely stunted in branching, a trait that was rescued with the addition of
exogenous GDNF. Renal explants also demonstrated a precipitous drop in p38(MAPK) 
activation that too was reversed in the presence of recombinant GDNF. RNA
profiling of NRAGE diminished ex vivo kidney explants resulted in altered
expression of GDNF, Ret, BMP7 and BMPRIb mRNAs. Our results suggested that in
early kidney development NRAGE might have multiple roles during renal branching
morphogenesis through association with both the BMP and GDNF signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2702142
PMID: 19268530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neonatology. 2009;96(1):50-60. doi: 10.1159/000201739. Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Quantification of Hox and surfactant protein-B transcription during murine lung
development.

Grier DG(1), Thompson A, Lappin TR, Halliday HL.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Neonatal Unit, Royal Maternity Hospital, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12
6BB, UK. grier@doctors.org.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic processes underlying fetal lung development and maturation
are incompletely understood. Better knowledge of these processes would provide
insights into the causes of lung malformations and prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome and the potential adverse effects of glucocorticoids. Hox genes
are involved in the lung branching morphogenesis and maturation of respiratory
epithelium, but their expression pattern remains to be defined.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that genes involved in lung branching would be
downregulated during early development, whereas those involved in maturation
would be unchanged or upregulated.
METHODS: TaqMan real-time primers and probes were designed for all 39 murine Hox 
genes, and the murine SP-B gene and transcription profiles of these genes were
obtained from whole lungs isolated at e14.5, e16.5, e18.5, e19.5 and postnatal
days 1 and 20.
RESULTS: Hox genes in clusters A and B, specifically those between paralog groups
3 and 7, were the most represented, with Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 being the most highly
transcribed. A wave of reduced transcription in 16 Hox genes, coincident with
increased SP-B transcription, was observed with advancing gestation. Consistently
high transcription of Hoxa5 from e14.5 to postnatal day 20 may indicate that
sustained transcription is required for normal lung maturation. When e15.5 lungs 
were cultured with dexamethasone, Hoxb6, Hoxb7 and Hoxb8 levels were
significantly upregulated, creating the potential for modulation of diverse
downstream target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved understanding of the genetic processes underlying lung
development afforded by our Q-PCR platform may allow development of more specific
methods for inducing fetal lung maturation.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19204410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mamm Genome. 2009 Mar;20(3):140-51. doi: 10.1007/s00335-008-9169-y. Epub 2009 Jan
24.

Genetic analyses reveal a requirement for Dicer1 in the mouse urogenital tract.

Pastorelli LM(1), Wells S, Fray M, Smith A, Hough T, Harfe BD, McManus MT, Smith 
L, Woolf AS, Cheeseman M, Greenfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Unit, MRC Harwell, Oxfordshire, OX11 0RD, UK.

Despite the increasing interest in other classes of small RNAs, microRNAs
(miRNAs) remain the most widely investigated and have been shown to play a role
in a number of different processes in mammals. Many studies investigating miRNA
function focus on the processing enzyme Dicer1, which is an RNAseIII protein
essential for the biogenesis of active miRNAs through its cleavage of precursor
RNA molecules. General deletion of Dicer1 in the mouse confirms that miRNAs are
essential for development because embryos lacking Dicer1 fail to reach the end of
gastrulation. Here we investigate the role of Dicer1 in urogenital tract
development. We utilised a conditional allele of the Dicer1 gene and two
Cre-expressing lines, driven by HoxB7 and Amhr2, to investigate the effect of
Dicer1 deletion on both male and female reproductive tract development. Data
presented here highlight an essential role for Dicer1 in the correct
morphogenesis and function of the female reproductive tract and confirm recent
findings that suggest Dicer1 is required for female fertility. In addition,
HoxB7:Cre-mediated deletion in ureteric bud derivatives leads to a spectrum of
anomalies in both males and females, including hydronephrotic kidneys and kidney 
parenchymal cysts. Male reproductive tract development, however, remains largely 
unaffected in the absence of Dicer1. Thus, Dicer1 is required for development of 
the female reproductive tract and also normal kidney morphogenesis.

PMID: 19169742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genesis. 2009 Feb;47(2):61-6. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20452.

A transgenic mouse that reveals cell shape and arrangement during ureteric bud
branching.

Chi X(1), Hadjantonakis AK, Wu Z, Hyink D, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York 10032, USA.

Understanding the cellular events that underlie epithelial morphogenesis is a key
problem in developmental biology. Here, we describe a new transgenic mouse line
that makes it possible to visualize individual cells specifically in the Wolffian
duct and ureteric bud, the epithelial structures that give rise to the collecting
system of the kidney. myr-Venus, a membrane-associated form of the fluorescent
protein Venus, was expressed in the ureteric bud lineage under the control of the
Hoxb7 promoter. In Hoxb7/myr-Venus mice, the outlines of all Wolffian duct and
ureteric bud epithelial cells are strongly labeled at all stages of urogenital
development, allowing the shapes and arrangements of individual cells to be
readily observed by confocal microscopy of freshly excised or cultured kidneys.
This strain should be extremely useful for studies of cell behavior during
ureteric bud branching morphogenesis in wild type and mutant mouse lines.

PMCID: PMC2880702
PMID: 19111008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Endocrinology. 2009 May;150(5):2202-10. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1531. Epub 2008 Dec 
23.

Conditional transgenic mice for studying the role of the glucocorticoid receptor 
in the renal collecting duct.

Nguyen Dinh Cat A(1), Ouvrard-Pascaud A, Tronche F, Clemessy M, Gonzalez-Nunez D,
Farman N, Jaisser F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Natíonal de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicalé Unité 772 College de
France, 11 Place Marcelin Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France.

The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) is a major regulator of renal sodium
reabsorption and body fluid homeostasis. However, little is known about
glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-dependent renal effects. Glucocorticoids may
activate both receptors, so it is difficult to distinguish between MR- and
GR-mediated effects in vivo. To overcome this complexity, we used a transgenic
mouse model allowing conditional GR overexpression (doxycycline inducible TetON
system, Hoxb7 promoter) in the renal collecting duct (CD) to identify
GR-regulated genes involved in sodium transport in the CD. In microdissected
cortical CD, induction of GR expression led (after 2 d of doxycycline) to
increased alpha-epithelial sodium channel and glucocorticoid-induced leucine
zipper and decreased abundance of with-no-lysine kinase 4 transcripts, without
modification of Na,K-ATPase, serum- and glucocorticoid-kinase-1, or MR
expression. No changes occurred in the upstream distal and connecting tubules
[distal convoluted tubule (DCT), connecting tubule (CNT)]. Sodium excretion was
unaltered, but the urinary aldosterone concentration was reduced, suggesting
compensation of transitory extracellular volume expansion that subsequently
disappeared. At steady state, i.e. after 15 d of doxycycline administration,
transcript abundance remained altered in the CD, whereas mirror changes appeared 
in the DCT and CNT. Plasma aldosterone or glucocorticoids and blood pressure were
all unaffected. These experiments show that: 1) GR, in addition to MR, controls
epithelial sodium channel- and glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper expression
in vivo in the CD; 2) with-no-lysine kinase 4 is negatively controlled by GR; and
3) the DCT and CNT compensate for these alterations to maintain normal sodium
reabsorption and blood pressure. These results suggest that enhanced GR
expression may contribute to enhanced sodium retention in some pathological
situations.

PMID: 19106216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2009 Jan;136(2):337-45. doi: 10.1242/dev.024463.

Met and the epidermal growth factor receptor act cooperatively to regulate final 
nephron number and maintain collecting duct morphology.

Ishibe S(1), Karihaloo A, Ma H, Zhang J, Marlier A, Mitobe M, Togawa A, Schmitt
R, Czyczk J, Kashgarian M, Geller DS, Thorgeirsson SS, Cantley LG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nephrology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA. shuta.ishibe@yale.edu

Ureteric bud (UB) branching during kidney development determines the final number
of nephrons. Although hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor Met have been
shown to stimulate branching morphogenesis in explanted embryonic kidneys, loss
of Met expression is lethal during early embryogenesis without obvious kidney
abnormalities. Met(fl/fl);HoxB7-Cre mice, which lack Met expression selectively
in the UB, were generated and found to have a reduction in final nephron number. 
These mice have increased Egf receptor expression in both the embryonic and adult
kidney, and exogenous Egf can partially rescue the branching defect seen in
kidney explants. Met(fl/fl);HoxB7-Cre;wa-2/wa-2 mice, which lack normal Egfr and 
Met signaling, exhibit small kidneys with a marked decrease in UB branching at
E14.5 as well as a reduction in final glomerular number. These mice developed
progressive interstitial fibrosis surrounding collecting ducts with kidney
failure and death by 3-4 weeks of age. Thus, in support of previous in vitro
findings, Met and the Egf receptor can act cooperatively to regulate UB branching
and mediate maintenance of the normal adult collecting duct.

PMCID: PMC2862758
PMID: 19103805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Placenta. 2008 Jul;29(7):624-30. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
Jun 2.

Novel homeobox genes are differentially expressed in placental microvascular
endothelial cells compared with macrovascular cells.

Murthi P(1), Hiden U, Rajaraman G, Liu H, Borg AJ, Coombes F, Desoye G, Brennecke
SP, Kalionis B.

Author information: 
(1)Pregnancy Research Centre, Department of Perinatal Medicine, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Carlton, Victoria, Australia. padma@unimelb.edu.au

Angiogenesis is fundamental to normal placental development and aberrant
angiogenesis contributes substantially to placental pathologies. The complex
process of angiogenesis is regulated by transcription factors leading to the
formation of endothelial cells that line the microvasculature. Homeobox genes are
important transcription factors that regulate vascular development in embryonic
and adult tissues. We have recently shown that placental homeobox genes HLX,
DLX3, DLX4, MSX2 and GAX are expressed in placental endothelial cells. Hence, the
novel homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2, TGIF, HEX, PHOX1, MEIS2, HOXB7, and LIM6 were
detected that have not been reported in endothelial cells previously.
Importantly, these homeobox genes have not been previously reported in placental 
endothelial cells and, with the exception of HEX, PHOX1 and HOXB7, have not been 
described in any other endothelial cell type. Reverse transcriptase PCR was
performed on cDNA from freshly isolated placental microvascular endothelial cells
(PLEC), and the human placental microvascular endothelial cell line HPEC. cDNAs
prepared from control term placentae, human microvascular endothelial cells
(HMVEC) and human umbilical vein macrovascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were
used as controls. PCR analyses showed that all novel homeobox genes tested were
expressed by all endothelial cells types. Furthermore, real-time PCR analyses
revealed that homeobox genes TLX1, TLX2 and PHOX1 relative mRNA expression levels
were significantly decreased in HUVEC compared with microvascular endothelial
cells, while the relative mRNA expression levels of MEIS2 and TGIF were
significantly increased in macrovascular cells compared with microvascular
endothelial cells. Thus we have identified novel homeobox genes in microvascular 
endothelial cells and have shown that homeobox genes are differentially expressed
between micro- and macrovascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 18514308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;68(10):3637-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2926. Epub 
2008 May 7.

Hoxb7 inhibits transgenic HER-2/neu-induced mouse mammary tumor onset but
promotes progression and lung metastasis.

Chen H(1), Lee JS, Liang X, Zhang H, Zhu T, Zhang Z, Taylor ME, Zahnow C,
Feigenbaum L, Rein A, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns 
Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Our previous studies have shown that HOXB7 mRNA is overexpressed in approximately
50% of invasive breast carcinomas and promotes tumor progression in breast cancer
cells grown as xenografts in mice. In silico analysis of published microarray
data showed that high levels of HOXB7 predict a poor outcome in HER-2-positive (P
= 0.046), but not in HER-2-negative breast cancers (P = 0.94). To study the
function of HOXB7 in vivo in the context of HER-2 overexpression, we generated
mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-Hoxb7 transgenic mice, and then crossed them
with MMTV-HER-2/neu transgenic mice. In the mice carrying both Hoxb7 and
HER-2/neu transgenes, Hoxb7 plays a dual role in mammary tumorigenesis. In double
transgenic mice, overexpression of Hoxb7 delayed tumor onset and lowered tumor
multiplicity. However, consistent with the clinical data, once the tumors
appeared, their growth was faster and metastasis to the lungs occurred at a
higher frequency. Our data show, for the first time, that deregulated expression 
of Hoxb7 in mammary tumor cells can significantly modulate HER-2/neu-oncogene
induced tumorigenesis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3715065
PMID: 18463397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cancer Lett. 2008 Aug 8;266(2):144-55. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.02.042. Epub
2008 Apr 2.

Oncogenic HoxB7 requires TALE cofactors and is inactivated by a dominant-negative
Pbx1 mutant in a cell-specific manner.

Fernandez LC(1), Errico MC, Bottero L, Penkov D, Resnati M, Blasi F, Caré A.

Author information: 
(1)IFOM, FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, via Adamello 16, 20126 Milan,
Italy.

The homeobox containing gene HoxB7 is functionally associated with melanoma
growth promotion through the direct transactivation of bFGF. Accordingly, the
introduction of HoxB7 in the breast cancer line SkBr3 (SkBr3/B7), strongly
increases its tumorigenic properties. Here we show that in SkBr3/B7 cells, HoxB7 
regulates the expression of TALE Hox cofactors by increasing Pbx2 and Prep1 and
decreasing Pbx1. The functional requirement of Hox cofactors in the oncogenic
activity of HoxB7 was proven with a dominant-negative Pbx1 mutant, Pbx1NT, which 
sequesters Prep1 in the cytoplasm. The less aggressive phenotype of the
SkBr3/B7/PbxNT cells, evaluated in vitro as well as in vivo, correlated well with
increased apoptosis, decreased cycling and up-regulation of p16 and p53. Tumor
cell-type specific functional effects of Pbx1NT were observed, possibly related
to the presence of different Hox genes in melanoma or breast adenocarcinoma
DNA-protein ternary complexes.

PMID: 18378073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 May;19(5):943-52. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007080864. Epub 2008
Feb 27.

Maternal diabetes modulates renal morphogenesis in offspring.

Tran S(1), Chen YW, Chenier I, Chan JS, Quaggin S, Hébert MJ, Ingelfinger JR,
Zhang SL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de
Montréal-Hôtel-Dieu, Research Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 May;19(5):837-9.

Maternal diabetes leads to an adverse in utero environment, but whether maternal 
diabetes impairs nephrogenesis is unknown. Diabetes was induced with
streptozotocin in pregnant Hoxb7-green fluorescence protein mice at embryonic day
13, and the offspring were examined at several time points after birth. Compared 
with offspring of nondiabetic controls, offspring of diabetic mice had lower body
weight, body size, kidney weight, and nephron number. The observed renal
dysmorphogenesis may be the result of increased apoptosis, because
immunohistochemical analysis revealed significantly more apoptotic podocytes as
well as increased active caspase-3 immunostaining in the renal tubules compared
with control mice. Regarding potential mediators of these differences, offspring 
of diabetic mice had increased expression of intrarenal angiotensinogen and renin
mRNA, upregulation of NF-kappaB isoforms p50 and p65, and activation of the
NF-kappaB pathway. In conclusion, maternal diabetes impairs nephrogenesis,
possibly via enhanced intrarenal activation of the renin-angiotensin system and
NF-kappaB signaling.

PMCID: PMC2386724
PMID: 18305124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 1;314(1):112-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.11.016. Epub 2007
Nov 28.

Beta-catenin is necessary to keep cells of ureteric bud/Wolffian duct epithelium 
in a precursor state.

Marose TD(1), Merkel CE, McMahon AP, Carroll TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Nephrology Division), University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX
75390-8856, USA.

Differentiation is the process by which tissues/organs take on their final,
physiologically functional form. This process is mediated in part by the
silencing of embryonic genes and the activation of terminal, differentiation gene
products. Mammalian kidney development is initiated when the Wolffian duct
branches and invades the overlying metanephric mesenchyme. The newly formed
epithelial bud, known as the ureteric bud, will continue to branch ultimately
differentiating into the collecting duct system and ureter. Here, we show that
Hoxb7-Cre mediated removal of beta-catenin from the mouse Wolffian duct
epithelium leads to the premature expression of gene products normally associated
with the differentiated kidney collecting duct system including the water channel
protein, Aquaporin-3 and the tight junction protein isoform, ZO-1 alpha+. Mutant 
cells fail to maintain expression of some genes associated with embryonic
development, including several mediators of branching morphogenesis, which
subsequently leads to kidney aplasia or hypoplasia. Reciprocally, expression of a
stabilized form of beta-catenin appears to block differentiation of the
collecting ducts. All of these defects occur in the absence of any effects on the
adherens junctions. These data indicate a role for beta-catenin in maintaining
cells of the Wolffian ducts and the duct derived ureteric bud/collecting duct
system in an undifferentiated or precursor state.

PMCID: PMC2699621
PMID: 18177851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Nov;293(5):F1736-45. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Vesico-ureteric reflux and urinary tract development in the Pax2 1Neu+/- mouse.

Murawski IJ(1), Myburgh DB, Favor J, Gupta IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University,
Quebec, Canada.

Vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR) is a urinary tract abnormality that affects roughly 
one-third of patients with renal-coloboma syndrome, an autosomal dominant
condition caused by a mutation in PAX2. Here, we report that a mouse model with
an identical mutation, the Pax2 1Neu+/- mouse, has a 30% incidence of VUR. In
VUR, urine flows retrogradely from the bladder to the ureter and is associated
with urinary tract infections, hypertension, and renal failure. The propensity to
reflux in the Pax2 1Neu+/- mouse is correlated with a shortened intravesical
ureter that has lost its oblique angle of entry into the bladder wall compared
with wild-type mice. Normally, the kidney and urinary tract develop from the
ureteric bud, which grows from a predetermined position on the mesonephric duct. 
In Pax2 1Neu+/- mice, this position is shifted caudally while surrounding
metanephric mesenchyme markers remain unaffected. Mutant offspring from crosses
between Pax2 1Neu+/- and Hoxb7/GFP+/- mice have delayed union of the ureter with 
the bladder and delayed separation of the ureter from the mesonephric duct. These
events are not caused by a change in apoptosis within the developing urinary
tract. Our results provide the first evidence that VUR may arise from a delay in 
urinary tract maturation and an explanation for the clinical observation that VUR
resolves over time in some affected children.

PMID: 17881463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):F987-93. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

LGL1, a novel branching morphogen in developing kidney, is induced by retinoic
acid.

Quinlan J, Kaplan F, Sweezey N, Goodyer P.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):F985-6.

Late-gestation lung protein 1 (LGL1) is a glycoprotein secreted by fetal lung
mesenchyme that stimulates branching morphogenesis of the developing lung bud. We
show that Lgl1 mRNA and protein are also expressed in mesenchymally derived
lineages of fetal kidney. Although Lgl1 expression is stimulated by
glucocorticoids in kidney cells, cortisol (10(-7) M) actually suppresses ureteric
bud branching of fetal kidneys from HoxB7/GFP mice in explant culture. However,
early branching morphogenesis in the lung and kidney is stimulated by retinoic
acid, and we identified putative retinoic acid response elements in the Lgl1
promoter. All-trans-retinoic acid (10(-6) M) stimulated Lgl1 promoter activity
and endogenous Lgl1 mRNA expression in vitro. Branching of cultured fetal kidney 
explants was increased in the presence of all-trans retinoic acid (10(-6) M).
Heterozygous Lgl1 knockout mice were crossed to HoxB7/GFP mice to visualize the
extent of ureteric bud branching at fetal stages. At embryonic (E) days
E12.5-E13.0, mutant Lgl1(+/-) embryos showed a 20% reduction in ureteric bud
branching compared with wild-type littermates. We propose a model in which
retinoic acid stimulates branching morphogenesis by activating Lgl1 early in
development. The prominent effects of glucocorticoids on Lgl1 expression in late 
lung development suggest a second role for LGL1 in alveolar maturation.

PMID: 17670908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cell. 2007 Jun 1;129(5):879-90.

Downregulation of death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia.

Raval A(1), Tanner SM, Byrd JC, Angerman EB, Perko JD, Chen SS, Hackanson B,
Grever MR, Lucas DM, Matkovic JJ, Lin TS, Kipps TJ, Murray F, Weisenburger D,
Sanger W, Lynch J, Watson P, Jansen M, Yoshinaga Y, Rosenquist R, de Jong PJ,
Coggill P, Beck S, Lynch H, de la Chapelle A, Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Human
Cancer Genetics Program, The Comprehensive Cancer Center at The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43214, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Jun 1;129(5):853-5.

The heritability of B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is relatively high;
however, no predisposing mutation has been convincingly identified. We show that 
loss or reduced expression of death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) underlies
cases of heritable predisposition to CLL and the majority of sporadic CLL.
Epigenetic silencing of DAPK1 by promoter methylation occurs in almost all
sporadic CLL cases. Furthermore, we defined a disease haplotype, which segregates
with the CLL phenotype in a large family. DAPK1 expression of the CLL allele is
downregulated by 75% in germline cells due to increased HOXB7 binding. In the
blood cells from affected family members, promoter methylation results in
additional loss of DAPK1 expression. Thus, reduced expression of DAPK1 can result
from germline predisposition, as well as epigenetic or somatic events causing or 
contributing to the CLL phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4647864
PMID: 17540169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Jul;18(7):2105-15. Epub 2007 May 30.

Reactive oxygen species in the presence of high glucose alter ureteric bud
morphogenesis.

Zhang SL(1), Chen YW, Tran S, Chenier I, Hébert MJ, Ingelfinger JR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de
Montréal-Hôtel-Dieu, Pavillon Masson, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
shao.ling.zhang@umontreal.ca

Renal malformations are a major cause of childhood renal failure. During the
development of the kidney, ureteric bud (UB) branching morphogenesis is critical 
for normal nephrogenesis. These studies investigated whether renal UB branching
morphogenesis is altered by a high ambient glucose environment and studied
underlying mechanism(s). Kidney explants that were isolated from different
periods of gestation (embryonic days 12 to 18) from Hoxb7-green fluorescence
protein mice were cultured for 24 h in either normal d-glucose (5 mM) or high
d-glucose (25 mM) medium with or without various inhibitors. Alterations in renal
morphogenesis were assessed by fluorescence microscopy. Paired-homeobox 2 (Pax-2)
gene expression was determined by real-time quantitative PCR, Western blotting,
and immunohistology. The results revealed that high d-glucose (25 mM)
specifically stimulates UB branching morphogenesis via Pax-2 gene expression,
whereas other glucose analogs, such as d-mannitol, l-glucose, and
2-deoxy-d-glucose, had no effect. The stimulatory effect of high glucose on UB
branching was blocked in the presence of catalase and inhibitors of NADPH
oxidase, mitochondrial electron transport chain complex I, and Akt signaling.
Moreover, in in vivo studies, it seems that high glucose induces, via Pax-2
(mainly localized in UB), acceleration of UB branching but not nephron formation.
Taken together, these data demonstrate that high glucose alters UB branching
morphogenesis. This occurs, at least in part, via reactive oxygen species
generation, activation of Akt signaling, and upregulation of Pax-2 gene
expression.

PMID: 17538188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Cancer. 2007 Sep 15;121(6):1205-11.

Inhibition of 13-cis retinoic acid-induced gene expression of homeobox B7 by
thalidomide.

Milanovic D(1), Maier P, Lohr F, Wenz F, Herskind C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mannheim Medical Centre, University of
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

Thalidomide and 13-cis retinoic acid (RA) show anticancer effects as sole agents 
or in combination with other drugs. However, induction of homeobox (HOX) gene
expression by 13-cis RA may contribute to tumor progression thereby potentially
limiting its efficacy. The purpose was to test if thalidomide can inhibit 13-cis 
RA-induced HOXB7 expression and whether thalidomide may enhance the
antiproliferative effect of 13-cis RA in U343MG glioblastoma cells. Quantitative 
real-time PCR showed significant inhibition of 13-cis RA-induced HOXB7 expression
by thalidomide with IC(50) approximately 0.1-0.2 microg/ml when given
simultaneously with 13-cis RA but not when administered 18 h later (p < 0.0001). 
13-cis RA alone inhibited proliferation and colony formation in a
concentration-dependent manner whereas growth inhibition by thalidomide alone at 
5-100 microg/ml was constant at 80-90% of controls. At 10% serum concentration,
growth inhibition by a combination of the 2 drugs was additive but at 1% serum,
growth inhibition was synergistic. It is concluded that thalidomide inhibits the 
RA-induced HOXB7 expression in glioblastoma cells and that 13-cis RA/thalidomide 
combinations can in principle enhance cytotoxicity. The improved cell kill
induced by thalidomide is attributed to downregulation of growth stimulatory
factors induced by 13-cis RA. Implications for the modus operandi of thalidomide 
in embryogenesis are noted.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17514648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2007 Aug;293(2):F494-500. Epub 2007 May 9.

Canonical WNT signaling during kidney development.

Iglesias DM(1), Hueber PA, Chu L, Campbell R, Patenaude AM, Dziarmaga AJ, Quinlan
J, Mohamed O, Dufort D, Goodyer PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University-Montreal Children's Hospital
Research Institute, 4060 St. Catherine West, Montreal, QC, Canada H3Z 2Z3.

The canonical WNT signaling pathway plays a crucial role in patterning of the
embryo during development, but little is known about the specific developmental
events which are under WNT control. To understand more about how the WNT pathway 
orchestrates mammalian organogenesis, we studied the canonical
beta-catenin-mediated WNT signaling pathway in kidneys of mice bearing a
beta-catenin-responsive TCF/betaGal reporter transgene. In metanephric kidney,
intense canonical WNT signaling was evident in epithelia of the branching
ureteric bud and in nephrogenic mesenchyme during its transition into renal
tubules. WNT signaling activity is rapidly downregulated in maturing nephrons and
becomes undetectable in postnatal kidney. Sites of TCF/betaGal activity are in
proximity to the known sites of renal WNT2b and WNT4 expression, and these WNTs
stimulate TCF reporter activity in kidney cell lines derived from ureteric bud
and metanephric mesenchyme lineages. When fetal kidney explants from HoxB7/GFP
mice were exposed to the canonical WNT signaling pathway inhibitor, Dickkopf-1,
arborization of the ureteric bud was significantly reduced. We conclude that
restricted zones of intense canonical WNT signaling drive branching nephrogenesis
in fetal kidney.

PMID: 17494089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jul;82(1):111-23. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Mouse neutrophilic granulocytes express mRNA encoding the macrophage
colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF-1R) as well as many other
macrophage-specific transcripts and can transdifferentiate into macrophages in
vitro in response to CSF-1.

Sasmono RT(1), Ehrnsperger A, Cronau SL, Ravasi T, Kandane R, Hickey MJ, Cook AD,
Himes SR, Hamilton JA, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)CRC for Chronic Inflammatory Diseases and ARC Special Research Centre for
Functional and Applied Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia.

The differentiation of macrophages from their progenitors is controlled by
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF-1), which binds to a receptor (CSF-1R) 
encoded by the c-fms proto-oncogene. We have previously used the promoter region 
of the CSF-1R gene to direct expression of an enhanced green fluorescent protein 
(EGFP) reporter gene to resident macrophage populations in transgenic mice. In
this paper, we show that the EGFP reporter is also expressed in all granulocytes 
detected with the Gr-1 antibody, which binds to Ly-6C and Ly-6G or with a
Ly-6G-specific antibody. Transgene expression reflects the presence of CSF-1R
mRNA but not CSF-1R protein. The same pattern is observed with the
macrophage-specific F4/80 marker. Based on these findings, we performed a
comparative array profiling of highly purified granulocytes and macrophages. The 
patterns of mRNA expression differed predominantly through granulocyte-specific
expression of a small subset of transcription factors (Egr1, HoxB7, STAT3), known
abundant granulocyte proteins (e.g., S100A8, S100A9, neutrophil elastase), and
specific receptors (fMLP, G-CSF). These findings suggested that appropriate
stimuli might mediate rapid interconversion of the major myeloid cell types, for 
example, in inflammation. In keeping with this hypothesis, we showed that
purified Ly-6G-positive granulocytes express CSF-1R after overnight culture and
can subsequently differentiate to form F4/80-positive macrophages in response to 
CSF-1.

PMID: 17438263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;67(4):1527-35.

A role for the HOXB7 homeodomain protein in DNA repair.

Rubin E(1), Wu X, Zhu T, Cheung JC, Chen H, Lorincz A, Pandita RK, Sharma GG, Ha 
HC, Gasson J, Hanakahi LA, Pandita TK, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors which function in body axis
patterning in the developing embryo. Recent evidence suggests that the
maintenance of specific HOX expression patterns is necessary for regulating the
homeostasis of adult tissues as well. In this study, HOXB7 transformed human
mammary epithelial cells, MCF10A, to grow in minimally supplemented medium, to
form colonies in Matrigel, and display resistance to ionizing radiation.
Searching for protein partners of HOXB7 that might contribute to resistance to
ionizing radiation, we identified four HOXB7-binding proteins by GST
pull-down/affinity chromatography and confirmed their interactions by
coimmunoprecipitation in vivo. Interestingly, all four HOXB7-binding proteins
shared functions as genomic caretakers and included members of the DNA-dependent 
protein kinase holoenzyme (Ku70, Ku80, DNA-PK(cs)) responsible for DNA
double-strand break repair by nonhomologous end joining pathway and poly(ADP)
ribose polymerase. Exogenous and endogenous expression of HOXB7 enhanced
nonhomologous end joining and DNA repair functions in vitro and in vivo, which
were reversed by silencing HOXB7. This is the first mechanistic study providing
definitive evidence for the involvement of any HOX protein in DNA double-strand
break repair.

PMID: 17308091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Ann Hum Genet. 2007 Jul;71(Pt 4):526-36. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Correlation between genetic variations in Hox clusters and Hirschsprung's
disease.

Garcia-Barceló MM(1), Miao X, Lui VC, So MT, Ngan ES, Leon TY, Lau DK, Liu TT,
Lao X, Guo W, Holden WT, Moore J, Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine of the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Interactions between migrating neural crest cells and the environment of the gut 
are crucial for the development of the enteric nervous system (ENS). A key
signalling mediator is the RET-receptor-tyrosine-kinase which, when defective,
causes Hirschprung's disease (HSCR, colon aganglionosis). RET mutations alone
cannot account for the variable HSCR phenotype, invoking interactions with as yet
unknown, and probably inter-related, loci involved in ENS development. Homeobox
(HOX) genes have a major role in gut development as depicted by the enteric Hox
code. We investigated whether DNA alterations in HOX genes, either alone or in
combination with RET, are implicated in HSCR. Genotyping effort was minimized by 
applying the HapMap data on Han Chinese from Beijing (CHB). 194 HSCR patients and
168 controls were genotyped using Sequenom technology for 72 tag, single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed along the HOX clusters. The HapMap
frequencies were compared to those in our population and standard statistics were
used for frequency comparisons. The multifactor-dimensionality-reduction method
was used for multilocus analysis, in which RET promoter SNP genotypes were
included. Genetic interactions were found between two HOX loci (5'-HOXA13 and
3'UTR-HOXB7) and the RET loci tested. Minor allele frequencies (MAF) of the SNPs 
tested in our sample were not significantly different from those reported by
HapMap when the sample sizes of the populations compared were considered. This is
the first evaluation of the HOX genes in HSCR and the first application of HapMap
data in a Chinese population. The interacting HOX loci may affect the penetrance 
of the RET risk allele. HapMap data for the CHB population correlated well with
the general Chinese population.

PMID: 17274802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9527-34.

HOXB7, a homeodomain protein, is overexpressed in breast cancer and confers
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Wu X(1), Chen H, Parker B, Rubin E, Zhu T, Lee JS, Argani P, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2401.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is increasingly recognized as a mechanism
whereby cells in primary noninvasive tumors acquire properties essential for
migration and invasion. Microarray analyses of microdissected epithelial cells
from bone metastasis revealed a HOXB7 overexpression that was 3-fold higher than 
in primary breast carcinomas and 18-fold higher compared with normal breast. This
led us to investigate the role of HOXB7 in neoplastic transformation of breast
cells. Expression of HOXB7 in both MCF10A and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
epithelial cells resulted in the acquisition of both phenotypic and molecular
attributes typical of EMT. Loss of epithelial proteins, claudin 1 and claudin 7, 
mislocalization of claudin 4 and E-cadherin, and the expression of mesenchymal
proteins, vimentin and alpha-smooth muscle actin, were observed. MDCK cells
expressing HOXB7 exhibited properties of migration and invasion. Unlike MDCK
vector-transfected cells, MDCK-HOXB7 cells formed highly vascularized tumors in
mice. MDCK-HOXB7 cells overexpressed basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), had
more active forms of both Ras and RhoA proteins, and displayed higher levels of
phosphorylation of p44 and p42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK;
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2). Effects initiated by HOXB7 were 
reversed by specific inhibitors of FGF receptor and the Ras-MAPK pathways. These 
data provide support for a function for HOXB7 in promoting tumor invasion through
activation of Ras/Rho pathway by up-regulating bFGF, a known transcriptional
target of HOXB7. Reversal of these effects by HOXB7-specific siRNA further
suggested that these effects were mediated by HOXB7. Thus, HOXB7 overexpression
caused EMT in epithelial cells, accompanied by acquisition of aggressive
properties of tumorigenicity, migration, and invasion.

PMID: 17018609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Kidney Int. 2006 Nov;70(9):1607-15. Epub 2006 Sep 20.

Reactive oxygen species and nuclear factor-kappa B pathway mediate high
glucose-induced Pax-2 gene expression in mouse embryonic mesenchymal epithelial
cells and kidney explants.

Chen YW(1), Liu F, Tran S, Zhu Y, Hébert MJ, Ingelfinger JR, Zhang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Université Montréal, Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CHUM)-Hôtel-Dieu, Pavillon Masson, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Diabetic mellitus confers a major risk of congenital malformations, and is
associated with diabetic embryopathy, affecting multiple organs including the
kidney. The DNA paired box-2 (Pax-2) gene is essential in nephrogenesis. We
investigated whether high glucose alters Pax-2 gene expression and aimed to
delineate its underlying mechanism(s) of action using both in vitro (mouse
embryonic mesenchymal epithelial cells (MK4) and ex vivo (kidney explant from
Hoxb7-green florescent protein (GFP) mice) approaches. Pax-2 gene expression was 
determined by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting, 
and immunofluorescent staining. A fusion gene containing the full-length
5'-flanking region of the human Pax-2 promoter linked to a luciferase reporter
gene, pGL-2/hPax-2, was transfected into MK4 cells with or without dominant
negative IkappaBalpha (DN IkappaBalpha) cotransfection. Fusion gene expression
level was quantified by cellular luciferase activity. Reactive oxygen species
(ROS) generation was measured by lucigenin assay. Embryonic kidneys from
Hoxb7-GFP mice were cultured ex vivo. High D(+) glucose (25 mM), compared to
normal glucose (5 mM), specifically induced Pax-2 gene expression in MK4 cells
and kidney explants. High glucose-induced Pax-2 gene expression is mediated, at
least in part, via ROS generation and activation of the nuclear factor kappa B
signaling pathway, but not via protein kinase C, p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK), and p44/42 MAPK signaling.

PMID: 16985513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 18;26(3):339-48. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Pre-B-cell leukemia transcription factor 1 is a major target of promyelocytic
leukemia zinc-finger-mediated melanoma cell growth suppression.

Shiraishi K(1), Yamasaki K, Nanba D, Inoue H, Hanakawa Y, Shirakata Y, Hashimoto 
K, Higashiyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Ehime University Graduate
School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon, Ehime, Japan.

Promyelocytic leukemia zinc-finger (PLZF) is a transcriptional repressor and
tumor suppressor. PLZF is expressed in melanocytes but not in melanoma cells, and
recovery of PLZF expression markedly suppresses melanoma cell growth. Several
target genes regulated by PLZF have been identified, but the precise function of 
PLZF remains uncertain. Here, we searched for candidate target genes of PLZF by
DNA microarray analysis. Pre-B-cell leukemia transcription factor 1 (Pbx1) was
one of the prominently suppressed genes. Pbx1 was highly expressed in melanoma
cells, and its expression was reduced by transduction with the PLZF gene.
Moreover, the growth suppression mediated by PLZF was reversed by enforced
expression of Pbx1. Knockdown of Pbx1 by specific small interfering RNAs
suppressed melanoma cell growth. We also found that Pbx1 binds HoxB7. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis demonstrated that repression of 
Pbx1 by PLZF reduces the expression of HoxB7 target genes, including
tumor-associated neoangiogenesis factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor, 
angiopoietin-2 and matrix metalloprotease 9. These findings suggest that
deregulation of Pbx1 expression owing to loss of PLZF expression contributes to
the progression and/or pathogenesis of melanoma.

PMID: 16862184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Endoscopy. 2006 Jun;38(6):604-9. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Detection of human aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase and homeobox B7 mRNA
in brush cytology specimens from patients with bile duct cancer.

Feldmann G(1), Nattermann J, Nischalke HD, Gorschlüter M, Kuntzen T, Ahlenstiel
G, Gerhardt T, Wolff M, Sauerbruch T, Spengler U, Dumoulin FL.

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Internal Medicine 1, University of Bonn, Germany.
gfeldma4@jhmi.edu

BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS: The diagnosis of bile duct cancer is hampered by the
low sensitivity of intraductal brush cytology and forceps biopsy. In the present 
study real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays
for the detection of human aspartyl (asparaginyl) beta-hydroxylase (HAAH) and
homeobox B7 (HoxB7) mRNA from intraductal brush cytology specimens were
established. Both markers are overexpressed in biliary cancer cell lines and
possibly involved in the pathogenesis of bile duct cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: RT-PCR assays were validated for detection limit, in-assay 
variability, and inter-assay variability. Target gene expression was determined
in brush cytology specimens from 16 patients with biliary strictures (11 with
histologically proven cholangiocarcinomas and five with benign biliary
strictures).
RESULTS: The assay was quick (about 3 h), highly sensitive (with detection limits
between 3 and 106 molecules), and reproducible (maximum in-assay variability 10.3
%, maximum inter-assay variability 11.8 %). The sensitivity of routine brush
cytology alone was 36 % (four of 11 cases), with 100 % specificity. A combination
with detection of HoxB7 and HAAH mRNA increased the overall diagnostic
sensitivity to 82 %.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of these markers using the RT-PCR assays from brush
cytology specimens described here may prove to be a useful additional tool for
the diagnosis of bile duct carcinoma.

PMID: 16673309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 11;103(15):6037-42. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Severe urinary concentrating defect in renal collecting duct-selective AQP2
conditional-knockout mice.

Rojek A(1), Füchtbauer EM, Kwon TH, Frøkiaer J, Nielsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Water and Salt Research Center, Institute of Anatomy, and Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Aarhus, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

Aquaporin-2 (AQP2) is the predominant vasopressin-regulated water channel in
kidney connecting tubule (CNT) and collecting duct (CD) and is essential for
renal regulation of body water balance. However, the relative role of AQP2 to
urinary concentration in the CNT and CD segments is unknown. To examine this
directly, transgenic mice expressing AQP2 selectively in CNT but lacking AQP2
expression in CD (AQP2-CD-KO) and mice lacking AQP2 globally (AQP2-total-KO) were
generated by exploiting the Cre/loxP technology. LoxP sites were inserted into
AQP2 introns 2 and 3, and transgenic mice were bred with strains expressing Cre
recombinase under the control of CD-specific Hoxb7- or global EIIa promoter. Mice
lacking AQP2 globally died postnatally (days 5-12). AQP2-CD-KO mice were viable
to adulthood and showed decreased body weight, 10-fold increased urine production
(0.96 +/- 0.11 vs. 0.10 +/- 0.01 ml/g of body weight), and decreased urinary
osmolality (170 +/- 19 vs. 1,630 +/- 135 milliosmoles/kg of H(2)O).
Immunohistochemical staining of AQP2-CD-KO kidneys (n = 12) revealed sustained,
strong AQP2 expression in CNT cells, whereas >95% of CD principal cells were
completely AQP2-negative. Water deprivation for 3 hours caused only marginal
decreased urine output (87 +/- 7% of levels when mice had free water access; P = 
0.04) with no change in urine osmolality, revealing an absence of compensatory
mechanisms. These results demonstrate that AQP2 in CNT is sufficient for
postnatal survival and that AQP2 in CD is essential for regulation of body water 
balance and cannot be compensated for by other mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC1421336
PMID: 16581908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Oncol. 2006 Apr;28(4):931-8.

Suppression of invasive characteristics by antisense introduction of
overexpressed HOX genes in ovarian cancer cells.

Yamashita T(1), Tazawa S, Yawei Z, Katayama H, Kato Y, Nishiwaki K, Yokohama Y,
Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asahikawa Medical College,
Midorigaoka, Asahikawa 078-8510, Japan. tyamashi@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

HOX genes encode transcription factors that function to establish basic body
pattern during embryogenesis and maintain the function of specific organs in the 
adult. Recent studies have demonstrated that HOX genes are also involved in
oncogenesis in a range of malignancies. To elucidate whether HOX genes contribute
to ovarian carcinogenesis, we created an expression profile of HOX genes using
ovarian derived materials from surgical samples and epithelial ovarian cancer
cells derived from five different cell lines. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR assay
indicated overexpression of 14 HOX genes in clusters A and B but only 2 genes in 
clusters C and D. Of the 16 HOX genes, overexpression of paralogs of HOX3, HOX4
and HOX7 is seen in cluster A and B, and of HOX13 in all paralogs. In addition,
HOXB7, HOXA13 and HOXB13 showed high levels of overexpression in cancer cells and
tissues whereas no or little expression was observed in normal controls. To
examine whether overexpressed HOX genes regulate invasion of ovarian cancer cells
directly, we introduced an antisense DNA fragment of overexpressed HOXB7 and
HOXB13, and HOXC5 that did not show overexpression into SKOV3 cells by
electroporation. Antisense introduction followed by chemoinvasion assay using
matrigel chamber demonstrated that SKOV3 cells introduced an antisense of each
HOXB7 and HOXB13 showed 85% and 50% reduction of invasion ability compared to the
parental SKOV3 cells, respectively. In contrast, antisense of HOXC5 introduced
cells showed no significant difference of the invasion ability. These results
suggest an important role of overexpressed HOX genes, especially for invasive
characteristics of ovarian cancer cells.

PMID: 16525643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Apr;17(4):1005-14. Epub 2006 Feb 22.

Angiotensin II type 1 receptor-EGF receptor cross-talk regulates ureteric bud
branching morphogenesis.

Yosypiv IV(1), Schroeder M, El-Dahr SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tulane University Health Sciences Center, SL-37,
1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. iiosipi@tulane.edu

Angiotensinogen-, angiotensin-converting enzyme-, and angiotensin II (Ang II)
type 1 receptor (AT(1)R)-deficient mice exhibit a dilated renal pelvis
(hydronephrosis) and a small papilla. These abnormalities have been attributed to
impaired development of the ureteral and pelvic smooth muscle. Defects in the
growth and branching of the ureteric bud (UB), which gives rise to the collecting
system, have not been examined carefully. This study tested the hypothesis that
Ang II stimulates UB growth and branching in the intact metanephros.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that embryonic mouse kidneys express AT(1)R in 
the UB and its branches. Embryonic day 11.5 metanephroi were microdissected from 
Hoxb7-green fluorescence protein mice and grown for 48 h in serum-free medium in 
the presence or absence of Ang II. The number of green fluorescence
protein-positive UB branch points (BP) and tips was monitored in each explant at 
24 and 48 h. Ang II increased the number of UB tips and BP at 24 h (tips: 24.3
+/- 1.1 versus 18.3 +/- 0.7, P < 0.01; BP: 14.4 +/- 0.6 versus 11.7 +/- 0.6, P < 
0.01) and 48 h (tips: 30.2 +/- 1.3 versus 22.9 +/- 0.8, P < 0.01; BP: 21.3 +/-
0.9 versus 15.7 +/- 0.6, P < 0.01) compared with control. In contrast, treatment 
of metanephroi with the AT(1)R antagonist candesartan inhibited UB branching,
decreasing the number of UB tips and BP. Similarly, inhibition of EGF receptor
(EGFR) tyrosine kinase activity abrogated Ang II-stimulated UB branching. A
cross-talk between the renin-angiotensin system and EGFR signaling was elicited
at the cellular level by the ability of Ang II to induce tyrosine phosphorylation
of EGFR in UB cells and through abrogation of Ang II-induced UB cell branching
using an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor. These data demonstrate that Ang II,
acting via the AT(1)R, stimulates UB branching morphogenesis. This process
depends on tyrosine phosphorylation of the EGFR. Cooperation of AT(1)R and EGFR
signaling therefore is important in the development of the renal collecting
system.

PMID: 16495379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1792-8.

Application of Bayesian modeling of autologous antibody responses against ovarian
tumor-associated antigens to cancer detection.

Erkanli A(1), Taylor DD, Dean D, Eksir F, Egger D, Geyer J, Nelson BH, Stone B,
Fritsche HA, Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Biomarkers for early detection of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) are urgently
needed. Patients can generate antibodies to tumor-associated antigens (TAAs). We 
tested multiplex detection of antibodies to candidate ovarian TAAs and
statistical modeling for discrimination of sera of EOC patients and controls.
Binding of serum antibody of women with EOC or healthy controls to candidate
TAA-coated microspheres was assayed in parallel. A Bayesian model/variable
selection approach using Markov Chain Monte Carlo computations was applied to
these data, and serum CA125 values, to determine the best predictive model. The
selected model was subjected to area under the receiver-operator curve (AUC)
analysis. The best model generated an AUC of 0.86 [95% confidence interval (95%
CI), 0.78-0.90] for discrimination between sera of EOC patients and healthy
patients using antibody specific to p53, NY-CO-8, and HOXB7. Inclusion of CA125
in the model provided an AUC of 0.89 (95% CI, 0.84-0.92) compared with an AUC of 
0.83 (95% CI, 0.81-0.85) using CA125 alone. However, using TAA responses alone,
the model discriminated between independent sera of women with nonmalignant
gynecologic conditions and those with advanced-stage or early-stage EOC with AUCs
of 0.71 (95% CI, 0.67-0.76) and 0.70 (95% CI, 0.48-0.75), respectively. Serum
antibody to p53 and HOXB7 is positively associated with EOC, whereas
NY-CO-8-specific antibody shows negative association. Bayesian modeling of these 
TAA-specific serum antibody responses exhibits similar discrimination of patients
with early-stage and advanced-stage EOC from women with nonmalignant gynecologic 
conditions and may be complementary to CA125.

PMID: 16452240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Apr 1;312(6):854-64. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

Smads oppose Hox transcriptional activities.

Li X(1), Nie S, Chang C, Qiu T, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1670 University 
Blvd., VH G003, Birmingham, AL 35294-0019, USA.

BMPs and Hox proteins play crucial roles in developmental processes. Beyond their
mutual regulation of gene expression, little is known about the relations between
their mechanisms of actions. Previously, we have shown that Hoxc8 acts as a
downstream repressor in the BMP signaling pathway. Smad1 and Smad6 interact with 
Hoxc8 and regulate its repression activities. The Hox family contains 39 genes
divided into 13 paralogs. In this report, we systemically examined the potential 
functions of all the paralogous Hox proteins as BMP downstream transcription
factors. Representative Hox proteins from each paralog were tested. In the
gel-shift assay, we found that Smad1, Smad4, and Smad6 interacted with most of
the Hox proteins in ways similar to their interactions with Hoxc8. The
interactions were confirmed in mammalian cells. We also examined the effects of
Smads on Hox-induced transactivation. Particularly, we determined that for Hoxd10
as a transcriptional activator, both Smad1 and Smad6 opposed its activity. In
addition, Smad6 also inhibited Hoxc8- and Hoxb7-induced osteoprotegerin (OPG)
transactivation. Furthermore, Smad1 inhibited Hoxb4-mediated target gene Irx5
expression during early Xenopus development. Our findings suggest that Hox
proteins act as general downstream DNA-binding proteins in BMP signaling cascade 
and their transcriptional activities are regulated by Smads.

PMID: 16405960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;21(5):372-4.

[Differential display of homeobox gene expressions in the normal, wounded human
fetal and adult skins by DNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Song HF(1), Chai JK, Chen ML, Lin ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Burn Institute, the 304th Hospital
Affiliated to PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100037, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the differential expression of homeobox genes in the
normal, wounded human fetal and adult skins and its significance in fetal
scarless healing.
METHODS: Gene chips containing 14 000 human genes were used to investigate
homeobox gene expressions of the normal, wounded human fetal and adult skins.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the expression of homeobox
genes, especially for PRX-2, HOXB13, HOXB6 and HOXB7.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox gene is in close relation to developmental biology. The
different expressions and changes of homeobox genes in the normal, wounded human 
fetal and adult skin may be a primary cause of different wound healing between
fetal and adult skin.

PMID: 16335386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1759-65. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Murine mesenchymal and embryonic stem cells express a similar Hox gene profile.

Phinney DG(1), Gray AJ, Hill K, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Health Science Center, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA. dphinne@tulane.edu

Using degenerate oligonucleotide primers targeting the homeobox domain, we
amplified by PCR and sequenced 723 clones from five murine cell populations and
lines derived from embryonic mesoderm and adult bone marrow. Transcripts from all
four vertebrate Hox clusters were expressed by the different populations.
Hierarchical clustering of the data revealed that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
and the embryonic stem (ES) cell line D3 shared a similar Hox expression profile.
These populations exclusively expressed Hoxb2, Hoxb5, Hoxb7, and Hoxc4,
transcripts regulating self-renewal and differentiation of other stem cells.
Additionally, Hoxa7 transcript quantified by real-time PCR strongly correlated
(r2=0.89) with the number of Hoxa7 clones identified by sequencing, validating
that data from the PCR screen reflects differences in Hox mRNA abundance between 
populations. This is the first study to catalogue Hox transcripts in murine MSCs 
and by comparative analyses identify specific Hox genes that may contribute to
their stem cell character.

PMID: 16288716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nat Genet. 2005 Oct;37(10):1082-9. Epub 2005 Sep 25.

Apoptosis induced by vitamin A signaling is crucial for connecting the ureters to
the bladder.

Batourina E(1), Tsai S, Lambert S, Sprenkle P, Viana R, Dutta S, Hensle T, Wang
F, Niederreither K, McMahon AP, Carroll TJ, Mendelsohn CL.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University, Department of Urology, 650 West 168th Street, New York,
New York 10032, USA.

Removal of toxic substances from the blood depends on patent connections between 
the kidney, ureters and bladder that are established when the ureter is
transposed from its original insertion site in the male genital tract to the
bladder. This transposition is thought to occur as the trigone forms from the
common nephric duct and incorporates into the bladder. Here we re-examine this
model in the context of normal and abnormal development. We show that the common 
nephric duct does not differentiate into the trigone but instead undergoes
apoptosis, a crucial step for ureter transposition controlled by vitamin
A-induced signals from the primitive bladder. Ureter abnormalities occur in 1-2% 
of the human population and can cause obstruction and end-stage renal disease.
These studies provide an explanation for ureter defects underlying some forms of 
obstruction in humans and redefine the current model of ureter maturation.

PMID: 16186816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005 Jul;46(7):1061-6.

Upregulated hoxC4 induces CD14 expression during the differentiation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Kim DY(1), Choi SJ, Kim SH, Chung HY, Yi S, Kim DW, Kim CC, Han TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, SBRI, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Homeobox (hox) genes encode transcription factors which are critically involved
in embryonic development. The 39 different hox genes are organized into four
unlinked chromosomal gene clusters (hoxA-D) in mammals and a number of studies
have suggested that hox genes play important roles in human leukemogenesis. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells carrying the PML-RARa fusion protein, respond 
well by differentiating in their response to an all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)
treatment. We examined the expression of the individual hox genes during this
differentiation. Besides the constitutive expression of hoxA9 and no expression
of hoxB7, the expression of hoxC4 increased significantly during differentiation 
of NB4 cells (PML-RAR(alpha)+). We also examined the expression of hoxC4 in bone 
marrow cells from APL patients and found that the hoxC4 expression was
reproducibly induced during an ATRA treatment. To further examine this finding,
HoxC4 was stably expressed in NB4 cells by retroviral transduction. The NB4 cells
expressing HoxC4 showed differentiated phenotypes including a CD14 expression,
which strongly suggests that upregulated hoxC4 is functionally involved in NB4
cell differentiation in response to ATRA. Upregulation of CD14 is at the
transcription level and mediated by the homeodomain of the HoxC4.

PMID: 16019559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Oct 17;23(2):159-71. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

Temporal and spatial transcriptional programs in murine kidney development.

Challen G(1), Gardiner B, Caruana G, Kostoulias X, Martinez G, Crowe M, Taylor
DF, Bertram J, Little M, Grimmond SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Queensland, Victoria, Australia.

We have performed a systematic temporal and spatial expression profiling of the
developing mouse kidney using Compugen long-oligonucleotide microarrays. The
activity of 18,000 genes was monitored at 24-h intervals from 10.5-day-postcoitum
(dpc) metanephric mesenchyme (MM) through to neonatal kidney, and a cohort of
3,600 dynamically expressed genes was identified. Early metanephric development
was further surveyed by directly comparing RNA from 10.5 vs. 11.5 vs. 13.5dpc
kidneys. These data showed high concordance with the previously published dynamic
profile of rat kidney development (Stuart RO, Bush KT, and Nigam SK. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98: 5649-5654, 2001) and our own temporal data. Cluster analyses
were used to identify gene ontological terms, functional annotations, and
pathways associated with temporal expression profiles. Genetic network analysis
was also used to identify biological networks that have maximal transcriptional
activity during early metanephric development, highlighting the involvement of
proliferation and differentiation. Differential gene expression was validated
using whole mount and section in situ hybridization of staged embryonic kidneys. 
Two spatial profiling experiments were also undertaken. MM (10.5dpc) was compared
with adjacent intermediate mesenchyme to further define metanephric commitment.
To define the genes involved in branching and in the induction of nephrogenesis, 
expression profiling was performed on ureteric bud (GFP+) FACS sorted from
HoxB7-GFP transgenic mice at 15.5dpc vs. the GFP- mesenchymal derivatives.
Comparisons between temporal and spatial data enhanced the ability to predict
function for genes and networks. This study provides the most comprehensive
temporal and spatial survey of kidney development to date, and the compilation of
these transcriptional surveys provides important insights into metanephric
development that can now be functionally tested.

PMID: 15998744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Mech Dev. 2005 Jun;122(6):765-80.

Crosstalk between Jagged1 and GDNF/Ret/GFRalpha1 signalling regulates ureteric
budding and branching.

Kuure S(1), Sainio K, Vuolteenaho R, Ilves M, Wartiovaara K, Immonen T, Kvist J, 
Vainio S, Sariola H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, P.O. Box 63, Haartmaninkatu
8, University of Helsinki, Helsinki FIN-00014, Finland.

Glial-Cell-Line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (GDNF) is the major
mesenchyme-derived regulator of ureteric budding and branching during
nephrogenesis. The ligand activates on the ureteric bud epithelium a receptor
complex composed of Ret and GFRalpha1. The upstream regulators of the GDNF
receptors are poorly known. A Notch ligand, Jagged1 (Jag1), co-localises with
GDNF and its receptors during early kidney morphogenesis. In this study we
utilized both in vitro and in vivo models to study the possible regulatory
relationship of Ret and Notch pathways. Urogenital blocks were exposed to
exogenous GDNF, which promotes supernumerary ureteric budding from the Wolffian
duct. GDNF-induced ectopic buds expressed Jag1, which suggests that GDNF can,
directly or indirectly, up-regulate Jag1 through Ret/GFRalpha1 signalling. We
then studied the role of Jag1 in nephrogenesis by transgenic mice constitutively 
expressing human Jag1 in Wolffian duct and its derivatives under HoxB7 promoter. 
Jag1 transgenic mice showed a spectrum of renal defects ranging from aplasia to
hypoplasia. Ret and GFRalpha1 are normally downregulated in the Wolffian duct,
but they were persistently expressed in the entire transgenic duct.
Simultaneously, GDNF expression remained unexpectedly low in the metanephric
mesenchyme. In vitro, exogenous GDNF restored the budding and branching defects
in transgenic urogenital blocks. Renal differentiation apparently failed because 
of perturbed stimulation of primary ureteric budding and subsequent branching.
Thus, the data provide evidence for a novel crosstalk between Notch and
Ret/GFRalpha1 signalling during early nephrogenesis.

PMID: 15905075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 1;283(1):70-84.

The role of GDNF in patterning the excretory system.

Shakya R(1), Jho EH, Kotka P, Wu Z, Kholodilov N, Burke R, D'Agati V, Costantini 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Mesenchymal-epithelial interactions are an important source of information for
pattern formation during organogenesis. In the developing excretory system, one
of the secreted mesenchymal factors thought to play a critical role in patterning
the growth and branching of the epithelial ureteric bud is GDNF. We have tested
the requirement for GDNF as a paracrine chemoattractive factor by altering its
site of expression during excretory system development. Normally, GDNF is
secreted by the metanephric mesenchyme and acts via receptors on the Wolffian
duct and ureteric bud epithelium. Misexpression of GDNF in the Wolffian duct and 
ureteric buds resulted in formation of multiple, ectopic buds, which branched
independently of the metanephric mesenchyme. This confirmed the ability of GDNF
to induce ureter outgrowth and epithelial branching in vivo. However, in mutant
mice lacking endogenous GDNF, kidney development was rescued to a substantial
degree by GDNF supplied only by the Wolffian duct and ureteric bud. These results
indicate that mesenchymal GDNF is not required as a chemoattractive factor to
pattern the growth of the ureteric bud within the developing kidney, and that any
positional information provided by the mesenchymal expression of GDNF may provide
for renal branching morphogenesis is redundant with other signals.

PMID: 15890330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):673-9.

Aberrant expression of HOX genes in human invasive breast carcinoma.

Makiyama K(1), Hamada J, Takada M, Murakawa K, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Tamoto E,
Shindo G, Matsunaga A, Teramoto K, Komuro K, Kondo S, Katoh H, Koike T, Moriuchi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

HOX genes are known not only as master genes that control the morphogenesis, but 
also as regulator genes that maintain tissue or organ specificity in the adult
body. We hypothesized that dysregulated expression of HOX genes was associated
with tumor development and malignant progression such as invasion and metastasis.
In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of 39 HOX genes in human
invasive ductal breast cancer tissues and normal tissues by the real-time RT-PCR 
method. We found 11 HOX genes (HOXA1, A2, A3, A5, A9, C11, D3, D4, D8, D9 and
D10) expression levels of which were significantly different between cancerous
and normal tissues. All 10 genes except HOXC11 were expressed at lower levels in 
cancerous tissues than normal tissues. Comparing expression levels of each HOX
gene among the different types of cancer tissues, the expression level of HOXB7
was lower in lymph node metastasis-positive cancer tissues than negative cancer
tissues; those of HOXD12 and D13 were higher in progesterone receptor-positive
cancer tissues than negative cancer tissues; and the expression level of HOXC5
was lower in cancerous tissues with mutated-type p53 than in normal and cancerous
tissues with wild-type p53. These results suggest that the aberrant expression of
HOX genes is related to the development of breast cancer and malignant behavior
of cancer cells.

PMID: 15756441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Feb 14;1727(2):106-15. Epub 2005 Jan 7.

Identification of two candidate collecting duct cell-specific cis-acting elements
in the Hoxb-7 promoter region.

Plaisier E(1), Ribes D, Ronco P, Rossert J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 489 and University Paris VI, Paris, France.
emmanuelle.plaisier@tnn.ap-hop-paris.fr

HOX genes encode highly conserved transcription factors responsible for
developmental patterning and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Previous studies have 
shown that a 1.4-kb segment of the Hoxb-7 proximal promoter drives renal
expression of reporter genes specifically in the ureteric bud and collecting
ducts. In this study using stably transfected renal tubule cell lines, we have
identified three short cis-acting sequences within this promoter segment that
cooperate to induce high-level expression specifically in collecting duct cells. 
In addition to an inverted CCAAT box (-71/-67) that acts as an ubiquitous
enhancer and binds the transcription factor CBF/NF-Y, two different cis-acting
sequences, named CDSE-1 and CDSE-2 (for Collecting Duct Specific Element 1 and
2), allow collecting duct cell-specific promoter activation. CDSE-1 (-56/-34) is 
composed of two E-boxes separated by a 9-bp GC-rich sequence. Only the latter
sequence enhances reporter gene expression specifically in collecting duct cells.
CDSE-2 (-34/-13) contains sequence bears high homology with a segment of the
Pax-2 promoter. CDSE-2 also conveys cell specificity but has no enhancer activity
by itself.

PMID: 15716052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2004 Nov;79(6):719-26.

[Expression of mRNA for HOX gene in human breast cancer and non-cancerous
tissues].

[Article in Japanese]

Makiyama K.

PMID: 15675302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Kidney Int. 2005 Feb;67(2):420-31.

Exogenous BMP-4 amplifies asymmetric ureteric branching in the developing mouse
kidney in vitro.

Cain JE(1), Nion T, Jeulin D, Bertram JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash 
University, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Exogenous bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4) has been reported to
inhibit ureteric branching morphogenesis and regulate the anterior-posterior axis
of the developing kidney in vitro. We examined the role of BMP-4 on ureteric
branching in vitro using three-dimensional image analysis software and
statistical models. Additionally, in vivo ureteric branching was analyzed and the
effect of reduced levels of BMP-4 in vivo on nephron number was examined.
METHODS: Embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) Balb/c mouse metanephroi cultured for 48
hours with or without 260 ng/mL recombinant human BMP-4 (rhBMP-4) were
immunostained to identify the ureteric epithelium which was quantified in three
dimensions. In vivo ureteric branching morphogenesis in Hoxb7/GFP mice was also
analyzed. The effect of reduced in vivo levels of BMP-4 on nephron number was
examined in BMP-4(+/-) and wild-type mice using an unbiased stereologic method.
RESULTS: Qualitative and quantitative studies identified a decrease in total
ureteric length and branch number in wild-type mouse metanephroi cultured in the 
presence of BMP-4. A marked anterior-posterior asymmetry in both ureteric length 
and branch number was observed in BMP-4-treated metanephroi. A similar asymmetry 
was revealed in control metanephroi, both in vitro and in vivo. This asymmetry is
the result of reduced ureteric branching morphogenesis in the posterior region of
the kidney and appears to be due to slower growth rather than the adoption of an 
alternate branching pattern. Reduction of endogenous BMP-4 in BMP-4(+/-) mice
resulted in no change in total nephron number in macroscopically normal kidneys.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that BMP-4 plays an important role in the
regulation of ureteric branching morphogenesis, and that excess BMP-4 in vitro
can amplify the existing asymmetry of the normal mouse kidney.

PMID: 15673289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):65-74.

The role of GDNF/Ret signaling in ureteric bud cell fate and branching
morphogenesis.

Shakya R(1), Watanabe T, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

While GDNF signaling through the Ret receptor is critical for kidney development,
its specific role in branching morphogenesis of the epithelial ureteric bud (UB) 
is unclear. Ret expression defines a population of UB "tip cells" distinct from
cells of the tubular "trunks," but how these cells contribute to UB growth is
unknown. We have used time-lapse mosaic analysis to investigate normal cell fates
within the growing UB and the developmental potential of cells lacking Ret. We
found that normal tip cells are bipotential, contributing to both tips and
trunks. Cells lacking Ret are specifically excluded from the tips, although they 
contribute to the trunks, revealing that the tips form and expand by GDNF-driven 
cell proliferation. Surprisingly, the mutant cells assumed an asymmetric
distribution in the UB trunks, suggesting a model of branching in which the
epithelium of the tip and the adjacent trunk is remodeled to form new branches.

PMID: 15621530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):403-15.

Role of fibroblast growth factor receptors 1 and 2 in the ureteric bud.

Zhao H(1), Kegg H, Grady S, Truong HT, Robinson ML, Baum M, Bates CM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Molecular Genetics, Columbus Children's Research
Institute, 700 Children's Drive, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.

Fibroblast growth receptors (FGFRs) consist of four signaling family members.
Mice with deletions of fgfr1 or fgfr2 are embryonic lethal prior to the onset of 
kidney development. To determine roles of FGFR1 and FGFR2 in the ureteric bud, we
used a conditional targeting approach. First, we generated transgenic mice using 
the Hoxb7 promoter to drive cre recombinase and green fluorescent protein
expression throughout ureteric bud tissue. We crossed Hoxb7creEGFP mice with mice
carrying lox-p sites flanking critical regions of fgfr1 and/or fgfr2. Absence of 
fgfr1 from the ureteric bud (fgfr1(UB-/-)) results in no apparent renal
abnormalities. In contrast, fgfr2(UB-/-) mice have very aberrant ureteric bud
branching, thin ureteric bud stalks, and fewer ureteric bud tips. Fgfr2(UB-/-)
ureteric bud tips also demonstrate inappropriate regions of apoptosis and reduced
proliferation. The nephrogenic mesenchymal lineage in fgfr2(UB-/-) mice develops 
normal-appearing glomeruli and tubules, and only slightly fewer nephrons than
controls. In contrast, fgfr2(UB-/-) kidneys have abnormally thickened subcapsular
cortical stromal mesenchyme. Ultimately, fgfr2(UB-/-) adult kidneys are small and
abnormally shaped or are hydronephrotic. Finally, there are no additional
abnormalities in the fgfr1/2(UB-/-) kidneys versus the fgfr2(UB-/-) kidneys. In
conclusion, FGFR2, but not FGFR1, appears crucial for ureteric bud branching
morphogenesis and stromal mesenchyme patterning.

PMCID: PMC4131686
PMID: 15581874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4593-605.

TGFbeta superfamily signals are required for morphogenesis of the kidney
mesenchyme progenitor population.

Oxburgh L(1), Chu GC, Michael SK, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The TGFbeta superfamily plays diverse and essential roles in kidney development. 
Gdf11 and Bmp4 are essential for outgrowth and positioning of the ureteric bud,
the inducer of metanephric mesenchyme. During nephrogenesis, Bmp7 is required for
renewal of the mesenchyme progenitor population. Additionally, in vitro studies
demonstrate inhibitory effects of BMPs and TGFbetas on collecting duct branching 
and growth. Here, we explore the predicted models of TGFbeta superfamily function
by cell-specific inactivation of Smad4, a key mediator of TGFbeta signaling.
Using a HoxB7cre transgene expressed in ureteric bud and collecting duct, we find
that development of the collecting duct is Smad4 independent. By contrast,
removal of Smad4 in nephrogenic mesenchyme using the Bmp7(cre/+) allele leads to 
disorganization of the nephrogenic mesenchyme and impairment of mesenchyme
induction. Smad4-deficient metanephric mesenchyme does not display defects in
inducibility in LiCl or spinal cord induction assays. However, in situ
hybridization and lineage analysis of Smad4 null mesenchyme cells at E11.5 show
that the nephrogenic mesenchyme does not aggregate tightly around the ureteric
bud tips, but remains loosely associated, embedded within a population of cells
expressing markers of both nephrogenic mesenchyme and peripheral stroma. We
conclude that the failure of recruitment of nephrogenic mesenchyme leaves a
primitive population of mesenchyme at the periphery of the kidney. This
population is gradually depleted, and by E16.5 the periphery is composed of cells
of stromal phenotype. This study uncovers a novel role for TGFbeta superfamily
signaling in the recruitment and/or organization of the nephrogenic mesenchyme at
early time-points of kidney development. Additionally, we present conclusive
genetic lineage mapping of the collecting duct and nephrogenic mesenchyme.

PMID: 15342483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2004 Dec;287(6):F1123-30. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

Overexpression of RET leads to vesicoureteric reflux in mice.

Yu OH(1), Murawski IJ, Myburgh DB, Gupta IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

RET, a tyrosine kinase receptor essential for kidney development, has recently
been shown to be important for the formation of the urinary tract. When RET is
overexpressed in the HoxB7/Ret transgenic mouse, kidneys are small and cystic,
and in some of the mice, the ureters are grossly dilated. Here, we report that
the observed ureteral dilatation is associated with the urinary tract abnormality
vesicoureteric reflux (VUR), in which urine flows retrogradely from the bladder
to the ureter. Reflux was determined in vitro by injecting methylene blue into
the bladders of HoxB7/Ret and wild-type mice. At postnatal day 1, 30% of
HoxB7/Ret mice had VUR compared with 4% of wild-type mice (P < 0.05). The length 
of the intravesical ureteral tunnel was shorter in HoxB7/Ret mice compared with
wild-type mice, on both the right and the left sides (P < 0.05), suggesting a
basis for the higher incidence of VUR in these mutants. At embryonic day 11, the 
ureteric bud was found to exit more caudally from the mesonephric duct in
HoxB7/Ret mice, and this may predispose them to VUR (P < 0.05). Wild-type and
HoxB7/Ret mice were tested for reflux at embryonic day 17, and both showed a high
frequency of VUR (59 and 75%, respectively). These results suggest that VUR may
occur transiently during normal urinary tract development before the ureter has
completed its insertion into the bladder. In the HoxB7/Ret mouse, overexpression 
of RET appears to delay the maturation of the distal ureter, resulting in
postnatal VUR. The HoxB7/Ret mouse is thus an important model in which to examine
how vesicoureteric reflux arises during urinary tract development.

PMID: 15328070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 1;271(1):98-108.

Real-time analysis of ureteric bud branching morphogenesis in vitro.

Watanabe T(1), Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

While it is clear that the normal branching morphogenesis of the ureteric bud
(UB) is critical for development of the metanephric kidney, the specific patterns
of branching and growth have heretofore only been inferred from static images.
Here, we present a systematic time-lapse analysis of UB branching morphogenesis
during the early development of the mouse kidney in organ culture. Metanephric
primordia from Hoxb7/GFP transgenic embryos were cultured for 3-4 days, and GFP
images of the UB taken every 30 min were assembled into movies. Analysis of these
movies (available as )revealed that the UB is a highly plastic structure, which
can branch in a variety of complex patterns, including terminal bifid, terminal
trifid, and lateral branching. To examine kinetic parameters of branching and
elongation, skeletal representations of the UB were used to measure the number of
segments and branch points and the length of each segment as a function of time
and of branch generation. These measurements provide a baseline for future
studies on mutant kidneys with defects in renal development. To illustrate how
these quantitative methods can be applied to the analysis of abnormal kidney
development, we examined the effects of the MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 on renal organ
cultures and confirmed a previous report that the drug has a specific inhibitory 
effect on UB branching as opposed to elongation.

PMID: 15196953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 3;23(26):4567-76.

Role of PLZF in melanoma progression.

Felicetti F(1), Bottero L, Felli N, Mattia G, Labbaye C, Alvino E, Peschle C,
Colombo MP, Carè A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore 
di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

The promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) protein has been described as a
transcriptional repressor of homeobox (HOX)-containing genes during
embryogenesis. As we previously demonstrated a functional link between
overexpression of HOXB7 and melanoma progression, we investigated the lack of
PLZF as the possible cause of HOXB7 constitutive activation in these neoplastic
cells. Accordingly, we found PLZF expression in melanocytes, but not in melanoma 
cells, a pattern inversely related to that of HOXB7. PLZF retroviral gene
transduction was then performed in a panel of melanoma cell lines, and
tumorigenicity was compared with that of empty vector-transduced control cell
lines. Evaluation of in vitro migration, invasion and adhesion indicated that
PLZF gene transduction induced a less malignant phenotype, as confirmed through
in vivo studies performed in athymic nude mice. This reduced tumorigenicity was
not coupled with HOXB7 repression. In order to find more about the molecular
targets of PLZF, the gene expression profiles of PLZF- and empty
vector-transduced A375 melanoma cells were analysed by Atlas Cancer macroarray.
Among several genes modulated by PLZF enforced expression, of particular interest
were integrin alphavbeta3, osteonectin/SPARC and matrix metalloprotease-9 that
were downmodulated, and the tyrosinase-related protein-1 that was upregulated in 
all the analysed samples. This profile confirms the reduced tumorigenic phenotype
with reversion to a more differentiated, melanocyte like, pattern, thus
suggesting a suppressor role for PLZF in solid tumors. Moreover, these results
indicate that PLZF and HOXB7 are functionally independent and that their coupled 
deregulation may account for most of the alterations described in melanomas.

PMID: 15077196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 1;264(1):77-90.

In vivo mutagenesis of the Hoxb8 hexapeptide domain leads to dominant homeotic
transformations that mimic the loss-of-function mutations in genes of the Hoxb
cluster.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Extracellular Matrix, Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M University, Houston, TX 77030, USA.olgamm@bcm.tmc.edu

Hox proteins are transcription factors that control developmental pathways along 
the anteroposterior axis of vertebrates. On their own, Hox proteins bind DNA
weakly, but they gain specificity and affinity by interaction with members of the
PBC subfamily of homeobox proteins. In vitro studies indicate that most of these 
interactions are mediated by the conserved hexapeptide motif of the Hox proteins.
To study the significance of these interactions in vivo, we have generated mice
that carry mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif. Analysis of skeletal
features of these mice reveals the presence of a dominant phenotype consisting of
homeotic transformations, similar to those observed in mice with a
loss-of-function of Hox genes, such as Hoxa7, Hoxb7, and Hoxb9. Genetic tests
demonstrate that the mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif are affecting the
function of other genes located in the Hoxb cluster. The expression pattern of
these genes is not affected; rather it appears that the mutant Hoxb8 protein
interferes with the function of other Hox genes by binding to their targets. Our 
findings suggest that the homeotic transformations result from altered DNA
binding specificity of the mutant Hoxb8 protein, implicating the cooperative
binding between Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif and cofactors as a critical element in
the fine-tuning of Hoxb8 protein target specificity. This is the first time the
function of the hexapeptide domain has been evaluated in vivo in mouse
development.

PMID: 14623233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2004 Feb;286(2):F244-54. Epub 2003 Oct 14.

Decreased amiloride-sensitive Na+ absorption in collecting duct principal cells
isolated from BPK ARPKD mice.

Veizis EI(1), Carlin CR, Cotton CU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Rainbow Center for Childhood PKD, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106-4948, USA.

The main feature of polycystic kidney diseases (PKD) is formation and progressive
enlargement of renal cysts. Alterations in epithelial cell proliferation,
extracellular matrix, and ion transport are thought to contribute to cyst
enlargement and loss of renal function. Abnormal Cl- secretion is implicated in
cyst enlargement in autosomal dominant PKD (ADPKD), but little is known about
transport abnormalities in autosomal recessive PKD (ARPKD). We developed a method
to isolate collecting duct (CD) principal cells (site of the lesion in ARPKD)
from normal and ARPKD mice. A transgenic mouse (Hoxb7/GFP) in which enhanced
green fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed in CDs was bred with an ARPKD mouse 
(BPK), and GFP-positive cells from normal and cystic mice were selected by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting. GFP-positive CD cells (>95 +/- 3%) obtained 
from either normal or cystic mice formed high-resistance, polarized epithelial
monolayers. Expression patterns for marker proteins and the presence of a central
cilium confirmed that the monolayers are composed of principal cells. Under basal
conditions, the Cl- secretory responses elicited by elevation of cAMP or calcium 
were not significantly different between normal and cystic monolayers. In
contrast, the amiloride-sensitive short-circuit current was significantly reduced
in monolayers of cells isolated from cystic mice (12.9 +/- 1.6 microA/cm2; n =
10) compared with monolayers of cells isolated from normal mice (27.3 +/- 3.4
microA/cm2; n = 12). The results of these studies suggest that epithelial sodium 
channel-mediated sodium absorption is decreased in principal cells of ARPKD CD
cysts and that the reduction in sodium absorption may contribute to the
accumulation of luminal fluid.

PMID: 14559716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46541-8. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

Cytoplasmic IkappaBalpha increases NF-kappaB-independent transcription through
binding to histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3.

Viatour P(1), Legrand-Poels S, van Lint C, Warnier M, Merville MP, Gielen J,
Piette J, Bours V, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Human Genetics, Center for Cellular and
Molecular Therapy, University of Liège, Sart-Tillman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

IkappaBalpha is an inhibitory molecule that sequesters NF-kappaB dimers in the
cytoplasm of unstimulated cells. Upon stimulation, NF-kappaB moves to the nucleus
and induces the expression of a variety of genes including IkappaBalpha. This
newly synthesized IkappaBalpha also translocates to the nucleus, removes
activated NF-kappaB from its target genes, and brings it back to the cytoplasm to
terminate the phase of NF-kappaB activation. We show here that IkappaBalpha
enhances the transactivation potential of several homeodomain-containing proteins
such as HOXB7 and Pit-1 through a NF-kappaB-independent association with histone 
deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and HDAC3 but not with HDAC2, -4, -5, and -6. IkappaBalpha
bound both HDAC proteins through its ankyrin repeats, and this interaction was
disrupted by p65. Immunofluorescence experiments demonstrated further that
IkappaBalpha acts by partially redirecting HDAC3 to the cytoplasm. At the same
time, an IkappaBalpha mutant, which lacked a functional nuclear localization
sequence, interacted very efficiently with HDAC1 and -3 and intensively enhanced 
the transactivation potential of Pit-1. Our results support the hypothesis that
the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaBalpha regulates the transcriptional activity of
homeodomain-containing proteins positively through cytoplasmic sequestration of
HDAC1 and HDAC3, a mechanism that would assign a new and unexpected role to
IkappaBalpha.

PMID: 12972430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Clin Invest. 2003 Aug;112(4):554-65.

Collecting duct-specific gene inactivation of alphaENaC in the mouse kidney does 
not impair sodium and potassium balance.

Rubera I(1), Loffing J, Palmer LG, Frindt G, Fowler-Jaeger N, Sauter D, Carroll
T, McMahon A, Hummler E, Rossier BC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Toxicologie, Rue du Bugnon 27, CH-1005
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Aldosterone controls the final sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion in the
kidney by regulating the activity of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) in the 
aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron (ASDN). ASDN consists of the last portion of
the distal convoluted tubule (late DCT), the connecting tubule (CNT), and the
collecting duct (CD) (i.e., the cortical CD [CCD] and the medullary CD [MCD]). It
has been proposed that the control of sodium transport in the CCD is essential
for achieving sodium and potassium balance. We have tested this hypothesis by
inactivating the alpha subunit of ENaC in the CD but leaving ENaC expression in
the late DCT and CNT intact. Under salt restriction or under aldosterone
infusion, whole-cell voltage clamp of principal cells of CCD showed no detectable
ENaC activity, whereas large amiloride-sensitive currents were observed in
control littermates. The animals survive well and are able to maintain sodium and
potassium balance, even when challenged by salt restriction, water deprivation,
or potassium loading. We conclude that the expression of ENaC in the CD is not a 
prerequisite for achieving sodium and potassium balance in mice. This stresses
the importance of more proximal nephron segments (late DCT/CNT) to achieve sodium
and potassium balance.

PMCID: PMC171384
PMID: 12925696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Apr 15;1626(1-3):1-9.

HOXB7 expression is regulated by the transcription factors NF-Y, YY1, Sp1 and
USF-1.

Meccia E(1), Bottero L, Felicetti F, Peschle C, Colombo MP, Carè A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale
Regina Elena, 299- 00161, Rome, Italy.

Products of HOX genes are transcription factors responsible for developmental
regulation and postnatal tissue homeostasis. Besides their well-established
function played during embryonic development, we had previously demonstrated the 
direct role of HOXB7 in tumor progression through transactivation of several
genes involved in the proliferative and angiogenic processes. This role is at
first exerted through the deregulated, constitutive expression of this gene. To
define the factors possibly responsible for such activation, we studied the
molecular regulation of HOXB7 in embryonic and neoplastic cells. In a 1.9-kb 5'
promoter region, we identified and functionally tested, at least in vitro,
different regulatory sequences showing a direct binding by the NF-Y, YY1, Sp1/Sp3
and upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) transcription factors. Cell
transfection and site-specific mutagenesis demonstrated Sp1/Sp3, NF-Y, YY1 and
USF-1 binding to be functional and fundamental in driving HOXB7 expression.
Disruption of the corresponding sites reduces gene expression of 65%, 78% and
55%, respectively. Because HOXB7 seems to play an important role in tumor
proliferation and progression, the analysis of its regulatory sequences might
represent an important step for gene targeting according to a new therapeutic
strategy.

PMID: 12697323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Oct 28;26(5):409-11.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of HOXB5, HOXB6, 
HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes in gliomaous cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu GJ(1), Chen LY, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: The expressions of HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes of U251 cell
infected by human cytomegalovirus and/or treated with all trans-retinoic
acid(ATRA) were detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The results were that U251 
cell did not express HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB8 but expressed HOXB7 without
infecting HCMV and/or being treated with ATRA. After infected with HCMV and/or
treated with ATRA, the expressions of HOXB7 and HOXB8 were up-regulated and the
expression of HOXB7 lasted the fourth generation, while HOXB8 was up-regulated
only in the second generation. These results indicate that the abnormal
expression of HOXB gene induced by HCMV may play an important role in the
maldevelopment.

PMID: 12536483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cancer Res. 2002 Nov 1;62(21):6240-5.

Impact of DNA amplification on gene expression patterns in breast cancer.

Hyman E(1), Kauraniemi P, Hautaniemi S, Wolf M, Mousses S, Rozenblum E, Ringnér
M, Sauter G, Monni O, Elkahloun A, Kallioniemi OP, Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute-NIH Research Scholar, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Genetic changes underlie tumor progression and may lead to cancer-specific
expression of critical genes. Over 1100 publications have described the use of
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to analyze the pattern of copy number
alterations in cancer, but very few of the genes affected are known. Here, we
performed high-resolution CGH analysis on cDNA microarrays in breast cancer and
directly compared copy number and mRNA expression levels of 13,824 genes to
quantitate the impact of genomic changes on gene expression. We identified and
mapped the boundaries of 24 independent amplicons, ranging in size from 0.2 to 12
Mb. Throughout the genome, both high- and low-level copy number changes had a
substantial impact on gene expression, with 44% of the highly amplified genes
showing overexpression and 10.5% of the highly overexpressed genes being
amplified. Statistical analysis with random permutation tests identified 270
genes whose expression levels across 14 samples were systematically attributable 
to gene amplification. These included most previously described amplified genes
in breast cancer and many novel targets for genomic alterations, including the
HOXB7 gene, the presence of which in a novel amplicon at 17q21.3 was validated in
10.2% of primary breast cancers and associated with poor patient prognosis. In
conclusion, CGH on cDNA microarrays revealed hundreds of novel genes whose
overexpression is attributable to gene amplification. These genes may provide
insights to the clonal evolution and progression of breast cancer and highlight
promising therapeutic targets.

PMID: 12414653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5301-12.

Sonic hedgehog regulates proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal cells
in the mouse metanephric kidney.

Yu J(1), Carroll TJ, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 16 Divinity Avenue, Harvard
University, Cambridge MA 02138, USA.

Signaling by the ureteric bud epithelium is essential for survival, proliferation
and differentiation of the metanephric mesenchyme during kidney development. Most
studies that have addressed ureteric signaling have focused on the proximal,
branching, ureteric epithelium. We demonstrate that sonic hedgehog is expressed
in the ureteric epithelium of the distal, non-branching medullary collecting
ducts and continues into the epithelium of the ureter -- the urinary outflow
tract that connects the kidney with the bladder. Upregulation of patched 1, the
sonic hedgehog receptor and a downstream target gene of the signaling pathway in 
the mesenchyme surrounding the distal collecting ducts and the ureter suggests
that sonic hedgehog acts as a paracrine signal. In vivo and in vitro analyses
demonstrate that sonic hedgehog promotes mesenchymal cell proliferation,
regulates the timing of differentiation of smooth muscle progenitor cells, and
sets the pattern of mesenchymal differentiation through its dose-dependent
inhibition of smooth muscle formation. In addition, we also show that bone
morphogenetic protein 4 is a downstream target gene of sonic hedgehog signaling
in kidney stroma and ureteral mesenchyme, but does not mediate the effects of
sonic hedgehog in the control of mesenchymal proliferation.

PMID: 12399320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2000 Oct 28;25(5):440-2.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of HOX genes in
human embryo lung cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LY(1), Dai G, Wu GJ, Wang JW, Luo MH, Chen SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hunan Medical University, Changsha 410078.

The expressions of HOX genes in human embryo lung (HEL) cells were detected with 
semi-quantitative RT-PCR method. The results were that HEL cells expressed HOXB7 
gene and its expression increased after human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection.
The level of expression reached maximum at 48 h after HCMV infection. Treated
with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the expression of HOXB7 in HEL cells
infected by HCMV was significantly increased. The results suggest that the
abnormal expression of HOX genes induced by HCMV might possibly play a role in
virus-induced abnormal embryogenesis.

PMID: 12212112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):297-301.

Expression of homeobox-containing genes in cDNA libraries derived from cattle
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo.

Ponsuksili S(1), Wimmers K, Adjaye J, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee,
53115 Bonn, Germany. spon@itz.uni-bonn.de

The homeobox-containing gene family plays a pivotal role in regulating,
patterning, and axial morphogenesis in the developing embryo. But there is still 
very little known about the expression and function of these genes in mammalian
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos. In this study we have used degenerate 
primers corresponding to the highly conserved regions of Antennapedia class
homeodomains as a rapid and an efficient method to survey bovine cDNA libraries
derived from unfertilised oocytes, single 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and
blastocyst stage embryos for the presence of homeobox sequences. Our results
provide, for the first time, evidence for the transcription of Hoxa3 and Hoxd1 in
oocytes; Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the 2-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, Hoxd1, and Hoxd4 in the
4-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, and Hoxc9 in the 8-cell; Cdx2, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in the
morula; Cdx2, Hoxb7, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in blastocyst stage cattle embryos. These
are candidate genes for the developmental capacity of in vivo and in vitro
produced bovine embryos.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 15;15(18):2433-44.

Differential activities of the RET tyrosine kinase receptor isoforms during
mammalian embryogenesis.

de Graaff E(1), Srinivas S, Kilkenny C, D'Agati V, Mankoo BS, Costantini F,
Pachnis V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC)
National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA,
UK.

The RET receptor tyrosine kinase has a critical role in kidney organogenesis and 
the development of the enteric nervous system. Two major isoforms, RET9 and
RET51, differ in the amino acid sequence of the C-terminal tail as a result of
alternative splicing. To determine the roles of these isoforms in vivo, we used
targeted mutagenesis to generate mice that express either RET9 or RET51.
Monoisoformic RET9 mice, which lack RET51, are viable and appear normal. In
contrast, monoisoformic RET51 animals, which lack RET9, have kidney hypodysplasia
and lack enteric ganglia from the colon. To study the differential activities of 
the two RET isoforms further, we generated transgenic mice expressing
ligand-dependent and constitutively active forms of RET9 or RET51 under the
control of the Hoxb7 regulatory sequences. Such RET9 transgenes are capable of
rescuing the kidney agenesis in RET-deficient mice or causing kidney
hypodysplasia in wild-type animals. In contrast, similar RET51 transgenes fail to
rescue the kidney agenesis or cause hypodysplasia. Our findings show that RET9
and RET51 have different signaling properties in vivo and define specific
temporal and spatial requirements of c-Ret function during renal development and 
histogenesis of the enteric nervous system.

PMCID: PMC312785
PMID: 11562352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 1;61(17):6532-9.

HOXB7: a key factor for tumor-associated angiogenic switch.

Carè A(1), Felicetti F, Meccia E, Bottero L, Parenza M, Stoppacciaro A, Peschle
C, Colombo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161
Rome. a.care@iss.it

We had demonstrated previously a functional bridge between altered homebox (HOX) 
gene expression and tumor progression through HOXB7 transactivation of basic
fibroblast growth factor. Here, we have studied whether HOXB7, in addition to
basic fibroblast growth factor, may induce other genes directly or indirectly
related to neoangiogenesis and tumor invasion. Parental,
beta-galactosidase-transduced, and HOXB7-transduced SkBr3 cell lines were
examined for the expression of several growth factors and growth factor receptors
involved in the proliferative and angiogenic processes. Vascular endothelial
growth factor, melanoma growth-stimulatory activity/growth-related oncogenene
alpha, interleukin-8, and angiopoietin-2 were up-regulated by HOXB7 transduction.
The exception was angiopoietin-1 expression that was abrogated. Additional
analyses included the expression levels of enzymes such as matrix metalloprotease
(MMP)-2 and MMP-9 and heparanase, capable of proteolytic degradation of
extracellular matrix and basement membranes. Results showed an induction of only 
MMP-9. The functional implication of such a finding was tested using an in vitro 
coculture assay in a three-dimensional matrix. A delay of differentiation with
persistent nests of proliferating cells was found in endothelial cells cocultured
with HOXB7-transduced SkBr3 cells. Tumorigenicity of these cells has been
evaluated in vivo. Xenograft into athymic nude mice showed that SkBr3/HOXB7 cells
developed tumors in mice, either irradiated or not, whereas parental SkBr3 cells 
did not show any tumor take unless mice were sublethally irradiated. Comparison
of tumor nodules for vascularization by CD-31 and CD-34 immunostaining revealed
an increased number of blood vessels in tumors expressing HOXB7. Together, the
results indicate HOXB7 as a key factor up-regulating a variety of proangiogenic
stimuli. Thus, HOXB7 gene or protein is a target to aim at to inhibit
tumor-associated neoangiogenesis, considering the number and the redundancy of
proangiogenic molecules that should be targeted one by one to theoretically
achieve the same effect.

PMID: 11522651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32844-53. Epub 2001 Jul 2.

Human homeobox HOXA7 regulates keratinocyte transglutaminase type 1 and inhibits 
differentiation.

La Celle PT(1), Polakowska RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. peter_lacelle@urmc.rochester.edu

Keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation result from expression of specific
groups of genes regulated by unique combinations of transcription factors. To
better understand these regulatory processes, we studied HOXA7 expression and its
regulation of differentiation-specific keratinocyte genes. We isolated the
homeobox transcription factor HOXA7 from keratinocytes through binding to a
differentiation-dependent viral enhancer and analyzed its effect on endogenous
differentiation-dependent genes, primarily transglutaminase 1. HOXA7
overexpression repressed transglutaminase 1-reporter activity. HOXA7 message
markedly decreased, and transglutaminase RNA increased, upon phorbol
ester-induced differentiation, in a protein kinase C-dependent manner.
Overexpression of HOXA7 attenuated the transglutaminase 1 induction by phorbol
ester, demonstrating that HOXA7 expression is inversely related to keratinocyte
differentiation, and to transglutaminase 1 expression. Antisense HOXA7 expression
activated transglutaminase 1, involucrin, and keratin 10 message and protein
levels, demonstrating that endogenous HOXA7 down-regulates multiple
differentiation-specific keratinocyte genes. In keeping with these observations, 
epidermal growth factor receptor activation stimulated HOXA7 expression. HOX
genes function in groups, and we found that HOXA5 and HOXB7 were also
down-regulated by phorbol ester. These results provide the first example of
protein kinase C-mediated homeobox gene regulation in keratinocytes, and new
evidence that HOXA7, potentially in conjunction with HOXA5 and HOXAB7, silences
differentiation-specific genes during keratinocyte proliferation, that are then
released from inhibition in response to differentiation signals.

PMID: 11435435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32489-94. Epub 2001 Jun 29.

An Abd-B class HOX.PBX recognition sequence is required for expression from the
mouse Ren-1c gene.

Pan L(1), Xie Y, Black TA, Jones CA, Pruitt SC, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Expression from the mouse Ren-1(c) gene in As4.1 cells is dependent on a proximal
promoter element (PPE) located at approximately -60 and a 241-base pair enhancer 
region located at -2625 relative to the transcription start site. The PPE
(TAATAAATCAA) is identical to a consensus HOX.PBX binding sequence. Further,
PBX1b has been shown to be a component of a PPE-specific binding complex present 
in nuclear extracts from As4.1 cells. The binding affinities of different paralog
HOX members to the PPE were examined in the absence or presence of PBX1b. HOXB6, 
-B7, and -C8 failed to bind the PPE alone but showed weak affinity in the
presence of PBX1b. In contrast, HOXD10 and to a lesser degree HOXB9 bound the PPE
with high affinities regardless of whether PBX1b was present. Abd-B HOX members, 
including HOXD10, -A10, -A9, -B9, and -C9, are expressed in As4.1 cells. The
ability of HOX and PBX1b to form a ternary complex with PREP1 on the PPE is also 
demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. Point mutations in either the HOX or PBX 
half-site of the PPE disrupted the formation of the HOX.PBX complex and
dramatically decreased transcriptional activity of the Ren-1(c) gene
demonstrating that both the HOX and PBX half-sites are critical for mouse renin
gene expression. These results strongly implicate Abd-B class Hox genes and their
cofactors as major determinants of the sites of renin expression.

PMID: 11432851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Immunol. 2001 Apr 15;166(8):5058-67.

Identification of novel functional regions important for the activity of HOXB7 in
mammalian cells.

Yaron Y(1), McAdara JK, Lynch M, Hughes E, Gasson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA.

Members of the HOX family of homeobox transcription factors play a role in
pattern formation in diverse developmental systems. The clearly documented role
of HOX genes in the proliferation and differentiation of primary hematopoietic
cells and cell lines provides a convenient system to pursue a biochemical
analysis of HOX gene function in mammalian cells. To explore the role of HOXB7 in
myeloid hematopoiesis, a number of mutations and deletions in the gene were
constructed that targeted sequences with known functions or in regions that had
not been examined previously. The wild-type and mutant B7 constructs were
introduced into the murine myelomonocytic cell line, 32D, and assayed for their
effects on G-CSF-induced myeloid differentiation. Wild-type HOXB7 inhibited the
differentiation of 32D cells, whereas mutations in the Pbx-binding pentapeptide
motif or the DNA-binding homeodomain, as well as internal deletions of the
N-terminal unique region, blocked this effect. Interestingly, mutations
eliminating two target sites for casein kinase II, the glutamate-rich C terminus,
or the first 14 amino acids of HOXB7, led to enhanced 32D differentiation. A
model proposing a role for these regions of HOXB7 is presented.

PMID: 11290787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Mar 27;98(7):4060-5.

A serologically identified tumor antigen encoded by a homeobox gene promotes
growth of ovarian epithelial cells.

Naora H(1), Yang YQ, Montz FJ, Seidman JD, Kurman RJ, Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA. hnaora@jhmi.edu

Ovarian carcinomas are thought to arise from cells of the ovarian surface
epithelium by mechanisms that are poorly understood. Molecules associated with
neoplasia are potentially immunogenic, but few ovarian tumor antigens have been
identified. Because ovarian carcinomas can elicit humoral responses in patients, 
we searched for novel tumor antigens by immunoscreening a cDNA expression library
with ovarian cancer patient serum. Seven clones corresponding to the homeobox
gene HOXB7 were isolated. ELISAs using purified recombinant HOXB7 protein
revealed significant serologic reactivity to HOXB7 in 13 of 39 ovarian cancer
patients and in only one of 29 healthy women (P < 0.0001). Ovarian carcinomas
were found to express HOXB7 at markedly higher levels than normal ovarian surface
epithelium, suggesting that immunogenicity of HOXB7 in patients could be
associated with its elevated expression in ovarian carcinomas. Overexpression of 
HOXB7 in immortalized normal ovarian surface epithelial cells dramatically
enhanced cellular proliferation. Furthermore, HOXB7 overexpression increased
intracellular accumulation and secretion of basic fibroblast growth factor, a
potent angiogenic and mitogenic factor. These results reveal HOXB7 as a tumor
antigen whose up-regulated expression could play a significant role in promoting 
growth and development of ovarian carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC31179
PMID: 11274429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):233-6.

HoxA and HoxB cluster genes subdivide the digestive tract into morphological
domains during chick development.

Sakiyama J(1), Yokouchi Y, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602, Nagoya, Japan.

The digestive tract exhibits region-specific morphology and cytodifferentiation
along the anteroposterior axis. We analyzed the spatial expression patterns of
Hox genes belonging to the HoxA and HoxB cluster (Hoxa-4 approximately a-9,
Hoxb-5 approximately b-9) in the developing chick digestive tract. The expression
domains of these Hox genes correlated with morphological subdivision of the
digestive tract along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 11231082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Cell Biochem. 2000 May;78(2):210-21.

HOXB7 overexpression promotes differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells to smooth muscle
cells.

Boström K(1), Tintut Y, Kao SC, Stanford WP, Demer LL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, UCLA School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, California 90095-1679, USA. kbostrom@mednet.ucla.edu

The presence of immature smooth muscle cells and ectopic tissues such as
fully-formed bone in atherosclerotic lesions, may result from recapitulation of
embryonic mechanisms in the artery wall. We hypothesized that expression of
homeobox genes is triggered in atherogenesis and that these regulate
proliferation and differentiation of multipotential progenitor cells along one or
more specific lineages. We identified expression of the homeobox gene HOXB7 in
clones of bovine aortic medial cells previously shown to be multipotent. HOXB7
was subsequently detected in human atherosclerotic plaques by RT-PCR and in situ 
hybridization. Expression was localized to areas adjacent to calcification and
scattered in media and neointima, which may be reflective of a role in either
osteoblastic or smooth muscle cell differentiation. To differentiate between
these possibilities, we overexpressed HOXB7 in C3H10T1/2 cells, a multipotent
cell line able to differentiate into vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC), as well 
as osteogenic and chondrogenic lineages. Results showed that overexpression of
HOXB7 increased proliferation 3.5-fold, and induced an SMC-like cell morphology. 
In addition, expression of the early SMC markers calponin and SM22alpha increased
4-fold and 3-fold respectively by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Expression of the
intermediate SMC marker smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (SM-MHC) did not change.
No increase in osteogenic or chondrogenic differentiation was detected, neither
in the C3H10T1/2 cells nor in M2 cells, a bone marrow stromal cell line used to
confirm this result. These findings suggest that HOXB7 plays a role in expansion 
of immature cell populations or dedifferentiation of mature cells.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10842316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Exp Zool. 1999 Aug 15;285(2):170-6.

Evolution of the HOXB6 intergenic region: motif conservation at the lateral plate
mesoderm (LPM) enhancer element.

Deinard A(1), Dorit R, Castiglione C, Jiang Z, Becker D, Ruddle F, Schugart K,
Kidd K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

This study reports the results of a comparative sequencing study in higher
primates, focusing on the intergenic region located between HOXB6 and HOXB7. We
have examined an 832 bp. region, encompassing a putative Lateral Plate Mesoderm
(LPM) enhancer element in a variety of anthropoid apes. The interspecific
comparisons reveal extensive substitutions occurring within this region, with a
marked bias in favor of C-->T transitions within the enhancer element. The
pattern of these substitutions suggests that the LPM enhancer region is subject
to specific sequence and compositional constraints that are only revealed through
comparative sequencing. These constraints produce an enhancer signature, the CpG 
microisland, which may be useful in identifying additional regulatory elements
located within the HOX complexes. J. Exp. Zool. (Mol. Dev. Evol.) 285:170-176,
1999.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Oncogene. 1999 Jul 8;18(27):4007-14.

CBP and histone deacetylase inhibition enhance the transactivation potential of
the HOXB7 homeodomain-containing protein.

Chariot A(1), van Lint C, Chapelier M, Gielen J, Merville MP, Bours V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Medical Oncology, CHU B35, University of
Liege Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

Homeodomain-containing proteins are transcription factors regulating the
coordinated expression of multiple target genes involved in development,
differentiation and cellular transformation. In this study, we demonstrated that 
HOXB7, one member of this family, behaved as a transactivator in breast cancer
cells. Deletion of either the HOXB7 N-terminal domain or the C-terminal acidic
tail abolished this transcriptional effect, suggesting a combination of distinct 
functional transactivating domains. HOXB7 physically interacted both in vitro and
in vivo with the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). This interaction led to 
an enhanced transactivating potential and required the N-terminal of HOXB7 as
well as two domains located at the C-terminal part of CBP. Moreover, trichostatin
A, a deacetylase inhibitor, strongly enhanced the transcriptional properties of
HOXB7. Our data therefore indicate that HOX proteins can directly interact with
CBP and that acetylation/deacetylation may regulate their transcriptional
properties.

PMID: 10435624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dev Genet. 1999;24(3-4):241-51.

Expression of green fluorescent protein in the ureteric bud of transgenic mice: a
new tool for the analysis of ureteric bud morphogenesis.

Srinivas S(1), Goldberg MR, Watanabe T, D'Agati V, al-Awqati Q, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The growth and branching of the ureteric bud is a complex process that is
ultimately responsible for the organization of the collecting duct system as well
as the number of nephrons in the metanephric kidney. While the genes involved in 
the regulation of this process have begun to be elucidated, our understanding of 
the cellular and molecular basis of ureteric bud morphogenesis remains
rudimentary. Furthermore, the timing and sequence of branching and elongation
that gives rise to the collecting system of the kidney can only be inferred from 
retrospective staining or microdissection of fixed preparations. To aid in the
investigation of these issues, we developed strains of transgenic mice in which a
green fluorescent protein (GFP) is expressed in the ureteric bud under the
control of the Hoxb7 promoter. In these mice, GFP is expressed in every branch of
the ureteric bud throughout renal development, and in its derivative epithelia in
the adult kidney. As GFP fluorescence can be easily visualized in living tissue, 
this allows the dynamic pattern of ureteric bud growth and branching to be
followed over several days when the kidneys are cultured in vitro. Using confocal
microscopy, branching of the ureteric bud in all three dimensions can be
analyzed. These mice represent an extremely powerful tool to characterize the
normal patterns of ureteric bud morphogenesis and to investigate the response of 
the bud to growth factors, matrix elements, and other agents that regulate its
growth and branching.

PMID: 10322632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3391-400.

Characterization of HOX gene expression during myelopoiesis: role of HOX A5 in
lineage commitment and maturation.

Fuller JF(1), McAdara J, Yaron Y, Sakaguchi M, Fraser JK, Gasson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA School of Medicine, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

During the process of normal hematopoiesis, proliferation is tightly linked to
maturation. The molecular mechanisms that lead to production of mature effector
cells with a variety of phenotypes and functions from a single multipotent
progenitor are only beginning to be elucidated. It is important to determine how 
these maturation events are regulated at the molecular level, because this will
provide significant insights into the process of normal hematopoiesis as well as 
leukemogenesis. Transcription factors containing the highly conserved homeobox
motif show considerable promise as potential regulators of hematopoietic
maturation events. In this study, we focused on identification and
characterization of homeobox genes of the HOX family that are important in
regulating normal human myeloid differentiation induced by the hematopoietic
growth factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We have
identified three homeobox genes, HOX A5, HOX B6, and HOX B7, which are expressed 
during early myelopoiesis. Treating bone marrow cells with antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides to HOX A5 resulted in inhibition of granulocytic/monocytic 
hematopoiesis and increased the generation of erythroid progenitors. Also,
overexpression of HOX A5 inhibited erythroid differentiation of the K562 cell
line. Based on these observations, we propose that HOX A5 functions as an
important regulator of hematopoietic lineage determination and maturation.

PMID: 10233891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncogene. 1999 Mar 18;18(11):1993-2001.

Enforced expression of HOXB7 promotes hematopoietic stem cell proliferation and
myeloid-restricted progenitor differentiation.

Carè A(1), Valtieri M, Mattia G, Meccia E, Masella B, Luchetti L, Felicetti F,
Colombo MP, Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

Hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells (HPCs/HSCs) purified from human adult
peripheral blood (PB) were triggered into cycling, retrovirally transduced with
HOXB7 and then functionally assayed in vitro. HPCs were assayed in multi- and
unilineage differentiation cultures in either liquid phase or semisolid medium,
primitive HPCs in the high proliferative potential colony-forming cell (HPP-CFC) 
evaluation system and putative HSCs in Dexter type long-term culture (LTC) as LTC
initiating cells (LTC-ICs). Control experiments ensured that the exogenous HOXB7 
gene was constantly expressed, while the endogenous one was barely or not
transcribed. Enforced expression of the gene markedly modulated the
proliferation/differentiation program of the entire HSC/HPC population. Enforced 
HOXB7 expression exerted a potent stimulatory effect on the proliferation of the 
primitive HPC and putative HSC subsets, assayed as HPP-CFCs and LTC-ICs
respectively. While not modifying the total number of HPCs, exogenous HOXB7
induced an increase of the number of granulo-monocytic (GM) HPCs [colony-forming 
unit GM (CFU-GM) CFU-GM, CFU-G and CFU-M, as evaluated by clonogenic assays] and 
markedly amplified the progeny of both CFU-G and CFU-M, which showed a sustained 
proliferation through at least 1-2 months (as evaluated in liquid suspension
culture). The prolonged proliferative stimulus induced by HOXB7 transfer into
LTC, primitive and GM oriented HPC culture was characterized by persistent
proliferation of a discrete population of blast cells and a large pool of
differentiated myeloid precursors. Altogether, these results suggest the
hypothesis that the proliferative stimulus exerted by exogenous HOXB7 in
primitive and GM-oriented HPCs may represent a preleukemic immortalization step. 
Consistent with the functional role of HOXB7 in the initial ontogenetic phase,
these studies indicate that ectopic HOXB7 expression in early HPCs and HSCs from 
adult PB stimulates their self renewal, sustained proliferation and myeloid
differentiation.

PMID: 10208421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Development. 1999 Apr;126(7):1375-86.

Dominant effects of RET receptor misexpression and ligand-independent RET
signaling on ureteric bud development.

Srinivas S(1), Wu Z, Chen CM, D'Agati V, Costantini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development and Department of Pathology, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
fdc3@columbia.edu

During kidney development, factors from the metanephric mesenchyme induce the
growth and repeated branching of the ureteric bud, which gives rise to the
collecting duct system and also induces nephrogenesis. One signaling pathway
known to be required for this process includes the receptor tyrosine kinase RET
and co-receptor GFR(&agr;)-1, which are expressed in the ureteric bud, and the
secreted ligand GDNF produced in the mesenchyme. To examine the role of RET
signaling in ureteric bud morphogenesis, we produced transgenic mice in which the
pattern of RET expression was altered, or in which a ligand-independent form of
RET kinase was expressed. The Hoxb7 promoter was used to express RET throughout
the ureteric bud branches, in contrast to its normal expression only at the bud
tips. This caused a variable inhibition of ureteric bud growth and branching
reminiscent of, but less severe than, the RET knockout phenotype. Manipulation of
the level of GDNF, in vitro or in vivo, suggested that this defect was due to
insufficient rather than excessive RET signaling. We propose that RET receptors
expressed ectopically on ureteric bud trunk cells sequester GDNF, reducing its
availability to the normal target cells at the bud tips. When crossed to RET
knockout mice, the Hoxb7/RET transgene, which encoded the RET9 isoform, supported
normal kidney development in some RET-/- animals, indicating that the other major
isoform, RET51, is not required in this organ. Expression of a Hoxb7/RET-PTC2
transgene, encoding a ligand-independent form of RET kinase, caused the
development of abnormal nodules, outside the kidney or at its periphery,
containing branched epithelial tubules apparently formed by deregulated growth of
the ureteric bud. This suggests that RET signaling is not only necessary but is
sufficient to induce ureteric bud growth, and that the orderly, centripetal
growth of the bud tips is controlled by the spatially and temporally regulated
expression of GDNF and RET.

PMID: 10068631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 26;274(9):5318-25.

IkappaB-alpha enhances transactivation by the HOXB7 homeodomain-containing
protein.

Chariot A(1), Princen F, Gielen J, Merville MP, Franzoso G, Brown K, Siebenlist
U, Bours V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Medical Oncology, Pathology, University of
Liege, Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liege, Belgium.

Combinatorial interactions between distinct transcription factors generate
specificity in the controlled expression of target genes. In this report, we
demonstrated that the HOXB7 homeodomain-containing protein, which plays a key
role in development and differentiation, physically interacted in vitro with
IkappaB-alpha, an inhibitor of NF-kappaB activity. This interaction was mediated 
by the IkappaB-alpha ankyrin repeats and C-terminal domain as well as by the
HOXB7 N-terminal domain. In transient transfection experiments, IkappaB-alpha
markedly increased HOXB7-dependent transcription from a reporter plasmid
containing a homeodomain consensus-binding sequence. This report therefore showed
a novel function for IkappaB-alpha, namely a positive regulation of
transcriptional activation by homeodomain-containing proteins.

PMID: 10026139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 28;18(4):1125-30.

Establishment of an inducible expression system of chimeric MLL-LTG9 protein and 
inhibition of Hox a7, Hox b7 and Hox c9 expression by MLL-LTG9 in 32Dcl3 cells.

Joh T(1), Hosokawa Y, Suzuki R, Takahashi T, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemotherapy, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya,
Japan.

The MLL (HRX/ALL-1 gene is frequently disrupted in infantile leukemias and
therapy-related leukemias and fused to various translocation partner genes. We
previously showed that chimeric MLL proteins localize in the nuclei in a fashion 
similar to that of MLL protein even if the partner gene encodes a cytoplasmic
protein and indicated the importance of the N-terminal portion of MLL common to
various MLL translocations. This time we established an inducible expression
system for chimeric MLL-LTG9 and truncated N-terminal MLL proteins (MLL-Zf(-)) in
32Dcl3 cells. By utilizing this system, we were able to show inhibition of Hox
a7, Hox b7 and Hox c9 genes' expression by induced MLL-LTG9 and MLL-Zf(-).
Up-regulation of Hox a7, Hox b7 and Hox c9 was observed when 32Dcl3 cells were
cultured with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) in place of
interleukin 3 and induction of MLL-LTG9 and MLL-Zf(-) was shown to suppress this 
upregulation. At the same time, expression of two mammalian Polycomb group genes,
M33 and mel-18, which both reportedly affect Hox genes' expression, was not
inhibited by MLL-LTG9 and MLL-Zf(-) induction. These results indicate that MLL
has an important effect on the expression of at least some Hox genes in
hematopoietic cells and suggest that inhibition of the proper expression of Hox
genes by chimeric MLL proteins may dysregulate hematopoietic cell differentiation
and proliferation, which then can lead to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10023690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mech Dev. 1998 Sep;77(1):49-57.

Analysis of Hoxa7/Hoxb7 mutants suggests periodicity in the generation of the
different sets of vertebrae.

Chen F(1), Greer J, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with targeted disruptions in Hoxa7 and Hoxb7, respectively.
Mice carrying the Hoxa7 mutation are healthy. No abnormalities in the formation
of the skeleton or other tissues were found in these mutants. Twelve percent of
Hoxb7-/- mutants show first and second rib defects similar to those observed in
mice homozygous for a Hoxb9 mutation (Chen, F., Capecchi, M.R., 1997. Dev. Biol. 
181, 186-196). Hoxb7-/- mice are also fertile and were used to generate double
mutants with Hoxa7 to reveal potential interactions between these two paralogous 
genes. Mice homozygous for both mutations have first and second rib defects with 
higher penetrance and increased expressivity, indicating a functional role for
Hoxa7 in the patterning of the upper thoracic region. Although Hoxb6, Hoxa7,
Hoxb7, and Hoxb9 have distinctive anterior expression limits in axial mesoderm,
the disruptions of these genes all yield first and second rib defects. A
hypothesis is suggested to explain the observation that axial defects in these
and other mouse Hox mutants appear to concentrate along the axial column at zones
of transition between vertebral types.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9784603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Neurobiol. 1998 Sep 15;36(4):559-71.

Regulation of a Purkinje cell-specific promoter by homeodomain proteins:
repression by engrailed-2 vs. synergistic activation by Hoxa5 and Hoxb7.

Sanlioglu S(1), Zhang X, Baader SL, Oberdick J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Neurobiotechnology
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that a short sequence element (L7ATE) within the 
proximal promoter of a Purkinje cell-specific gene, pcp-2(L7), is required for
the normal pattern of expression of the gene in the cerebellum of transgenic
mice. The presence of a series of TAAT sequence motifs in this element suggested 
its interaction with homeodomain proteins. To extend these observations,
degenerate oligonucleotides were used to clone by reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction members of the mouse Hox gene family expressed in
neonatal cerebellum but not forebrain. Two of these, HoxB7 and HoxA5, are
continuously expressed from the neonatal period into adult stages in cerebellar
Purkinje cells. These Hox proteins are shown to synergistically activate the L7
promoter by cotransfection assay in vitro. In contrast, another homeodomain
protein that is normally expressed in Purkinje cells only during the embryonic
period, En-2, has a negative effect on L7 gene expression. These data suggest a
biphasic, combinatorial control mechanism for the Purkinje cell-specific
expression of the pcp-2(L7) gene.

PMID: 9740027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Oct 1;71(1):46-54.

Molecular cloning of a mutated HOXB7 cDNA encoding a truncated transactivating
homeodomain-containing protein.

Chariot A(1), Senterre-Lesenfants S, Sobel ME, Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA. Alain.Chariot@ulg.ac.be

Homeodomain-containing proteins regulate, as transcription factors, the
coordinated expression of genes involved in development, differentiation, and
malignant transformation. We report here the molecular cloning of a mutated HOXB7
transcript encoding a truncated homeodomain-containing protein in MCF7 cells.
This is a new example of mutation affecting the coding region of a HOX gene. In
addition, we detected two HOXB7 transcripts in several breast cell lines and
demonstrated that both normal and mutated alleles were expressed at the RNA level
in MCF7 cells as well as in a variety of breast tissues and lymphocytes,
suggesting that a truncated HOXB7 protein might be expressed in vivo. Using
transient co-transfection experiments, we demonstrated that both HOXB7 proteins
can activate transcription from a consensus HOX binding sequence in breast cancer
cells. Our results provide evidence that HOXB7 protein has transcription factor
activity in vivo and that the two last amino acids do not contribute to this
property.

PMID: 9736453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 30;248(3):749-52.

Differential expression of Hox genes in multistage carcinogenesis of mouse skin.

Chang PY(1), Kozono T, Chida K, Kuroki T, Huh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Cell Research, University of Tokyo, Japan.

We surveyed expression of Hox genes in multiple carcinogenesis of mouse skin by
RT-PCR cloning. According to the sequences of the amplified DNA fragments within 
the homeobox of Hox genes, 25 of the 39 known Hox genes were amplified in the
normal dorsal skin of adult mice. In the papilloma and carcinoma, clones of Hox
A7 and Hox B7 were preferentially isolated among others. The entire Hox D locus
was silent in both papilloma and carcinoma. Our present results suggest that the 
majority of Hox gene family members are expressed in normal mouse skin, while the
repertoire is substantially limited in the papilloma and carcinoma.

PMID: 9703999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oncogene. 1998 Jun 25;16(25):3285-9.

Transduction of the SkBr3 breast carcinoma cell line with the HOXB7 gene induces 
bFGF expression, increases cell proliferation and reduces growth factor
dependence.

Caré A(1), Silvani A, Meccia E, Mattia G, Peschle C, Colombo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

Several melanomas, carcinomas, glioblastomas and leukemias showed coordinated
expression of HOXB7 and bFGF with exception of the SkBr3 mammary carcinoma that
was negative for both. Transduction of HOXB7 gene into SkBr3 cells, induced bFGF 
expression, increased growth rate, independence from serum withdrawal and ability
to form colonies in semisolid medium. ELISA assay showed that most of bFGF was
associated to cell lysate when cells were cultured at 1% serum whereas in cells
kept to 10% serum bFGF was detected both within cell lysate or secreted into cell
supernatants. Antisense oligos to bFGF inhibited the growth of cells cultured in 
1%, indicating that beside the possible activation of additional genes other than
bFGF by HOXB7 transduction, only bFGF induction accounts for the observed
results. Moreover, since inhibition of cell proliferation occurred in cells kept 
in 1% but not 10% serum, a bFGF intracrine loop appears operative in serum
starved SkBr3/HOXB7 cells. Also, these results further indicate bFGF as target of
HOXB7.

PMID: 9681827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Jun 15;69(4):377-91.

Expression of Hoxa-1 and Hoxb-7 is regulated by extracellular matrix-dependent
signals in mammary epithelial cells.

Srebrow A(1), Friedmann Y, Ravanpay A, Daniel CW, Bissell MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biochem 1998 Nov 1;71(2):310-2.

Homeobox-containing genes encode transcriptional regulators involved in cell fate
and pattern formation during embryogenesis. Recently, it has become clear that
their expression in continuously developing adult tissues, as well as in
tumorigenesis, may be of equal importance. In the mouse mammary gland, expression
patterns of several homeobox genes suggest a role in epithelial-stromal
interactions. Because the stroma and the extracellular matrix (ECM) are known to 
influence both functional and morphological development of the mammary gland, we 
asked whether these genes would be expressed postnatally in the gland and also in
cell lines in culture and whether they could be modulated by ECM. Using a
polymerase chain reaction-base strategy five members of the Hox gene clusters a
and b were shown to be expressed in cultured mouse mammary cells. Hoxa-1 and
Hoxb-7 were chosen for further analysis. Hoxb-7 was chosen because it had not
been described previously in the mammary gland and was modulated at different
stages of gland development. Hoxa-1 was chosen because it was reported previously
to be expressed only in mammary tumors, and not in normal glands. We showed that 
culturing the mammary epithelial cell lines SCp2 and CID-9 on a basement membrane
(BM) that was previously shown to induce a lactational phenotype was necessary to
turn off Hoxb-7, but a change in cell shape, brought about by culturing the cells
on an inert substratum such as polyHEMA, was sufficient to downregulate Hoxa-1.
This is the first report of modulation of homeobox genes by ECM. The results
provide a rationale for the differential pattern of expression in vivo of Hoxa-1 
and Hoxb-7 during different stages of development. The culture model should
permit further in-depth analysis of the molecular mechanisms involved in how ECM 
signaling and homeobox genes may interact to bring about tissue organization.

PMID: 9620166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Feb;110(2):110-5.

HOX homeobox genes exhibit spatial and temporal changes in expression during
human skin development.

Stelnicki EJ(1), Kömüves LG, Kwong AO, Holmes D, Klein P, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence
HJ, Adzick NS, Harrison M, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

The spatial and temporal deployment of HOX homeobox genes along the spinal axis
and in limb buds during fetal development is a key program in embryonic pattern
formation. Although we have previously reported that several of the HOX homeobox 
genes are expressed during murine skin development, there is no information about
developmental expression of HOX genes in human skin. We have now used reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, in conjunction with a set of degenerate 
oligonucleotide primers, to identify a subset of HOX genes that are expressed
during human fetal skin development. In situ hybridization analyses demonstrated 
that there were temporal and spatial shifts in expression of these genes. Strong 
HOXA4 expression was detected in the basal cell layers of 10 wk fetal epidermis
and throughout the epidermis and dermis of 17 wk skin, whereas weak signal was
present in the granular layer of newborn and adult skin. The expression patterns 
of HOXA5 and HOXA7 were similar, but their expression was weaker. In situ
hybridization analysis also revealed strong HOXC4 and weaker HOXB7 expression
throughout fetal development, whereas HOXB4 was expressed at barely detectable
levels. Differential HOX gene expression was also observed in developing hair
follicles, and sebaceous and sweat glands. None of the HOX genes examined were
detected in the adult dermis.

PMID: 9457903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncogene. 1997 Oct 23;15(17):2059-67.

The chimeric oncoproteins E2A-PBX1 and E2A-HLF are concentrated within spherical 
nuclear domains.

LeBrun DP(1), Matthews BP, Feldman BJ, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Oncogenic mutation of nuclear transcription factors often is associated with
altered patterns of subcellular localization that may be of functional
importance. The leukemogenic transcription factor gene E2A-PBX1 is created
through fusion of the genes E2A and PBX1 as a result of t(1;19) in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. We evaluated subcellular localization patterns of
E2A-PBX1 protein in transfected cells using immunofluorescence. Full-length
E2A-PBX1 was exclusively nuclear and was concentrated in spherical domains
denoted chimeric-E2A oncoprotein domains (CODs). In contrast, nuclear
fluorescence for wild-type E2A or PBX1 proteins was diffuse. Enhanced
concentrations of RNA polymerase II within many CODs and the requirement for an
E2A-encoded activation domain suggested transcriptional relevance. However, in
situ co-detection of nascent transcripts labeled with bromouridine failed to
confirm altered transcriptional activity in relation to CODs. CODs also failed to
co-localize with other proteins known to occupy functional nuclear compartments, 
including the transcription factor PML, the spliceosome-associated protein SC-35 
and the adenovirus replication factor DBP, or with foci of DNA replication.
Co-transfection of Hoxb7, a homeodomain protein capable of enhancing DNA binding 
by PBX1, impaired COD formation, suggesting that CODs contain E2A-PBX1 protein
not associated with DNA. We conclude that, as a 'gain of function' phenomenon
requiring protein elements from both E2A and PBX1, COD formation may be relevant 
to the biology of E2A-PBX1 in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 9366523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 1997 Apr 15;89(8):2723-35.

Mammalian homeobox B6 expression can be correlated with erythropoietin production
sites and erythropoiesis during development, but not with hematopoietic or
nonhematopoietic stem cell populations.

Zimmermann F(1), Rich IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.

There has been increasing interest in the involvement of mammalian homeobox (HOX)
genes in hematopoietic regulation. The HOX genes are clustered in 4 chromosomes
in mice and humans. In general, 5' end HOX gene expression is predominant in
hematopoietic stem cell populations, whereas 3' end HOX gene expression are
primarily found in committed progenitor cells. Furthermore, HOX genes of the A
cluster are generally found in myelomonocytic cells, B cluster genes in
erythropoietic cells, and C cluster genes in lymphoid cells. The results
presented here concentrate on a single gene, namely HOX B6. Preliminary
observations using whole mount in situ hybridization showed that both HOX B6 and 
erythropoietin (EPO) gene expression occurred in exactly the same areas of the
8.5-day mouse embryo. As a consequence, we studied the expression of HOX B6 and
EPO gene expression from 6.5 to 19.5 days of gestation, in the neonate, and in
the adult. It was found that the sequential transfer of erythropoiesis in
different organs during development was followed by a similar transfer of HOX B6 
and EPO gene expression. Between days 16.5 and 17.5, both HOX B6 and EPO gene
expression decrease in the fetal liver, even though hepatic erythropoiesis
continues to decline and is transferred to the fetal spleen. Precisely at this
time point, HOX B6 and EPO gene expression are transferred to both the fetal
spleen and fetal kidney. However, surprisingly, expression of both genes
increases again in the fetal liver just before birth. HOX B6 is expressed in
cells from in vitro erythropoietic colonies (colony-forming unit-erythroid and
burst-forming unit-erythroid) and TER-119+ erythroid cells but not in
hematopoietic or nonhematopoietic stem cell populations. When the latter two
populations are allowed to differentiate into erythropoietic cells, HOX B6 and
erythroid-relevant markers are expressed. The results indicate that HOX B6 is
intimately involved in the regulation of the erythropoietic system and could be a
marker for this lineage.

PMID: 9108390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Development. 1997 Mar;124(5):1089-98.

Specific residues in the Pbx homeodomain differentially modulate the DNA-binding 
activity of Hox and Engrailed proteins.

Peltenburg LT(1), Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

Two classes of homeodomain proteins, Hox and Engrailed, have been shown to act in
concert with the atypical homeodomain proteins Pbx and extradenticle. We now show
that specific residues located within the Pbx homeodomain are essential for
cooperative DNA binding with Hox and Engrailed gene products. Within the
N-terminal region of the Pbx homeodomain, we have identified a residue that is
required for cooperative DNA binding with three Hox gene products but not for
cooperativity with Engrailed-2 (En-2). Furthermore, there are similarities
between heterodimeric interactions involving the yeast mating type proteins MATa1
and MATalpha2 and those that allow the formation of Pbx/Hox and Pbx/En-2
heterodimers. Specifically, residues located in the a1 homeodomain that were
previously shown to form a hydrophobic pocket allowing the alpha2 C-terminal tail
to bind, are also required for Pbx/Hox and Pbx/En-2 cooperativity. Furthermore,
we show that three residues located in the turn between helix 1 and helix 2,
characteristic of many atypical homeodomain proteins, are required for
cooperative DNA binding involving both Hox and En-2. Replacement of the three
residues located in the turn between helix 1 and helix 2 of the Pbx homeodomain
with those of the atypical homeodomain proteins controlling cell fate in the
basidiomycete Ustilago maydis, bE5 and bE6, allows cooperative DNA binding with
three Hox members but abolishes interactions with En-2. The data suggest that the
molecular mechanism of homeodomain protein interactions that control cell fate in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and in the basidiomycetes may well be conserved in part 
in multicellular organisms.

PMID: 9056783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):81-8.

The Hox cooperativity motif of the chimeric oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1 is necessary and
sufficient for oncogenesis.

Chang CP(1), de Vivo I, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, California
94305, USA.

E2a-Pbx1 chimeric oncoproteins result from fusion of the E2A and PBX1 genes at
the sites of t(1;19) chromosomal translocations in a subset acute lymphoblastic
leukemias. Experimentally, E2a-Pbx1 transforms a variety of cell types, including
fibroblasts, myeloid progenitors, and lymphoblasts. Structure-function studies
have shown that contributions from both E2a and Pbx1 are necessary for
oncogenesis, but the Pbx1 homeodomain is dispensable and the required portion of 
Pbx1 has not been delineated. In this study, we used deletional and site-directed
mutagenesis to identify portions of Pbx1 necessary for oncogenic and
transcriptional activities of E2a-Pbx1. These studies defined a motif (named the 
Hox cooperativity motif [HCM]) carboxy terminal to the Pbx homeodomain that is
required for cooperative DNA binding, cellular transcriptional activity, and the 
oncogenic potential of E2a-Pbx1. The HCM is highly conserved throughout the
Pbx/exd subfamily of divergent homeodomain proteins and functions in DNA-binding 
assays as a potential contact site for Hox dimerization. E2a-Pbx1 proteins with
interstitial deletion or single-point mutations in the HCM could neither activate
transcription in cellular assays nor transform NIH 3T3 cells. An E2a-Pbx1 mutant 
containing 50 amino acids of Pbx1b spanning the HCM but lacking the homeodomain
was capable of inducing fibroblast transformation. Thus, the HCM is a necessary
and sufficient contribution of Pbx1 for oncogenesis induced by E2a-Pbx1 and
accounts for its homeodomain-independent transforming properties. Since subtle
alterations of the Pbx HCM result in complete abrogation of transforming activity
whereas the homeodomain is entirely dispensable, we conclude that interactions
mediated by the HCM are more important for transformation by E2a-Pbx1 than
interactions with cognate Pbx DNA sites.

PMCID: PMC231732
PMID: 8972188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 1;319 ( Pt 1):91-7.

Cloning and expression of a new HOXC6 transcript encoding a repressing protein.

Chariot A(1), Castronovo V, Le P, Gillet C, Sobel ME, Gielen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, C.H.U., Sart-Tilman, University of Liege,
Belgium.

Homeodomain-containing proteins are transcription factors that regulate the
co-ordinated expression of multiple genes involved in development,
differentiation and malignant transformation. In an attempt to characterize
expressed homeobox (HOX) genes in breast cancer cells, we cloned two distinct
HOXC6 transcripts from an MCF7 cDNA library, Interestingly, one of them
represents a new HOXC6 mRNA encoding a homeodomain-containing protein harbouring 
a unique N-terminal sequence. Moreover we demonstrate that this HOXC6 transcript 
is less abundant in human breast cancer cells than in non-tumorigenic cell lines,
is detected in breast carcinomas and adjacent tissues and is expressed in a
variety of human tumours. In addition, transient co-transfection experiments
illustrated that both HOXC6 transcripts encode gene products that repress
transcription from a HOX binding sequence in MDA-MB231 cells and co-operate with 
other HOX gene products such as HOXB7 on their target genes. Taken together, our 
results suggest that HOXC6 proteins might contribute to the breast cell phenotype
through co-operative interactions with other HOX-derived proteins and repression 
of their target genes.

PMCID: PMC1217739
PMID: 8870653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Sep;16(9):4842-51.

HOXB7 constitutively activates basic fibroblast growth factor in melanomas.

Caré A(1), Silvani A, Meccia E, Mattia G, Stoppacciaro A, Parmiani G, Peschle C, 
Colombo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

Homeobox (HOX) genes control axial specification during mammalian development and
also regulate skin morphogenesis. Although selected HOX genes are variably
expressed in leukemias and kidney and colon cancer cell lines, their relationship
with the neoplastic phenotype remains unclear. In both normal development and
neoplastic transformation, HOX target genes are largely unknown. We investigated 
the expression and function of HOXB cluster genes in human melanoma. The HOXB7
gene was constitutively expressed in all 25 melanoma cell lines and analyzed
under both normal and serum-starved conditions, as well as in in vivo primary and
metastatic melanoma cells; conversely, HOXB7 was expressed in proliferating but
not quiescent normal melanocytes. Treatment of melanoma cell lines with antisense
oligomers targeting HOXB7 mRNA markedly inhibited cell proliferation and
specifically abolished expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) mRNA. 
Band shift and cotransfection experiments showed that HOXB7 directly
transactivates the hFGF gene through one out of five putative homeodomain binding
sites present in its promoter. These novel findings indicate a key role for
constitutive HOXB7 expression in melanoma cell proliferation via bFGF. The
results also raise the possibility that growth factor genes are critical HOX
target genes in other developmental and/or neoplastic cell systems.

PMCID: PMC231486
PMID: 8756643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. FEBS Lett. 1996 Feb 12;380(1-2):103-7.

Relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression of the HOXB gene cluster
in small cell lung cancers.

Flagiello D(1), Poupon MF, Cillo C, Dutrillaux B, Malfoy B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, CNRS, Paris, France.

The expression pattern of the HOXB gene cluster in four xenografted small-cell
lung cancers was compared to the methylation of the DNA in the corresponding
genomic regions. In 90% (17/19) of the studied cases, the expressed genes were in
methylated regions whereas 70% (12/17) of the unexpressed genes were in
unmethylated regions. This specific behavior could correspond to a particular
gene expression regulation mechanism of the HOX gene network. Since some genes
(HOXB2, HOXB4, HOXB7) were always inactive when unmethylated, this unexpected
relationship might indicate their key function(s) in the HOX gene network.

PMID: 8603715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jan 23;93(2):900-5.

Restricted expression of homeobox genes distinguishes fetal from adult human
smooth muscle cells.

Miano JM(1), Firulli AB, Olson EN, Hara P, Giachelli CM, Schwartz SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Smooth muscle cell plasticity is considered a prerequisite for atherosclerosis
and restenosis following angioplasty and bypass surgery. Identification of
transcription factors that specify one smooth muscle cell phenotype over another 
therefore may be of major importance in understanding the molecular basis of
these vascular disorders. Homeobox genes exemplify one class of transcription
factors that could govern smooth muscle cell phenotypic diversity. Accordingly,
we screened adult and fetal human smooth muscle cell cDNA libraries with a
degenerate oligonucleotide corresponding to a highly conserved region of the
homeodomain with the idea that homeobox genes, if present, would display a smooth
muscle cell phenotype-dependent pattern of expression. No homeobox genes were
detected in the adult human smooth muscle cell library; however, five
nonparalogous homeobox genes were uncovered from the fetal library (HoxA5,
HoxA11, HoxB1, HoxB7, and HoxC9). Northern blotting of adult and fetal tissues
revealed low and restricted expression of all five homeobox genes. No significant
differences in transcripts of HoxA5, HoxA11, and HoxB1 were detected between
adult or fetal human smooth muscle cells in culture. HoxB7 and HoxC9, however,
showed preferential mRNA expression in fetal human smooth muscle cells that
appeared to correlate with the age of the donor. This phenotype-dependent
expression of homeobox genes was also noted in rat pup versus adult smooth muscle
cells. While similar differences in gene expression have been reported between
subsets of smooth muscle cells from rat vessels of different-aged animals or
clones of rat smooth muscle, our findings represent a demonstration of a
transcription factor distinguishing two human smooth muscle cell phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC40155
PMID: 8570656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Genes Dev. 1995 Mar 15;9(6):663-74.

Pbx proteins display hexapeptide-dependent cooperative DNA binding with a subset 
of Hox proteins.

Chang CP(1), Shen WF, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, California 94305,
USA.

The human proto-oncogene PBX1 codes for a homolog of Drosophila extradenticle, a 
divergent homeo domain protein that modulates the developmental and DNA-binding
specificity of select HOM proteins. We demonstrate that wild-type Pbx proteins
and chimeric E2a-Pbx1 oncoproteins cooperatively bind a consensus DNA probe with 
HoxB4, B6, and B7 of the Antennapedia class of Hox/HOM proteins. Specificity of
Hox-Pbx interactions was suggested by the inability of Pbx proteins to
cooperatively bind the synthetic DNA target with HoxA10 or Drosophila
even-skipped. Site-directed mutagenesis showed that the hexapeptide motif
(IYPWMK) upstream of the Hox homeo domain was essential for HoxB6 and B7 to
cooperatively bind DNA with Pbx proteins. Engraftment of the HoxB7 hexapeptide
onto HoxA10 endowed it with robust cooperative properties, demonstrating a
functional role for the highly conserved hexapeptide element as one of the
molecular determinants delimiting Hox-Pbx cooperativity. The Pbx homeo domain was
necessary but not sufficient for cooperativity, which required conserved amino
acids carboxy-terminal of the homeo domain. These findings demonstrate that
interactions between Hox and Pbx proteins modulate their DNA-binding properties, 
suggesting that Pbx and Hox proteins act in parallel as heterotypic complexes to 
regulate expression of specific subordinate genes.

PMID: 7729685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Cell Sci. 1995 Jan;108 ( Pt 1):187-93.

Nucleolar localisation of three Hox homeoproteins.

Corsetti MT(1), Levi G, Lancia F, Sanseverino L, Ferrini S, Boncinelli E, Corte
G.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Biotechnology Center, C.B.A., IST, Genova, Italy.

Homeoproteins encoded by genes of the Hox family are nuclear proteins believed to
act as transcription factors and to participate in the determination of the body 
plan. Here we show that in several vertebrate cells, they exhibit a subnuclear
localisation associated with the nucleolus. We used monoclonal antibodies to
study the distribution of three homeoproteins, namely HOXB7, HOXC6 and HOXD4. The
immunoreactivity to antibodies against HOXC6 protein in Xenopus laevis embryonic 
tissues is restricted to one or two spots within the nucleus; this distribution
partially overlaps that of fibrillarin, a protein of the fibrillar zone of the
nucleoli. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis of the distribution of HOXB7
protein in 3T3 cells, and of HOXD4 protein in human neuroblastoma and Raji
lymphoma cell lines and activated lymphocytes, results invariably in a nucleolar 
localisation. Purified nucleoli from stimulated T lymphocytes, and Raji cells
contain an activity capable of binding, in a gel retardation assay, to an
oligonucleotide specifically recognised by the HOXD4 homeoprotein. This activity 
is specifically removed by anti-HOXD4 antibodies and is found associated in
southwestern blots with a single band with an apparent M(r) of 30,000,
corresponding to that of recombinant HOXD4. The functional significance of the
nucleolar localisation of Hox proteins remains to be determined.

PMID: 7738096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Oct 15;196(1):203-8.

Identification of homeobox genes expressed in human T-lymphocytes.

Inamori K(1), Takeshita K, Chiba S, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors involved in the process of normal
development and differentiation of cells and organs. Recently, some homeobox
genes are found implicated in hemato-lymphoid neoplasms. To assess the role of
homeobox genes in normal development and neoplastic transformation of T-cells, we
have surveyed for homeobox-containing gene expression in a human T-cell leukemia 
line with a polymerase chain reaction. Ten members of homeobox genes were
isolated, including one novel sequence. The novel sequence was most related to
mouse Cdx. One of the others, HOXB7, is expressed in most malignant T-cell lines 
and CD4-positive peripheral blood T-cells. Together with the recent observations,
these results suggest that the protein products of these genes may participate in
normal functions and/or transformation of T-cells.

PMID: 8105782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


