
1. Pediatr Obes. 2016 Mar 23. doi: 10.1111/ijpo.12113. [Epub ahead of print]

Validation of obesity susceptibility loci identified by genome-wide association
studies in early childhood in South Brazilian children.

Zandoná MR(1), Sangalli CN(1,)(2), Campagnolo PD(3), Vitolo MR(1,)(2), Almeida
S(1), Mattevi VS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Health Sciences, Federal University of Health Sciences of 
Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (2)Nutrition Research Group (NUPEN),
Federal University of Health Sciences of Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
(3)Department of Nutrition, Vale do Rio do Sinos University, São Leopoldo, RS,
Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of childhood obesity has been dramatically increasing 
in developing countries as it has been reported for developed nations.
Identifying susceptibility genes in early life could provide the foundations for 
interventions in lifestyle to prevent obese children to become obese adults.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of genetic 
variants related to obesity identified by genome-wide association studies (MC4R, 
TMEM18, KCTD15, SH2B1, SEC16B, BDNF, NEGR1, OLFM4 and HOXB5 genes) on
anthropometric and dietary phenotypes in two Brazilian cohorts followed-up since 
birth.
METHODS: There were 745 children examined at birth, after 1<U+2009>year and after
3.5<U+2009>years of follow-up. Ten single nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped.
Anthropometric and dietary parameters were compared among genotypes. Children
were classified as overweight when body mass index Z-score was >+1.
RESULTS: Overweight prevalence was 30.7% at 3.5<U+2009>years old. Significant
associations were identified at 3.5<U+2009>years old for TMEM18 rs6548238, NEGR1
rs2815752, BDNF rs10767664 and rs6265 (1<U+2009>year old and 3.5<U+2009>years old) with
anthropometric phenotypes and at 3.5<U+2009>years old for SEC16B rs10913469 with dietary
parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that genetic variants in/near these genes
contribute to obesity susceptibility in childhood and highlight the age at which 
they begin to affect obesity-related phenotypes.

© 2016 The Authors. Pediatric Obesity © 2016 International Association for the
Study of Obesity.

PMID: 27005443  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Nature. 2016 Feb 11;530(7589):223-7. doi: 10.1038/nature16943.

Hoxb5 marks long-term haematopoietic stem cells and reveals a homogenous
perivascular niche.

Chen JY(1,)(2), Miyanishi M(1,)(2), Wang SK(1,)(2), Yamazaki S(3), Sinha
R(1,)(2), Kao KS(1,)(2), Seita J(1), Sahoo D(1,)(2), Nakauchi H(1,)(3), Weissman 
IL(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA. (2)Ludwig Center for Cancer 
Stem Cell Research and Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA. (3)Division of Stem Cell Therapy, Center for
Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, The Institute of Medical Science,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are arguably the most extensively characterized 
tissue stem cells. Since the identification of HSCs by prospective isolation,
complex multi-parameter flow cytometric isolation of phenotypic subsets has
facilitated studies on many aspects of HSC biology, including self-renewal,
differentiation, ageing, niche, and diversity. Here we demonstrate by unbiased
multi-step screening, identification of a single gene, homeobox B5 (Hoxb5, also
known as Hox-2.1), with expression in the bone marrow that is limited to
long-term (LT)-HSCs in mice. Using a mouse single-colour tri-mCherry reporter
driven by endogenous Hoxb5 regulation, we show that only the Hoxb5(+) HSCs
exhibit long-term reconstitution capacity after transplantation in primary
transplant recipients and, notably, in secondary recipients. Only 7-35% of
various previously defined immunophenotypic HSCs are LT-HSCs. Finally, by in situ
imaging of mouse bone marrow, we show that >94% of LT-HSCs (Hoxb5(+)) are
directly attached to VE-cadherin(+) cells, implicating the perivascular space as 
a near-homogenous location of LT-HSCs.

PMID: 26863982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochem J. 2015 Dec 15;472(3):393-403. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150213. Epub 2015 Oct 14.

HOXB5 induces invasion and migration through direct transcriptional up-regulation
of ß-catenin in human gastric carcinoma.

Hong CS(1), Jeong O(2), Piao Z(3), Guo C(1), Jung MR(2), Choi C(4), Park YK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Molecular Therapeutic to GI Tract, Institute for
Biomedical Science, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Jeonnam 519-763,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Surgery, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Jeonnam 519-763, Republic of Korea. (3)Research Center for Molecular
Therapeutic to GI Tract, Institute for Biomedical Science, Chonnam National
University Hwasun Hospital, Jeonnam 519-763, Republic of Korea Center for
Creative Biomedical Scientists (BK-21 Plus Project), Chonnam National University 
Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pathology,
Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Jeonnam 519-763, Republic of Korea. 
(5)Research Center for Molecular Therapeutic to GI Tract, Institute for
Biomedical Science, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, Jeonnam 519-763,
Republic of Korea Department of Surgery, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Jeonnam 519-763, Republic of Korea Center for Creative Biomedical
Scientists (BK-21 Plus Project), Chonnam National University Medical School,
Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea parkyk@jnu.ac.kr.

HOX (homeobox) genes encode a family of transcriptional regulators, which have an
important role in morphogenesis and differentiation during embryonic development.
Their deregulated expression is involved in the carcinogenesis of many human
solid tumours. In the present study, we show that HOXB5 mRNA was significantly
overexpressed in gastric cancer tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues.
HOXB5-up-regulated cancer cells showed increased invasion and migration activity,
but no change in proliferation activity, whereas HOXB5-down-regulated cells
showed decreased invasion and migration activity. Up-regulation of HOXB5 resulted
in up-regulation of ß-catenin, whereas inhibition of HOXB5 expression by siRNA
led to the down-regulation of ß-catenin. Moreover, a significant correlation
between HOXB5 and CTNNB1 (ß-catenin) mRNA expression was detected in gastric
cancer tissues. Furthermore, we found that HOXB5 binds directly to the CTNNB1
promoter region and activates the transcriptional expression of ß-catenin, as
well as its downstream target genes, encoding cyclin D1 and c-Myc, leading to an 
increase in the invasion and migration activity of human gastric cancer cells.
Thus HOXB5 may be an important regulator of the Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway,
thereby contributing to gastric cancer progression and metastasis.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 26467157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Rep. 2015 Aug 11;12(6):903-12. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.07.020. Epub 2015 
Jul 30.

Hox5 Genes Regulate the Wnt2/2b-Bmp4-Signaling Axis during Lung Development.

Hrycaj SM(1), Dye BR(2), Baker NC(1), Larsen BM(1), Burke AC(3), Spence JR(2),
Wellik DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA. (2)Department of Cell and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA.
(4)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA; Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
Electronic address: dwellik@umich.edu.

Hox genes are required for proper anteroposterior axial patterning and the
development of several organ systems. Here, we show that all three Hox5
paralogous genes play redundant roles in the developing lung. Hoxa5;Hoxb5;Hoxc5
triple-mutant embryos develop severely hypoplastic lungs with reduced branching
and proximal-distal patterning defects. Hox5 genes are exclusively expressed in
the lung mesoderm; however, defects are observed in both lung mesenchyme and
endodermally derived epithelium, demonstrating that Hox5 genes act to regulate
mesodermal-epithelial crosstalk during development. We show that Hox5 loss of
function leads to loss of Wnt2/2b expression in the distal lung mesenchyme and
the downregulation of previously identified downstream targets of Wnt2/2b
signaling, including Lef1, Axin2, and Bmp4. Wnt2/2b-enriched media rescue proper 
Sox2/Sox9 patterning and restore Bmp4 expression in Hox5 triple-mutant lung
explants. Taken together, these data show that Hox5 genes are key upstream
mesenchymal regulators of the Wnt2/2b-Bmp4-signaling axis critical for proper
lung patterning.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4536095 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 26235626  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Oct;24(10):1574-84. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1270. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Network-Based Integration of GWAS and Gene Expression Identifies a HOX-Centric
Network Associated with Serous Ovarian Cancer Risk.

Kar SP, Tyrer JP, Li Q, Lawrenson K, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N,
Chenevix-Trench G; Australian Cancer Study; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study
Group, Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean YT, Beckmann MW, Berchuck A, Bisogna M, Bjørge
L, Bogdanova N, Brinton L, Brooks-Wilson A, Butzow R, Campbell I, Carty K,
Chang-Claude J, Chen YA, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer D, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C,
Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Dürst
M, Eccles D, Easton DF, Edwards RP, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT,
Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J,
Harrington P, Harter P, Hein A, Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E,
Hogdall CK, Hosono S, Iversen ES, Jakubowska A, Paul J, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan
BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley J, Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C,
Kupryjanczyk J, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Lele S, Leminen A,
Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall L, Massuger
L, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, McNeish IA, Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich
KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Nevanlinna H, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I,
Orsulic S, Weber RP, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM,
Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph
A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Shu XO,
Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston-Campbell LE,
Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tsai YY, Tworoger SS, van
Altena AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C,
Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu A, Yang H,
Zheng W, Ziogas A, Sellers TA, Monteiro AN, Freedman ML, Gayther SA, Pharoah PD.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have so far reported 12 loci
associated with serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. We hypothesized that
some of these loci function through nearby transcription factor (TF) genes and
that putative target genes of these TFs as identified by coexpression may also be
enriched for additional EOC risk associations.
METHODS: We selected TF genes within 1 Mb of the top signal at the 12 genome-wide
significant risk loci. Mutual information, a form of correlation, was used to
build networks of genes strongly coexpressed with each selected TF gene in the
unified microarray dataset of 489 serous EOC tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Genes represented in this dataset were subsequently ranked using a gene-level
test based on results for germline SNPs from a serous EOC GWAS meta-analysis
(2,196 cases/4,396 controls).
RESULTS: Gene set enrichment analysis identified six networks centered on TF
genes (HOXB2, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7 at 17q21.32 and HOXD1, HOXD3 at 2q31) that were
significantly enriched for genes from the risk-associated end of the ranked list 
(P < 0.05 and FDR < 0.05). These results were replicated (P < 0.05) using an
independent association study (7,035 cases/21,693 controls). Genes underlying
enrichment in the six networks were pooled into a combined network.
CONCLUSION: We identified a HOX-centric network associated with serous EOC risk
containing several genes with known or emerging roles in serous EOC development.
IMPACT: Network analysis integrating large, context-specific datasets has the
potential to offer mechanistic insights into cancer susceptibility and prioritize
genes for experimental characterization.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592449
PMID: 26209509  [PubMed - in process]


6. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 May 1;11(6):701-11. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.11431. eCollection
2015.

HOXB5 Promotes the Proliferation and Invasion of Breast Cancer Cells.

Lee JY(1), Hur H(2), Yun HJ(1), Kim Y(3), Yang S(1), Kim SI(4), Kim MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 plus
project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
120-752, Korea. (2)2. Department of Surgery, National Health Insurance Service
Ilsan Hospital, Goyang 410-719, Korea ; 3. Department of Surgery, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea. (3)4. Department of
Pathology, National Health Insurance Service Ilsan Hospital, Goyang 410-719,
Korea. (4)3. Department of Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
120-752, Korea.

HOX transcription factors play an important role in determining body patterning
and cell fate during embryogenesis. Accumulating evidence has shown that these
genes act as positive and/or negative modulators in many types of cancer,
including breast cancer, in a tissue-specific manner. We have previously reported
that HOXB5 is aberrantly overexpressed in breast cancer tissues and cell lines.
Here, we investigated the biological roles and clinical relevance of HOXB5 in
breast cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis of HOXB5 on tissue microarray (TMA)
including 34 normal and 67 breast cancer specimens revealed that HOXB5 was highly
expressed in cancer tissues, particularly from estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
breast cancer patients. An online survival analysis confirmed the correlation
between HOXB5 expression and poor distant metastasis-free survival in
ER-positive, but not in ER-negative, breast cancer. In vitro studies indicated
that HOXB5 silencing in ER-positive cells significantly decreased cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent cell growth. In contrast, overexpression 
of HOXB5 displayed EMT characteristics with a greater invasive ability, higher
cell proliferation and colony formation in soft agar. HOXB5 knockdown or
overexpression led to changes in the expression levels of RET, ERBB2, and EGFR,
but not of ESR1. In conclusion, we suggest that HOXB5 acts as a positive
modulator most likely by promoting cell proliferative response and invasiveness
in ER-positive breast cancer. These results would help predict prognosis of
breast cancer and identify a new valuable therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4440260
PMID: 25999793  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Feb;57(2):158-68. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12199. Epub 2015 Feb
19.

Roles of Hoxb5 in the development of vagal and trunk neural crest cells.

Kam MK(1), Lui VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Neural crest cells (NC) are a group of multipotent stem cells uniquely present in
vertebrates. They are destined to form various organs according to their
anterior-posterior (A-P) levels of origin in the neural tube (NT). They develop
into a wide spectrum of cell lineages under the influence of signaling cascades, 
neural plate border genes and NC specifier genes. Although this complex gene
regulatory network (GRN) specifies the fate of NC and the combinatory action of
Hox genes executed at the time of NC induction governs the patterning of NC for
the formation of specific structures along the A-P axis, not much information on 
how GRN and Hox genes directly interact and orchestrate is available. This review
summarizes recent findings on the multiple roles of Hoxb5 on the survival and
cell lineage differentiation of vagal and trunk NC cells during early
development, by direct transcriptional regulation of NC specifier genes (Sox9 and
Foxd3) of the GRN. We will also review findings on the transcriptional regulation
of Ret by Hoxb5 in the population of the vagal NC that are committed to the
enteric neuron and glia lineages. Functional redundancy between Hox proteins
(Hoxa5 and Hoxc5) from the same paralogue group as Hoxb5, and the cooperative
effects of Hox cofactors, collaborators and transcription factors in the Hoxb5
transcriptional regulation of target genes will also be discussed.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 25703667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;55:144-52. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.09.002.
Epub 2014 Sep 8.

Homeobox b5 (Hoxb5) regulates the expression of Forkhead box D3 gene (Foxd3) in
neural crest.

Kam MK(1), Cheung M(2), Zhu JJ(3), Cheng WW(1), Sat EW(1), Tam PK(4), Lui VC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. (2)Department of Anatomy, Li
Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China; Centre for Reproduction, Development & Growth, Li Ka 
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. (3)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong,
China; Faculty of Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province,
China. (4)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China; Centre for
Reproduction, Development & Growth, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China; Centre for Reproduction,
Development & Growth, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
vchlui@hku.hk.

Patterning of neural crest (NC) for the formation of specific structures along
the anterio-posterior (A-P) body axis is governed by a combinatorial action of
Hox genes, which are expressed in the neuroepithelium at the time of NC
induction. Hoxb5 was expressed in NC at both induction and migratory stages, and 
our previous data suggested that Hoxb5 played a role in the NC development.
However, the underlying mechanisms by which Hoxb5 regulates the early NC
development are largely unknown. Current study showed that both the human and
mouse Foxd3 promoters were bound and trans-activated by Hoxb5 in NC-derived
neuroblastoma cells. The binding of Hoxb5 to Foxd3 promoter in vivo was further
confirmed in the brain and neural tube of mouse embryos. Moreover, Wnt1-Cre
mediated perturbation of Hoxb5 signaling at the dorsal neural tube in mouse
embryos resulted in Foxd3 down-regulation. In ovo, Foxd3 alleviated the apoptosis
of neural cells induced by perturbed Hoxb5 signaling, and Hoxb5 induced ectopic
Foxd3 expression in the chick neural tube. This study demonstrated that Hoxb5 (an
A-P patterning gene) regulated the NC development by directly inducing Foxd3 (a
NC specifier and survival gene).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Sep;8(3):231-44. doi: 10.1007/s12079-014-0237-7. Epub 
2014 Jul 30.

Oxygen differentially affects the hox proteins Hoxb5 and Hoxa5 altering airway
branching and lung vascular formation.

Silfa-Mazara F(1), Mujahid S, Thomas C, Vong T, Larsson I, Nielsen HC, Volpe MV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Floating Hospital for 
Children at Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Hoxb5 and Hoxa5 transcription factor proteins uniquely impact lung morphogenesis 
at the developmental time point when extremely preterm infants are born. The
effect of O2 exposure (0.4 FiO2) used in preterm infant care on these Hox
proteins is unknown. We used ex vivo fetal mouse lung organ cultures to explore
the effects of 0.4 FiO2 on lung airway and vascular formation in the context of
Hoxb5 and Hoxa5 expression and regulation. Compared to room air, 48 h (h) 0.4
FiO2 adversely attenuated airway and microvasculature formation while reducing
lung growth and epithelial cell volume, and increasing mesenchymal volume. 0.4
FiO2 decreased pro-angiogenic Hoxb5 and VEGFR2 while not altering protein levels 
of angiostatic Hoxa5. Lungs returned to RA after 24 h 0.4FiO2 had partial
structural recovery but remained smaller and less developed. Mesenchymal cell
apoptosis increased and proliferation decreased with time in O2 while epithelial 
cell proliferation significantly increased. Hoxb5 overexpression led to prominent
peri-airway VEGFR2 expression and promoted lung vascular and airway patterning.
Hoxa5 overexpression had the opposite effects. We conclude that 0.4 FiO2 exposure
causes a profound loss of airway and lung microvascular development that occurs
partially via reduction in pro-angiogenic Hoxb5 while angiostatic Hoxa5
expression is maintained.

PMCID: PMC4165823
PMID: 25073509  [PubMed]


10. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;51:142-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.04.013.
Epub 2014 Apr 29.

HOXB5 binds to multi-species conserved sequence (MCS+9.7) of RET gene and
regulates RET expression.

Zhu JJ(1), Kam MK(2), Garcia-Barceló MM(2), Tam PK(2), Lui VC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; Faculty of Medicine, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China. (2)Department of Surgery, LKS
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region. (3)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Electronic
address: vchlui@hku.hk.

RET gene is crucial for the development of enteric nervous system, and
dys-regulation of RET expression causes Hirschsprung disease. HOXB5 regulates RET
transcription, and perturbations in transcriptional regulation by HOXB5 caused
reduced RET expression and defective enteric nervous system development in mice. 
The mechanisms by which HOXB5 regulate RET transcription are unclear. Thus,
unraveling the regulatory mechanisms of HOXB5 on RET transcription could lead to 
a better understanding of the etiology of Hirschsprung disease. In this study, we
identified and confirmed HOXB5 binding to the multi-species conserved sequence
(MCS+9.7) in the first intron of the RET gene. We developed a RET mini-gene
reporter system, and showed that MCS+9.7 enhanced HOXB5 trans-activation from RET
promoter in human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells and in chick embryos. The deletion 
of HOXB5 binding site interfered with HOXB5 trans-activation. Furthermore,
transfection of HOXB5 induced endogenous RET transcription, enhanced the
co-precipitation of TATA-box binding protein with the transcription start site of
RET, and induced histone H3K4 trimethylation in chromatin regions upstream and
downstream of RET transcription start site. In conclusion, (i) HOXB5 physically
interacted with MCS+9.7 and enhanced RET transcription, (ii) HOXB5 altered
chromatin conformation and histone modification of RET locus, which could
facilitate the formation of transcription complex, and enhance RET transcription,
(iii) expression of RET was mediated by a complex regulatory network of
transcription factors functioning in a synergistic, additive and/or independent
manners. Hence, dys-regulation of RET expression by HOXB5 could result in
insufficient RET expression and Hirschsprung disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24794774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun;59(6):307-13. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2014.23. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Association study of common polymorphisms in MSRA, TFAP2B, MC4R, NRXN3, PPARGC1A,
TMEM18, SEC16B, HOXB5 and OLFM4 genes with obesity-related traits among
Portuguese children.

Albuquerque D(1), Nóbrega C(2), Rodríguez-López R(3), Manco L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Research Centre for Anthropology and Health
(CIAS), University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (2)Center for Neurosciences and
Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (3)Servicio de Análisis
Clínicos, Consorcio Hospital General de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

At least 52 genetic loci were associated with obesity-related traits. However,
little is known about the genetic basis of obesity among children. This study
aims to test whether 10 polymorphisms in obesity-related genes methionine
sulfoxide reductase A (MSRA), transcription factor AP-2 beta (TFAP2B),
melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), neurexin 3 (NRXN3), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PPARGC1A),
transmembrane protein 18 (TMEM18), homolog of S. cerevisiae Sec16 (SEC16B),
homeobox B5 (HOXB5) and olfactomedin 4 (OLFM4) are associated with the risk of
obesity in Portuguese children. A total of 730 children aging from 6 to 12 years 
old, recruited randomly from public schools in Portugal, were analysed.
Anthropometric measurements were obtained and children were classified into three
phenotypic groups, normal weight (n=256), overweight (n=320) and obese (n=154),
according to the International Obesity Task Force cutoffs. Polymorphisms were
genotyped by allelic discrimination TaqMan assays. The MC4R rs12970134
polymorphism was nominally associated with body mass index (BMI) (P=0.035), BMI
Z-score (P=0.043) and waist circumference (P=0.020), and borderline associated
with weight (P=0.053). Near nominal associations were also found for the PPARGC1A
rs8192678 polymorphism with weight (P=0.061), and for the MSRA rs545854
polymorphism with BMI (P=0.055) and BMI Z-score (P=0.056). Furthermore, logistic 
regression showed that MC4R rs12970134 and TFAP2B rs987237 were nominally,
respectively, associated (P=0.029) and borderline associated (P=0.056) with the
obese phenotype. This study highlighted the possible association of MC4R,
PPARGC1A, MSRA and TFAP2B polymorphisms with several obesity-related traits in a 
sample of Portuguese children. The two significant associated TFAP2B rs987237 and
MC4R rs12970134 polymorphisms showed an opposite direction of effect to that in
the original reports.

PMID: 24670271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e91010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091010. eCollection 
2014.

Gene expression profile of patients with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome:
new insights into the potential role of developmental pathways.

Nodale C(1), Ceccarelli S(1), Giuliano M(2), Cammarota M(2), D'Amici S(1),
Vescarelli E(1), Maffucci D(3), Bellati F(3), Panici PB(3), Romano F(4), Angeloni
A(5), Marchese C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Biotechnology and Molecular Biology
Section, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy. (3)Department of
Gynecologic-Obstetrical and Urologic Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy. (4)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (MRKHS) is a rare disease characterized
by congenital aplasia of uterus and vagina. Although many studies have
investigated several candidate genes, up to now none of them seem to be
responsible for the aetiology of the syndrome. In our study, we identified
differences in gene expression profile of in vitro cultured vaginal tissue of
MRHKS patients using whole-genome microarray analysis. A group of eight out of
sixteen MRKHS patients that underwent reconstruction of neovagina with an
autologous in vitro cultured vaginal tissue were subjected to microarray analysis
and compared with five healthy controls. Results obtained by array were confirmed
by qRT-PCR and further extended to other eight MRKHS patients. Gene profiling of 
MRKHS patients delineated 275 differentially expressed genes, of which 133
downregulated and 142 upregulated. We selected six deregulated genes (MUC1,
HOXC8, HOXB2, HOXB5, JAG1 and DLL1) on the basis of their fold change, their
differential expression in most patients and their relevant role in embryological
development. All patients showed upregulation of MUC1, while HOXB2 and HOXB5 were
downregulated, as well as Notch ligands JAG1 and DLL1 in the majority of them.
Interestingly, HOXC8 was significantly upregulated in 47% of patients, with a
differential expression only in MRKHS type I patients. Taken together, our
results highlighted the dysregulation of developmental genes, thus suggesting a
potential alteration of networks involved in the formation of the female
reproductive tract and providing a useful clue for understanding the
pathophysiology of MRKHS.

PMCID: PMC3946625
PMID: 24608967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Dev Biol. 2014 Apr 1;388(1):134-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.027. Epub 2014
Feb 10.

Long-range regulation by shared retinoic acid response elements modulates dynamic
expression of posterior Hoxb genes in CNS development.

Ahn Y(1), Mullan HE(1), Krumlauf R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA. (2)Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA; Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology, Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.
Electronic address: rek@stowers.org.

Retinoic acid (RA) signaling plays an important role in determining the anterior 
boundary of Hox gene expression in the neural tube during embryogenesis. In
particular, RA signaling is implicated in a rostral expansion of the neural
expression domain of 5<U+05F3> Hoxb genes (Hoxb9-Hoxb5) in mice. However, underlying
mechanisms for this gene regulation have remained elusive due to the lack of RA
responsive element (RARE) in the 5<U+05F3> half of the HoxB cluster. To identify
cis-regulatory elements required for the rostral expansion, we developed a
recombineering technology to serially label multiple genes with different
reporters in a single bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) vector containing the
mouse HoxB cluster. This allowed us to simultaneously monitor the expression of
multiple genes. In contrast to plasmid-based reporters, transgenic BAC reporters 
faithfully recapitulated endogenous gene expression patterns of the Hoxb genes
including the rostral expansion. Combined inactivation of two RAREs, DE-RARE and 
ENE-RARE, in the BAC completely abolished the rostral expansion of the 5<U+05F3> Hoxb
genes. Knock-out of endogenous DE-RARE lead to significantly reduced expression
of multiple Hoxb genes and attenuated Hox gene response to exogenous RA treatment
in utero. Regulatory potential of DE-RARE was further demonstrated by its ability
to anteriorize 5<U+05F3> Hoxa gene expression in the neural tube when inserted into a
HoxA BAC reporter. Our data demonstrate that multiple RAREs cooperate to remotely
regulate 5<U+05F3> Hoxb genes during CNS development, providing a new insight into the
mechanisms for gene regulation within the Hox clusters.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19438-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315075110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Hox5 interacts with Plzf to restrict Shh expression in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Hrycaj SM, McIntyre DC, Baker NC, Takeuchi JK, Jeannotte L, Gaber ZB,
Novitch BG, Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

To date, only the five most posterior groups of Hox genes, Hox9-Hox13, have
demonstrated loss-of-function roles in limb patterning. Individual paralog groups
control proximodistal patterning of the limb skeletal elements. Hox9 genes also
initiate the onset of Hand2 expression in the posterior forelimb compartment, and
collectively, the posterior HoxA/D genes maintain posterior Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) 
expression. Here we show that an anterior Hox paralog group, Hox5, is required
for forelimb anterior patterning. Deletion of all three Hox5 genes (Hoxa5, Hoxb5,
and Hoxc5) leads to anterior forelimb defects resulting from derepression of Shh 
expression. The phenotype requires the loss of all three Hox5 genes,
demonstrating the high level of redundancy in this Hox paralogous group. Further 
analyses reveal that Hox5 interacts with promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
biochemically and genetically to restrict Shh expression. These findings, along
with previous reports showing that point mutations in the Shh limb enhancer lead 
to similar anterior limb defects, highlight the importance of Shh repression for 
proper patterning of the vertebrate limb.

PMCID: PMC3845161
PMID: 24218595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Feb 1;101(2):247-55. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvt244. Epub 2013 Nov 
4.

The transcription factor HoxB5 stimulates vascular remodelling in a
cytokine-dependent manner.

Fessner A(1), Esser JS, Bluhm F, Grundmann S, Zhou Q, Patterson C, Bode C, Moser 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology and Angiology I, Heart Center, Freiburg University, Freiburg,
Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

AIMS: Proper blood vessel formation is essential in health and is often
dysregulated in ischaemic diseases. Therefore, regulatory mechanisms that control
angiogenesis and arteriogenesis are required to improve treatment of ischaemic
diseases. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of homeobox
transcription factor HoxB5 overexpression during revascularization in ischaemic
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To assess the effect of HoxB5 overexpression on blood vessel
formation in vivo, we subjected C57BL/6 mice to femoral artery ligation with
local intramuscular injection of HoxB5 or green fluorescent protein control
adenoviral vectors. Laser Doppler perfusion imaging revealed that HoxB5 enhanced 
perfusion restoration in mice and immunohistochemistry analysis revealed
increased capillary density. To identify a potential mechanism of HoxB5 in blood 
vessel formation, a 'proteome-profiler' array was performed. HoxB5 overexpression
in endothelial cells increased the expression of pro-inflammatory molecules such 
as monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in vitro and
in vivo. Functionally, HoxB5 enhanced monocyte as well as endothelial cell
migration in vitro and increased leucocyte infiltration into ischaemic tissues.
HoxB5-induced migration of monocytes was antagonized by the presence of an MCP-1 
blocking antibody.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that overexpression of HoxB5 enhances blood vessel 
perfusion in vivo by up-regulation of MCP-1 and IL-6 as well as in enhanced
leucocyte infiltration and blood vessel remodelling.

PMID: 24189625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):278-89. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.142. Epub 2013
Oct 18.

Perturbation of Hoxb5 signaling in vagal and trunk neural crest cells causes
apoptosis and neurocristopathies in mice.

Kam MK(1), Cheung MC(2), Zhu JJ(1), Cheng WW(1), Sat EW(1), Tam PK(3), Lui VC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China [2] 
Centre for Reproduction, Development and Growth, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. (3)1] Department of
Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, 
Hong Kong, China [2] Centre for Reproduction, Development and Growth, Li Ka Shing
Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

Neural crest cells (NCCs) migrate from different regions along the
anterior-posterior axis of the neural tube (NT) to form different structures.
Defective NCC development causes congenital neurocristopathies affecting multiple
NCC-derived tissues in human. Perturbed Hoxb5 signaling in vagal NCC causes
enteric nervous system (ENS) defects. This study aims to further investigate if
perturbed Hoxb5 signaling in trunk NCC contributes to defects of other
NCC-derived tissues besides the ENS. We perturbed Hoxb5 signaling in NCC from the
entire NT, and investigated its impact in the development of tissues derived from
these cells in mice. Perturbation of Hoxb5 signaling in these NCC resulted in
Sox9 downregulation, NCC apoptosis, hypoplastic sympathetic and dorsal root
ganglia, hypopigmentation and ENS defects. Mutant mice with NCC-specific Sox9
deletion also displayed some of these phenotypes. In vitro and in vivo assays
indicated that the Sox9 promoter was bound and trans-activated by Hoxb5. In ovo
studies further revealed that Sox9 alleviated apoptosis induced by perturbed
Hoxb5 signaling, and Hoxb5 induced ectopic Sox9 expression in chick NT. This
study demonstrates that Hoxb5 regulates Sox9 expression in NCC and disruption of 
this signaling causes Sox9 downregulation, NCC apoptosis and multiple
NCC-developmental defects. Phenotypes such as ENS deficiency, hypopigmentation
and some of the neurological defects are reported in patients with Hirschsprung
disease (HSCR). Whether dysregulation of Hoxb5 signaling and early depletion of
NCC contribute to ENS defect and other neurocristopathies in HSCR patients
deserves further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3890950
PMID: 24141719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:320249. doi: 10.1155/2013/320249. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Regulatory interactions between androgens, Hoxb5, and TGF ß signaling in murine
lung development.

Volpe MV(1), Ramadurai SM, Mujahid S, Vong T, Brandao M, Wang KT, Pham LD,
Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Floating Hospital for 
Children at Tufts Medical Center and Sackler School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA ; Division of Neonatology,
Department of Pediatrics, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Androgens enhance airway branching but delay alveolar maturation contributing to 
increased respiratory morbidity in prematurely born male infants. Hoxb5 protein
positively regulates airway branching in developing lung. In other organs,
androgen regulation intersects with Hox proteins and TGF ß -SMAD signaling, but
these interactions have not been studied in the lung. We hypothesized that
androgen alteration of airway branching early in lung development requires Hoxb5 
expression and that these androgen-Hoxb5 interactions occur partially through
regional changes in TGF ß signaling. To evaluate acute effects of androgen and
TGF ß on Hoxb5, E11 whole fetal mouse lungs were cultured with
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) with/without Hoxb5 siRNA or TGF ß inhibitory antibody. 
Chronic in utero DHT exposure was accomplished by exposing pregnant mice to DHT
(subcutaneous pellet) from E11 to E18. DHT's ability to enhance airway branching 
and alter phosphorylated SMAD2 cellular localization was partially dependent on
Hoxb5. Hoxb5 inhibition also changed the cellular distribution of SMAD7 protein. 
Chronic in utero DHT increased Hoxb5 and altered SMAD7 mesenchymal localization. 
TGF ß inhibition enhanced airway branching, and Hoxb5 protein cellular
localization was more diffuse. We conclude that DHT controls lung airway
development partially through modulation of Hoxb5 protein expression and that
this level of regulation involves interactions with TGF ß signaling.

PMCID: PMC3776362
PMID: 24078914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Aug 2;6(1):25. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-25.

DNA methylation and differentiation: HOX genes in muscle cells.

Tsumagari K(1), Baribault C, Terragni J, Chandra S, Renshaw C, Sun Z, Song L,
Crawford GE, Pradhan S, Lacey M, Ehrlich M.

Author information: 
(1)Hayward Human Genetics Program and Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane Health
Sciences Center, New Orleans LA, USA. ehrlich@tulane.edu.

BACKGROUND: Tight regulation of homeobox genes is essential for vertebrate
development. In a study of genome-wide differential methylation, we recently
found that homeobox genes, including those in the HOX gene clusters, were highly 
overrepresented among the genes with hypermethylation in the skeletal muscle
lineage. Methylation was analyzed by reduced representation bisulfite sequencing 
(RRBS) of postnatal myoblasts, myotubes and adult skeletal muscle tissue and 30
types of non-muscle-cell cultures or tissues.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that myogenic hypermethylation was present in
specific subregions of all four HOX gene clusters and was associated with various
chromatin epigenetic features. Although the 3' half of the HOXD cluster was
silenced and enriched in polycomb repression-associated H3 lysine 27
trimethylation in most examined cell types, including myoblasts and myotubes,
myogenic samples were unusual in also displaying much DNA methylation in this
region. In contrast, both HOXA and HOXC clusters displayed myogenic
hypermethylation bordering a central region containing many genes preferentially 
expressed in myogenic progenitor cells and consisting largely of chromatin with
modifications typical of promoters and enhancers in these cells. A particularly
interesting example of myogenic hypermethylation was HOTAIR, a HOXC noncoding RNA
gene, which can silence HOXD genes in trans via recruitment of polycomb proteins.
In myogenic progenitor cells, the preferential expression of HOTAIR was
associated with hypermethylation immediately downstream of the gene. Other HOX
gene regions also displayed myogenic DNA hypermethylation despite being
moderately expressed in myogenic cells. Analysis of representative myogenic
hypermethylated sites for 5-hydroxymethylcytosine revealed little or none of this
base, except for an intragenic site in HOXB5 which was specifically enriched in
this base in skeletal muscle tissue, whereas myoblasts had predominantly
5-methylcytosine at the same CpG site.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that myogenic hypermethylation of HOX genes
helps fine-tune HOX sense and antisense gene expression through effects on 5'
promoters, intragenic and intergenic enhancers and internal promoters. Myogenic
hypermethylation might also affect the relative abundance of different RNA
isoforms, facilitate transcription termination, help stop the spread of
activation-associated chromatin domains and stabilize repressive chromatin
structures.

PMCID: PMC3750649
PMID: 23916067  [PubMed]


20. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Jun 15;304(12):L817-30. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00006.2013. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Partial functional redundancy between Hoxa5 and Hoxb5 paralog genes during lung
morphogenesis.

Boucherat O(1), Montaron S, Bérubé-Simard FA, Aubin J, Philippidou P, Wellik DM, 
Dasen JS, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

Hox genes encode transcription factors governing complex developmental processes 
in several organs. A subset of Hox genes are expressed in the developing lung.
Except for Hoxa5, the lack of overt lung phenotype in single mutants suggests
that Hox genes may not play a predominant role in lung ontogeny or that
functional redundancy may mask anomalies. In the Hox5 paralog group, both Hoxa5
and Hoxb5 genes are expressed in the lung mesenchyme whereas Hoxa5 is also
expressed in the tracheal mesenchyme. Herein, we generated Hoxa5;Hoxb5 compound
mutant mice to evaluate the relative contribution of each gene to lung
development. Hoxa5;Hoxb5 mutants carrying the four mutated alleles displayed an
aggravated lung phenotype, resulting in the death of the mutant pups at birth.
Characterization of the phenotype highlighted the role of Hoxb5 in lung
formation, the latter being involved in branching morphogenesis, goblet cell
specification, and postnatal air space structure, revealing partial functional
redundancy with Hoxa5. However, the Hoxb5 lung phenotypes were less severe than
those seen in Hoxa5 mutants, likely because of Hoxa5 compensation. New specific
roles for Hoxa5 were also unveiled, demonstrating the extensive contribution of
Hoxa5 to the developing respiratory system. The exclusive expression of Hoxa5 in 
the trachea and the phrenic motor column likely underlies the Hoxa5-specific
trachea and diaphragm phenotypes. Altogether, our observations establish that the
Hoxa5 and Hoxb5 paralog genes shared some functions during lung morphogenesis,
Hoxa5 playing a predominant role.

PMCID: PMC3680751
PMID: 23585229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 May;129(2):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.02.021. Epub
2013 Feb 21.

HOXB8 expression in ovarian serous carcinoma effusions is associated with shorter
survival.

Stavnes HT(1), Holth A, Don T, Kærn J, Vaksman O, Reich R, Trope' CG, Davidson B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
N-0310 Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: HOX proteins are key transcription factors in embryogenesis. HOXB5 and
HOXB8 were previously shown to be overexpressed in ovarian/primary peritoneal
serous carcinoma compared to breast carcinoma using gene expression arrays. The
present study investigated the clinical role of HOXB5 and HOXB8 in advanced-stage
(FIGO III-IV) ovarian serous carcinoma.
METHODS: HOXB5 and HOXB8 protein expression was analyzed in 286 effusions and 76 
patient-matched solid lesions (27 primary carcinomas, 49 metastases) using
immunohistochemistry. Expression was analyzed for association with
clinicopathologic parameters, including survival.
RESULTS: Cytoplasmic HOXB5 protein was detected in 268/286 (94%) effusions. HOXB8
was expressed at both the cytoplasm (252/286; 88%) and nucleus (131/286; 46%) of 
carcinoma cells. Cytoplasmic HOXB5, cytoplasmic HOXB8 and nuclear HOXB8 were
found in 56/76 (74%), 76/76 (100%) and 30/76 (39%) solid lesions, respectively,
with significantly higher HOXB5 expression in effusions (p=0.002) and higher
cytoplasmic HOXB8 in solid lesions (p<0.001). HOXB5 expression was higher in
post-chemotherapy disease recurrence effusions compared to pre-chemotherapy
effusions tapped at diagnosis (p=0.04). In univariate survival analysis of the
effusion cohort, higher expression of cytoplasmic HOXB8 was associated with
significantly shorter progression-free survival (p=0.033), whereas higher nuclear
HOXB8 expression was associated with significantly shorter overall survival in
analysis limited to patients with post-chemotherapy effusions (p=0.036). Neither 
finding was independent prognostic factor in Cox multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB5 and HOXB8 are frequently expressed in ovarian serous
carcinoma, with anatomic site-related differences for cytoplasmic staining. HOXB5
may be affected by chemotherapy in effusions. HOXB8 expression is associated with
shorter survival in metastatic serous carcinoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23438671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055911. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

MiR-221 and miR-130a regulate lung airway and vascular development.

Mujahid S(1), Nielsen HC, Volpe MV.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions play a crucial role in branching
morphogenesis, but very little is known about how endothelial cells contribute to
this process. Here, we examined how anti-angiogenic miR-221 and pro-angiogenic
miR-130a affect airway and vascular development in the fetal lungs. Lung-specific
effects of miR-130a and miR-221 were studied in mouse E14 whole lungs cultured
for 48 hours with anti-miRs or mimics to miR-130a and miR-221. Anti-miR 221
treated lungs had more distal branch generations with increased Hoxb5 and VEGFR2 
around airways. Conversely, mimic 221 treated lungs had reduced airway branching,
dilated airway tips and decreased Hoxb5 and VEGFR2 in mesenchyme. Anti-miR 130a
treatment led to reduced airway branching with increased Hoxa5 and decreased
VEGFR2 in the mesenchyme. Conversely, mimic 130a treated lungs had numerous
finely arborized branches extending into central lung regions with diffusely
localized Hoxa5 and increased VEGFR2 in the mesenchyme. Vascular morphology was
analyzed by GSL-B4 (endothelial cell-specific lectin) immunofluorescence.
Observed changes in airway morphology following miR-221 inhibition and miR-130a
enhancement were mirrored by changes in vascular plexus formation around the
terminal airways. Mouse fetal lung endothelial cells (MFLM-91U) were used to
study microvascular cell behavior. Mimic 221 treatment resulted in reduced tube
formation and cell migration, where as the reverse was observed with mimic 130a
treatment. From these data, we conclude that miR-221 and miR-130a have opposing
effects on airway and vascular morphogenesis of the developing lung.

PMCID: PMC3568032
PMID: 23409087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Feb;23(1):29-38. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1326955. Epub 2012 
Oct 25.

Enteric nervous system impairment in gastroschisis.

Auber F(1), Danzer E, Noché-Monnery ME, Sarnacki S, Trugnan G, Boudjemaa S, Audry
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Armand Trousseau/Hopitaux
Universitaire Est Parisien/AP-HP, Paris, France. frederic.auber@trs.aphp.fr

INTRODUCTION: After surgical repair of gastroschisis, most neonates exhibit
severe intestinal dysmotility. We hypothesized that impaired development of the
enteric nervous system or interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) network contributes
to impaired intestinal motility in gastroschisis. We evaluated this hypothesis in
a rat model of gastroschisis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Gastroschisis was created surgically in rat fetuses on
gestational day 18, under general anesthesia, and small bowel was harvested on
day 22. Intestinal weight-to-length (IW/L) ratio, and small-bowel wall thickness 
were assessed. Specimens were processed for hematoxylin-eosin staining or
immunohistochemistry with specific markers for neuronal cells (Hoxb5), glial
cells (GFAP, S100), and ICCs (c-kit). Myenteric plexus maturation was assessed
morphologically and compared with sham and control fetuses. Stage of development 
of the myenteric plexus was graded from 1 (mature) to 3 (very immature)
comparatively with specimens from E16 to E22 control fetuses.
RESULTS: Compared with sham-operated or control fetuses, gastroschisis was
associated with increases in mean intestinal weight/intestinal length (IW/L)
ratio, and mean thicknesses of the total, muscular, and submucosal layers of the 
small-bowel wall. The myenteric plexus were present in the small bowel from
fetuses with gastroschisis, however all exhibited abnormal myenteric plexus
maturation. Thus, of the gastroschisis fetuses, 55% had an aspect similar to the 
immature myenteric plexus of E19-E20 fetuses and 45% to the very immature
mesenteric plexus observed in E16-E18 fetuses. When compared with sham and
control groups, ICCs were less abundant in eviscerated small bowel in the
gastroschisis group and often exhibited weak c-kit staining or an abnormally
round shape without branches. Hoxb5, a marker for enteric neuroblasts and
neuronal precursors, was expressed similarly in myenteric plexuses in all groups.
S100 or GFAP staining showed the presence of glial cells within the myenteric
plexuses in all groups. The S100 expression level was similar in all groups. In
contrast, the GFAP expression level was higher in the gastroschisis group than in
the sham and control groups.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that delayed maturation of the enteric nervous
system combined with impaired ICC network development may largely explain the
intestinal dysmotility seen in neonates with gastroschisis.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23100056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e40127. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040127. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

A microRNA-7 binding site polymorphism in HOXB5 leads to differential gene
expression in bladder cancer.

Luo J(1), Cai Q, Wang W, Huang H, Zeng H, He W, Deng W, Yu H, Chan E, Ng CF,
Huang J, Lin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the biological function of HOXB5 in human bladder cancer 
and explore whether the HOXB5 3'-UTR SNP (1010A/G), which is located within the
microRNA-7 binding site, was correlated with clinical features of bladder cancer.
METHODS: Expression of HOXB5 in 35 human bladder cancer tissues and 8 cell lines 
were examined using real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Next, we explored the
biological function of HOXB5 in vitro using cell proliferation, migration and
colony formation assays. Using bioinformatics, a SNP (1010A/G) was found located 
within the microRNA-7 binding site in the 3'-UTR of HOXB5. Real-time PCR was used
to test HOXB5 expression affected by different alleles. Finally, multivariate
logistic regression analysis was used to determine the relationship between SNP
(1010A/G) frequency and clinical features in 391 cases.
RESULTS: HOXB5 was frequently over-expressed both in bladder cancer tissues and
cell lines. Inhibition of HOXB5 suppressed the oncogenic function of cancer
cells. Next, we demonstrated that a SNP (1010A/G), located within the microRNA-7 
binding site in the 3'-UTR of HOXB5, could affect HOXB5 expression in bladder
cancer mainly by differential binding activity of microRNA-7 and SNP-related mRNA
stability. Finally, we also showed the frequency of 1010G genotype was higher in 
cancer group compared to normal controls and correlated with the risk of high
grade and high stage.
CONCLUSION: HOXB5 is overexpressed in bladder cancer. A miRNA-binding SNP
(1010A/G) located within 3'-UTR of HOXB5 is associated with gene expression and
may be a promising prognostic factor for bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC3387002
PMID: 22768238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Hum Genet. 2012 Aug;57(8):485-93. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.54. Epub 2012 May 31.

Hirschsprung's disease and variants in genes that regulate enteric neural crest
cell proliferation, migration and differentiation.

Carter TC(1), Kay DM, Browne ML, Liu A, Romitti PA, Kuehn D, Conley MR, Caggana
M, Druschel CM, Brody LC, Mills JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Epidemiology, Statistics,
and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.

Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) results from failed colonization of the embryonic
gut by enteric neural crest cells (ENCCs); colonization requires RET
proto-oncogene (RET) signaling. We sequenced RET to identify coding and
splice-site variants in a population-based case group and we tested for
associations between HSCR and common variants in RET and candidate genes (ASCL1, 
homeobox B5 (HOXB5), L1 cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM), paired-like homeobox 2b
(PHOX2B), PROK1 and PROKR1) chosen because they are involved in ENCC
proliferation, migration and differentiation in animal models. We conducted a
nested case-control study of 304 HSCR cases and 1215 controls. Among 38 (12.5%)
cases with 34 RET coding and splice-site variants, 18 variants were previously
unreported. We confirmed associations with common variants in HOXB5 and PHOX2B
but the associations with variants in ASCL1, L1CAM and PROK1 were not significant
after multiple comparisons adjustment. RET variants were strongly associated with
HSCR (P-values between 10(-3) and 10(-31)) but this differed by race/ethnicity:
associations were absent in African-Americans. Our population-based study not
only identified novel RET variants in HSCR cases, it showed that common RET
variants may not contribute to HSCR in all race/ethnic groups. The findings for
HOXB5 and PHOX2B provide supportive evidence that genes regulating ENCC
proliferation, migration and differentiation could be risk factors for HSCR.

PMCID: PMC3503526
PMID: 22648184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9077-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116933109. Epub 2012 May 17.

Evidence for a functional role of epigenetically regulated midcluster HOXB genes 
in the development of Barrett esophagus.

di Pietro M(1), Lao-Sirieix P, Boyle S, Cassidy A, Castillo D, Saadi A, Eskeland 
R, Fitzgerald RC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison Medical Research Council 
Research Centre, CB2 0XZ Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Barrett esophagus (BE) is a human metaplastic condition that is the only known
precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma. BE is characterized by a posterior
intestinal-like phenotype in an anterior organ and therefore it is reminiscent of
homeotic transformations, which can occur in transgenic animal models during
embryonic development as a consequence of mutations in HOX genes. In humans,
acquired deregulation of HOX genes during adulthood has been linked to
carcinogenesis; however, little is known about their role in the pathogenesis of 
premalignant conditions. We hypothesized that HOX genes may be implicated in the 
development of BE. We demonstrated that three midcluster HOXB genes (HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB7) are overexpressed in BE, compared with the anatomically
adjacent normal esophagus and gastric cardia. The midcluster HOXB gene signature 
in BE is identical to that seen in normal colonic epithelium. Ectopic expression 
of these three genes in normal squamous esophageal cells in vitro induces markers
of intestinal differentiation, such as KRT20, MUC2, and VILLIN. In BE-associated 
adenocarcinoma, the activation midcluster HOXB gene is associated with loss of
H3K27me3 and gain of AcH3, compared with normal esophagus. These changes in
histone posttranslational modifications correlate with specific chromatin
decompaction at the HOXB locus. We suggest that epigenetically regulated
alterations of HOX gene expression can trigger changes in the transcriptional
program of adult esophageal cells, with implications for the early stages of
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3384195
PMID: 22603795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Nat Genet. 2012 May;44(5):526-31. doi: 10.1038/ng.2247.

A genome-wide association meta-analysis identifies new childhood obesity loci.

Bradfield JP(1), Taal HR, Timpson NJ, Scherag A, Lecoeur C, Warrington NM,
Hypponen E, Holst C, Valcarcel B, Thiering E, Salem RM, Schumacher FR, Cousminer 
DL, Sleiman PM, Zhao J, Berkowitz RI, Vimaleswaran KS, Jarick I, Pennell CE,
Evans DM, St Pourcain B, Berry DJ, Mook-Kanamori DO, Hofman A, Rivadeneira F,
Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM, van der Valk RJ, de Jongste JC, Postma DS, Boomsma
DI, Gauderman WJ, Hassanein MT, Lindgren CM, Mägi R, Boreham CA, Neville CE,
Moreno LA, Elliott P, Pouta A, Hartikainen AL, Li M, Raitakari O, Lehtimäki T,
Eriksson JG, Palotie A, Dallongeville J, Das S, Deloukas P, McMahon G, Ring SM,
Kemp JP, Buxton JL, Blakemore AI, Bustamante M, Guxens M, Hirschhorn JN, Gillman 
MW, Kreiner-Møller E, Bisgaard H, Gilliland FD, Heinrich J, Wheeler E, Barroso I,
O'Rahilly S, Meirhaeghe A, Sørensen TI, Power C, Palmer LJ, Hinney A, Widen E,
Farooqi IS, McCarthy MI, Froguel P, Meyre D, Hebebrand J, Jarvelin MR, Jaddoe VW,
Smith GD, Hakonarson H, Grant SF; Early Growth Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Adair LS, Ang W, Atalay M, van Beijsterveldt T, Bergen N, Benke K,
Berry D, Bradfield J, Bustamente M, Charoen P, Coin L, Cousminer D, Das S, Davis 
OS, Elliott P, Evans DM, Feenstra B, Flexeder C, Frayling T, Freathy R, Gaillard 
R, Geller F, Groen-Blokhuis M, Goh LK, Guxens M, Haworth CM, Hadley D, Hedebrand 
J, Hinney A, Hirschhorn JN, Holloway JW, Holst C, Hottenga JJ, Horikoshi M,
Huikari V, Hypponen E, Iñiguez C, Kaakinen M, Kilpeläinen TO, Kirin M, Kowgier M,
Lakka HM, Lange LA, Lawlor DA, Lehtimäki T, Lewin A, Lindgren C, Lindi V, Mägi R,
Marsh J, Middeldorp C, Millwood I, Mook-Kanamori DO, Murray JC, Nivard M, Nohr
EA, Ntalla I, Oken E, O'Reilly P, Palmer L, Panoutsopoulou K, Pararajasingham J, 
Prokopenko I, Rodriguez A, Salem RM, Sebert S, Siitonen N, Sovio U, St Pourcain
B, Strachan DP, Sunyer J, Taal HR, Teo YY, Thiering E, Tiesler C, Uitterlinden
AG, Valcárcel B, Warrington N, White S, Willemsen G, Yaghootkar H, Zeggini E,
Boomsma DI, Cooper C, Estivill X, Gillman M, Grant SF, Hakonarson H, Hattersley
AT, Heinrich J, Hocher B, Jaddoe VW, Jarvelin MR, Lakka TA, McCarthy MI, Melbye
M, Mohlke KL, Dedoussis GV, Ong KK, Pearson ER, Pennell CE, Price TS, Power C,
Raitakari OT, Saw SM, Scherag A, Simell O, Sørensen TI, Sunyer J, Timpson NJ,
Widen E, Wilson JF.

Multiple genetic variants have been associated with adult obesity and a few with 
severe obesity in childhood; however, less progress has been made in establishing
genetic influences on common early-onset obesity. We performed a North American, 
Australian and European collaborative meta-analysis of 14 studies consisting of
5,530 cases (=95th percentile of body mass index (BMI)) and 8,318 controls (<50th
percentile of BMI) of European ancestry. Taking forward the eight newly
discovered signals yielding association with P < 5 × 10(-6) in nine independent
data sets (2,818 cases and 4,083 controls), we observed two loci that yielded
genome-wide significant combined P values near OLFM4 at 13q14 (rs9568856; P =
1.82 × 10(-9); odds ratio (OR) = 1.22) and within HOXB5 at 17q21 (rs9299; P =
3.54 × 10(-9); OR = 1.14). Both loci continued to show association when two
extreme childhood obesity cohorts were included (2,214 cases and 2,674 controls).
These two loci also yielded directionally consistent associations in a previous
meta-analysis of adult BMI(1).

PMCID: PMC3370100
PMID: 22484627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2012 Feb;31(1):11-20. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2011.618867.

The expression of HoxB5 and its role in neonatal rats with chronic lung disease.

Xu W(1), Yang N, Pan L, Fu J, Xue X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

The purpose of this investigation is to research the expression and effect of
HoxB5 during pulmonary injury and to investigate the repairing ability of
alveolar epithelial cells in such processes. Eighty neonatal rats were randomly
divided into two groups: a group of high concentration of oxygen and the control 
group. The high oxygen group would inhale 85 to 90% oxygen and the control group 
would inhale air. The lung tissues on the 1(st), 3(rd), 7(th), 14(th), and 21(st)
days would be obtained, in which immunohistochemical assay and Reverse
Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) would be performed to test the
expressions of proteins and mRNAs of surfactant protein C (SPC) and AQP5. For
expression of HoxB5 protein and its mRNA, immunohistochemical assay, western
blot, in-situ hybridization, and RT-PCR would be run. The expression of SPC in
the group of high concentration of oxygen was significantly reduced on day 3. Its
expressions on day 14 and day 21 were significantly higher than those of the
control group (p < 0.05). The expression of AQP5 in the group of high
concentration of oxygen progressively decreased and such difference with the
control group was significant (p < 0.05). The four experimental methods all
showed the expression of HoxB5 in the group with high concentration of oxygen
gradually decreased since day 7 (p < 0.05). High concentration of oxygen is
damaging to alveolar epithelial cells. Although the number of type II alveolar
epithelial cells (AECII) increases, its ability to differentiate and transform is
significantly reduced and the reduced expression level of HoxB5 is possibly the
reason for AECII to lose differentiation function to AECI.

PMID: 22233504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21250. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021250. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Transformation of human mesenchymal cells and skin fibroblasts into hematopoietic
cells.

Harris DM(1), Hazan-Haley I, Coombes K, Bueso-Ramos C, Liu J, Liu Z, Li P,
Ravoori M, Abruzzo L, Han L, Singh S, Sun M, Kundra V, Kurzrock R, Estrov Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Patients with prolonged myelosuppression require frequent platelet and occasional
granulocyte transfusions. Multi-donor transfusions induce alloimmunization,
thereby increasing morbidity and mortality. Therefore, an autologous or
HLA-matched allogeneic source of platelets and granulocytes is needed. To
determine whether nonhematopoietic cells can be reprogrammed into hematopoietic
cells, human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) and skin fibroblasts were incubated
with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine (Aza) and the growth factors (GF)
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and stem cell factor. This
treatment transformed MSCs to round, non-adherent cells expressing T-, B-,
myeloid-, or stem/progenitor-cell markers. The transformed cells engrafted as
hematopoietic cells in bone marrow of immunodeficient mice. DNA methylation and
mRNA array analysis suggested that Aza and GF treatment demethylated and
activated HOXB genes. Indeed, transfection of MSCs or skin fibroblasts with
HOXB4, HOXB5, and HOXB2 genes transformed them into hematopoietic cells. Further 
studies are needed to determine whether transformed MSCs or skin fibroblasts are 
suitable for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3120836
PMID: 21731684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020815. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

HOXB5 cooperates with NKX2-1 in the transcription of human RET.

Zhu J(1), Garcia-Barcelo MM, Tam PK, Lui VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Development & Growth, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

The enteric nervous system (ENS) regulates peristaltic movement of the gut, and
abnormal ENS causes Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) in newborns. HSCR is a
congenital complex genetic disorder characterised by a lack of enteric ganglia
along a variable length of the intestine. The receptor tyrosine kinase gene (RET)
is the major HSCR gene and its expression is crucial for ENS development. We have
previously reported that (i) HOXB5 transcription factor mediates RET expression, 
and (ii) mouse with defective HOXB5 activity develop HSCR phenotype. In this
study, we (i) elucidate the underlying mechanisms that HOXB5 mediate RET
expression, and (ii) examine the interactions between HOXB5 and other
transcription factors implicated in RET expression. We show that human HOXB5
binds to the promoter region 5' upstream of the binding site of NKX2-1 and
regulates RET expression. HOXB5 and NKX2-1 form a protein complex and mediate RET
expression in a synergistic manner. HSCR associated SNPs at the NKX2-1 binding
site (-5G>A rs10900296; -1A>C rs10900297), which reduce NKX2-1 binding, abolish
the synergistic trans-activation of RET by HOXB5 and NKX2-1. In contrast to the
synergistic activation of RET with NKX2-1, HOXB5 cooperates in an additive manner
with SOX10, PAX3 and PHOX2B in trans-activation of RET promoter. Taken together, 
our data suggests that HOXB5 in coordination with other transcription factors
mediates RET expression. Therefore, defects in cis- or trans-regulation of RET by
HOXB5 could lead to reduction of RET expression and contribute to the
manifestation of the HSCR phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3108997
PMID: 21677782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cancer Genet. 2011 May;204(5):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.02.003.

Expression of HOXB genes is significantly different in acute myeloid leukemia
with a partial tandem duplication of MLL vs. a MLL translocation: a
cross-laboratory study.

Liu HC(1), Shih LY, May Chen MJ, Wang CC, Yeh TC, Lin TH, Chen CY, Lin CJ, Liang 
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene may be
rearranged to generate a partial tandem duplication (PTD), or fused to partner
genes through a chromosomal translocation (tMLL). In this study, we first
explored the differentially expressed genes between MLL-PTD and tMLL using gene
expression profiling of our cohort (15 MLL-PTD and 10 tMLL) and one published
data set. The top 250 probes were chosen from each set, resulting in 29 common
probes (21 unique genes) to both sets. The selected genes include four HOXB
genes, HOXB2, B3, B5, and B6. The expression values of these HOXB genes
significantly differ between MLL-PTD and tMLL cases. Clustering and
classification analyses were thoroughly conducted to support our gene selection
results. Second, as MLL-PTD, FLT3-ITD, and NPM1 mutations are identified in AML
with normal karyotypes, we briefly studied their impact on the HOXB genes.
Another contribution of this study is to demonstrate that using public data from 
other studies enriches samples for analysis and yields more conclusive results.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21665178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Appl Oral Sci. 2011 Apr;19(2):125-9.

HOXB5 expression in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Tucci R(1), Campos MS, Matizonkas-Antonio LF, Durazzo M, Pinto Junior Ddos S,
Nunes FD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Research, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. renata-tucci@uol.com.br

Human HOX genes encode transcription factors that act as master regulators of
embryonic development. They are important in several processes such as cellular
morphogenesis and differentiation. The HOXB5 gene in particular has been reported
in some types of neoplasm, but not in oral cancer.OBJECTIVE: The present study
investigated the expression of HOXB5 in oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and in
non-tumoral adjacent tissues, focusing on verifying its possible role as a broad 
tumor-associated gene and its association with histopathological and clinical
(TNM) characteristics.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: RT-PCR was performed to amplify HOXB5 mRNA in 15 OSCCs and 
adjacent non-tumoral epithelium. A possible association with TNM and
histopathologic data was verified by the chi-square and post-hoc t-test.
RESULTS: HOXB5 was amplified in 60% non-tumoral epithelium and in 93.3%
carcinomas. No statistically significant differences were found regarding the
HOXB5 mRNA expression and TNM or histological grade.
CONCLUSION: HOXB5 is expressed in OSCCs and its role in cancer progression should
be further investigated.

PMCID: PMC4243750
PMID: 21552713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2011;29(4):315-20. doi: 10.1159/000322738. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Overexpression of HOXB5, cyclin D1 and PCNA in congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation.

Wang X(1), Wolgemuth DJ, Baxi LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the patterns of expression of HOXB5, cyclin D1 and
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) proteins in human congenital cystic
adenomatoid malformation (CCAM) to establish the molecular basis of its etiology.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on frozen archival specimens of CCAM 
and normal lung tissue as controls using antibodies against HOXB5, cyclin D1 and 
PCNA proteins.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed a higher level of expression of HOXB5,
cyclin D1 and PCNA predominantly in mesenchymal cells of the CCAM tissues as
compared to normal adjacent control lung tissues.
CONCLUSION: Elevated levels of immunohistochemical detection of HOXB5, cyclin D1 
and PCNA were characteristic properties of lung tissue cells in CCAM. This
elevated HOXB5 expression may correlate with the aberrant cellular
differentiation observed in the CCAM disorder. Elevated expression of cyclin D1
and PCNA further suggests that increased cellular proliferation contributes to
the overgrowth of lung tissue in CCAM.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21228548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 9;5(6):e11033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011033.

Switch from stress response to homeobox transcription factors in adipose tissue
after profound fat loss.

Dankel SN(1), Fadnes DJ, Stavrum AK, Stansberg C, Holdhus R, Hoang T, Veum VL,
Christensen BJ, Våge V, Sagen JV, Steen VM, Mellgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: In obesity, impaired adipose tissue function may promote secondary
disease through ectopic lipid accumulation and excess release of adipokines,
resulting in systemic low-grade inflammation, insulin resistance and organ
dysfunction. However, several of the genes regulating adipose tissue function in 
obesity are yet to be identified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to identify novel candidate genes that
may regulate adipose tissue function, we analyzed global gene expression in
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue before and one year after bariatric surgery
(biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch, BPD/DS) (n = 16). Adipose tissue
from lean healthy individuals was also analyzed (n = 13). Two different
microarray platforms (AB 1700 and Illumina) were used to measure the differential
gene expression, and the results were further validated by qPCR. Surgery reduced 
BMI from 53.3 to 33.1 kg/m(2). The majority of differentially expressed genes
were down-regulated after profound fat loss, including transcription factors
involved in stress response, inflammation, and immune cell function (e.g., FOS,
JUN, ETS, C/EBPB, C/EBPD). Interestingly, a distinct set of genes was
up-regulated after fat loss, including homeobox transcription factors (IRX3,
IRX5, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB5, HOXC6, EMX2, PRRX1) and extracellular matrix
structural proteins (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, COL6A3).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The data demonstrate a marked switch of transcription
factors in adipose tissue after profound fat loss, providing new molecular
insight into a dichotomy between stress response and metabolically favorable
tissue development. Our findings implicate homeobox transcription factors as
important regulators of adipose tissue function.

PMCID: PMC2882947
PMID: 20543949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMC Cancer. 2010 Mar 10;10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-89.

Targeting HOX and PBX transcription factors in ovarian cancer.

Morgan R(1), Plowright L, Harrington KJ, Michael A, Pandha HS.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Medical School, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.
r.morgan@surrey.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer still has a relatively poor prognosis due to the
frequent occurrence of drug resistance, making the identification of new
therapeutic targets an important goal. We have studied the role of HOX genes in
the survival and proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. These are a family of
homeodomain-containing transcription factors that determine cell and tissue
identity in the early embryo, and have an anti-apoptotic role in a number of
malignancies including lung and renal cancer.
METHODS: We used QPCR to determine HOX gene expression in normal ovary and in the
ovarian cancer cell lines SK-OV3 and OV-90. We used a short peptide, HXR9, to
disrupt the formation of HOX/PBX dimers and alter transcriptional regulation by
HOX proteins.
RESULTS: In this study we show that the ovarian cancer derived line SK-OV3, but
not OV-90, exhibits highly dysregulated expression of members of the HOX gene
family. Disrupting the interaction between HOX proteins and their co-factor PBX
induces apoptosis in SK-OV3 cells and retards tumour growth in vivo.
CONCLUSION: HOX/PBX binding is a potential target in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2846885
PMID: 20219106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):L143-52. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.90618.2008. Epub 2009 May 1.

Aberrant cell adhesion molecule expression in human bronchopulmonary
sequestration and congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation.

Volpe MV(1), Chung E, Ulm JP, Gilchrist BF, Ralston S, Wang KT, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Newborn Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, 
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.
mvolpe1@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

In many organs, integrins and cadherins are partly regulated by Hox genes, but
their interactions in airway morphogenesis and congenital lung diseases are
unknown. We previously showed that the Hox protein HoxB5 is abnormally increased 
in bronchopulmonary sequestration (BPS) and congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation (CCAM), congenital lung lesions with abnormal airway branching. We
now report on alpha(2)-, alpha(3)-, and beta(1)-integrin and E-cadherin
expression in normal human lung and in BPS and CCAM tissue previously shown to
have abnormal HoxB5 expression and on the relationship of cell adhesion molecule 
expression to Hoxb5 regulation. alpha(2)-, alpha(3)-, and beta(1)-integrins and
E-cadherin expression in normal human lung and BPS and CCAM were evaluated using 
Western blot and immunohistochemistry. Fetal mouse lung fibroblasts with
Hoxb5-specific siRNA downregulation were evaluated for alpha(2)-integrin protein 
levels by Western blot. Compared with normal human lung, a previously undetected 
alpha(2)-integrin isoform potentially lacking essential cytoplasmic sequences was
significantly increased in BPS and CCAM, and alpha(2)-integrin spatial and
cellular expression was more intense. E-cadherin protein levels were also
significantly increased, whereas alpha(3) increased in CCAM compared with
canalicular, but not with alveolar, stage lung. beta(1)-integrin levels were
unchanged. We conclude that in BPS and CCAM, altered alpha(2)-integrin
cytoplasmic signaling contributes to abnormal cellular behavior in these lung
lesions. Aberrant cell adhesion molecule and Hox protein regulation are likely
part of the mechanism involved in the development of BPS and CCAM.

PMCID: PMC2711815
PMID: 19411307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Aug 1;83(3):558-65. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvp133. Epub 2009 Apr
29.

HoxB5 induces endothelial sprouting in vitro and modifies intussusceptive
angiogenesis in vivo involving angiopoietin-2.

Winnik S(1), Klinkert M, Kurz H, Zoeller C, Heinke J, Wu Y, Bode C, Patterson C, 
Moser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55,
Freiburg 79106, Germany.

AIMS: Homeobox (Hox) proteins are transcriptional regulators in embryonic
patterning, cell differentiation, proliferation, and migration in vertebrates and
invertebrates. A growing body of evidence suggests that Hox proteins are involved
in endothelial cell regulation. We have shown earlier that HoxB5 upregulates
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 and thereby contributes to enhanced
endothelial precursor cell differentiation. Here we aim to elucidate the role of 
HoxB5 in angiogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Endothelial cell sprouting was investigated in the human
umbilical vein endothelial cell spheroid assay. We investigated in vivo
angiogenesis in the chick (Gallus gallus) chorioallantoic membrane assay.
Expression profiling of proangiogenic factors was done by quantitative PCR. The
angiopoietin-2 (Ang2) promoter and deletion fragments thereof were cloned into
the pGL3 reporter system for analysis of transcriptional activity. We observed
that HoxB5 enhances endothelial cell sprouting and modulates the expression of
adhesion molecules in vitro. Accordingly, we observed a modification of vascular 
growth by HoxB5 in vivo. The HoxB5 effect is reminiscent of the effects of
angiopoietins. We demonstrate that Ang2 is upregulated upon HoxB5 overexpression 
and that the HoxB5 effect is abolished by the angiopoietin antagonist soluble
Tie-2.
CONCLUSION: HoxB5 has an activating effect on Ang2 that is essential for
endothelial cell sprouting and coordinated vascular growth.

PMID: 19403561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Jan;11(1):51-5.

[Expression of HoxB5, SPC and AQP5 in neonatal rats with hyperoxia-induced
chronic lung disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu W(1), Fu JH, Xue XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Affiliated Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, China.

OBJECTIVE: Alveolar epithelium impairment is one of pathological changes
associated with chronic lung disease (CLD). Hoxb5 is one of the few homeobox
genes strongly expressed in the developing lung. This study investigated the
expression of HoxB5, SPC and AQP5 in rats with CLD in order to explore the role
of Hoxb-5 in impairment and reparation of alveolar epithelium.
METHODS: Eighty neonatal rats were randomly exposed to hyperoxia (model group) or
to room air (control group) (n=40 each). The CLD model was induced by hyperoxia
exposure. The expression of HoxB5, SPC and AQP5 protein and mRNA in the lung
tissue was detected by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR 1, 3, 7, 14 and 21 days
after exposure.
RESULTS: In the model group HoxB5 expression significantly decreased 7, 14 and 21
days after hyperoxia exposure. SPC expression decreased 3 days after hyperoxia
exposure but increased significantly 7, 14 and 21 days after hyperoxia exposure
as compared to the control group. AQP5 expression was progressively reduced with 
prolonged hyperoxia exposure.
CONCLUSIONS: Hyperoxia exposure may lead to alveolar epithelial cell (AEC) damage
in neonatal rats. The increased SPC expression and decreased AQP5 expression
suggested that the ability of differentiation and transformation of AECII into
AECI decreased in neonatal rats with CLD. The decreased HoxB5 expression
following hyperoxia exposure might contribute to a decreased ability of
differentiation of AECII.

PMID: 19149924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Jul;46(7):540-3.

[Expression of HoxB5 mRNA and their effect on lung development in premature rats 
with hyperoxia-induced chronic lung disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Fu JH(1), Xue XD, Pan L, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second Affiliated Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, China.

OBJECTIVE: Resolution of alveolar damage after lung injury requires finely
orchestrated processes that include coordinated and effective tissue
reconstruction to reestablish a functional barrier. Reconstitution of denuded
type I alveolar epithelial cell that undergo apoptotic and necrotic death after
lung injury is required in many pulmonary diseases. Disruption of distal airway
development and type II-type I alveolar epithelial cell differentiation after
lung injury and disordered repair of the alveolus after injury is one of the
predominant pathological characteristics of chronic lung disease (CLD) of
premature infants. HoxB5 belongs to the Hox gene family encoding transcription
factors known for their role in skeletal patterning and the elaboration of
organs. HoxB5 is required for embryonic respiratory tract morphogenesis. The
present study aimed to test the hypothesis that HoxB5 may participate in the
etiology of CLD and to understand possible mechanism.
METHODS: Premature rat pups were taken out surgically at gestational age 21 d.
CLD was induced by hyperoxia exposure in neonatal premature rats. Eighty
premature rats were randomly exposed to hyperoxia (FiO2 = 0.90, CLD group) and to
room air (FiO2 = 0.21, control group) (n = 40 each). Lung specimens were obtained
respectively on days 1, 3, 7, 14 and 21 after exposure. Histopathologic changes
was assayed after hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining and pulmonary development
was evaluated by lung coefficient and radical alveolar counts (RAC), dynamic
changes of RAC were observed; and the expression of HoxB5, AQP-5, and SP-B mRNA
were assayed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the RAC and the expression
level of HoxB5, AQP-5, and SP-B mRNA between the CLD and the control groups
within 3 days after birth (P > 0.05). However, compared to the control group, the
RAC of the CLD group was reduced (6.35 +/- 0.83 vs. 7.67 +/- 0.52), and the
expression of HoxB5 (0.98 +/- 0.14 vs. 1.20 +/- 0.16), AQP-5 (0.78 +/- 0.11 vs.
1.04 +/- 0.19) mRNA were significantly lower (P < 0.05), while the expression of 
SP-B mRNA was increased on the 7th day (P < 0.05). On the 14th day, the RAC and
the expression of HoxB5, AQP-5 mRNA of CLD group were significantly lower than
those of the control group (P < 0.05), and the expression of SP-B mRNA continued 
to increase (P < 0.05). On the 21st day, the expression of HoxB5, AQP-5 mRNA
decreased to the nadir (0.64 +/- 0.11 vs. 1.18 +/- 0.13 and 0.67 +/- 0.12 vs.
0.97 +/- 0.01, respectively) (P < 0.01), on the same day the expression of SP-B
mRNA reached to the pinnacle (1.43 +/- 0.07 vs. 1.12 +/- 0.09) (P < 0.01). The
expression of HoxB5 mRNA was positively correlated with RAC in the CLD group (r =
0.685, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: With hyperoxia exposure, the mRNA expression of specific marker of
type I alveolar epithelial cell, AQP-5, was decreased while specific marker of
type II alveolar epithelial cell, SP-B, was increased; and the expression of
HoxB5 mRNA in lung tissues kept on decreasing. Decreased expression of HoxB5 may 
associate with the disruption of type II-I alveolar epithelial cell
differentiation and thus may play an important role in inhibition of lung
development with CLD. The altered Hox gene expression may predispose lung
pathology.

PMID: 19099817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2008 Nov;135(21):3543-53. doi: 10.1242/dev.025817. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Functional resolution of duplicated hoxb5 genes in teleosts.

Jarinova O(1), Hatch G, Poitras L, Prudhomme C, Grzyb M, Aubin J, Bérubé-Simard
FA, Jeannotte L, Ekker M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada.

The duplication-degeneration-complementation (DDC) model predicts that
subfunctionalization of duplicated genes is a common mechanism for their
preservation. The additional Hox complexes of teleost fish constitute a good
system in which to test this hypothesis. Zebrafish have two hoxb complexes, with 
two hoxb5 genes, hoxb5a and hoxb5b, the expression patterns of which suggest
subfunctionalization of an ancestral hoxb5 gene. We characterized conserved
non-coding elements (CNEs) near the zebrafish hoxb5 genes. One CNE, J3, is only
retained in the hoxb5a locus, whereas the others, J1 and J2, are present in both 
hoxb5 loci. When tested individually, the enhancer activity of individual CNEs,
including J3, extensively overlapped and did not support a role in
subfunctionalization. By contrast, reporter transgene constructs encompassing
multiple CNEs were able to target reporter gene expression to unique domains of
hoxb5a and hoxb5b expression. The deletion of J3 from the hoxb5a locus resulted
in expression that approached that of hoxb5b, whereas its insertion in the hoxb5b
locus increased reporter expression and rendered it more similar to that of
hoxb5a. Our results highlight the importance of interactions between CNEs in the 
execution of complementary subfunctions of duplicated genes.

PMID: 18832391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Nucl Med. 2008 Oct;49(10):1686-93. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.108.052894. Epub 2008
Sep 15.

In vivo imaging of functional targeting of miR-221 in papillary thyroid
carcinoma.

Kim HJ(1), Kim YH, Lee DS, Chung JK, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, noncoding RNA molecules that control expression of 
target genes. The abnormally expressed miRNAs function as oncogenes or tumor
suppressors in human cancer. To evaluate the abundant gene regulation of miR-221 
in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), we performed microarray analysis and
developed a Gaussia luciferase (Gluc) reporter system regulated by
miR-221.METHODS: Total RNAs were isolated from pre-miR-221-treated normal human
thyroid cells (HT-ori3) and anti-miR-221-treated papillary thyroid cells (NPA).
Microarray analysis was performed with 44,000 probes. The messenger RNA levels of
target genes regulated by miR-221 were evaluated using reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction. Three types of cytomegalovirus (CMV)/Gluc_3'
untranslated region (UTR) of homeobox B5 (HOXB5), which included a seed sequence 
of mature miR-221 in the 3' UTR of HOXB5 after the Gluc stop codon, were
transfected into NPA cells, and pre-miR-221 was cotransfected with CMV/Gluc_3'
UTR of HOXB5. The Gluc activities in cells were measured by luciferase assay.
Mice implanted with PTC-expressing Gluc regulated by miR-221 were monitored with 
bioluminescence imaging for 6 d.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis showed thousands of genes were directly and
indirectly regulated by miR-221 and shifted the gene expression pattern of normal
thyroid cells toward PTC. Of several genes downregulated more than 2-fold by
miR-221, messenger RNA levels of HOXB5 were significantly downregulated by
miR-221. Also, in vitro or in vivo Gluc activities using CMV/Gluc_3' UTR of HOXB5
systems were downregulated dose dependently by endogenous or exogenous miR-221.
CONCLUSION: MiR-221 overexpressed in PTC drives carcinoma gene expression
patterns by directly and indirectly regulating numerous genes, including HOXB5.
The bioluminescence imaging system using CMV/Gluc_3' UTR of HOXB5 is a useful
tool for noninvasive in vivo long-term monitoring of functional targeting of
miR-221.

PMID: 18794255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Sep 3;100(17):1247-59. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn253. Epub
2008 Aug 26.

Identification of chromatin remodeling genes Arid4a and Arid4b as leukemia
suppressor genes.

Wu MY(1), Eldin KW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia evolves through a multistep process from premalignancy to
malignancy. Epigenetic alterations, including histone modifications, have been
proposed to play an important role in tumorigenesis. The involvement of two
chromatin remodeling genes, retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (Rbbp1/Arid4a) and
Rbbp1-like 1 (Rbbp1l1/Arid4b), in leukemogenesis was not characterized.
METHODS: The leukemic phenotype of mice deficient for Arid4a with or without
haploinsufficiency for Arid4b was investigated by serially monitoring complete
blood counts together with microscopic histologic analysis and flow cytometric
analysis of bone marrow and spleen from the Arid4a(-/-) mice or
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice. Regulation in bone marrow cells of downstream genes 
important for normal hematopoiesis was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Genotypic effects on histone
modifications were examined by western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis. 
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Young (2-5 months old) Arid4a-deficient mice had ineffective blood cell 
production in all hematopoietic lineages. Beyond 5 months of age, the Arid4a(-/-)
mice manifested monocytosis, accompanied by severe anemia and thrombocytopenia.
These sick Arid4a(-/-) mice showed bone marrow failure with myelofibrosis
associated with splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Five of 42 Arid4a(-/-) mice and 10
of 12 Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice progressed to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 
had rapid further increases of leukocyte counts. Expression of Hox genes (Hoxb3, 
Hoxb5, Hoxb6, and Hoxb8) was decreased in Arid4a-deficient bone marrow cells with
or without Arid4b haploinsufficiency, and FoxP3 expression was reduced in
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) bone marrow. Increases of histone trimethylation of H3K4, 
H3K9, and H4K20 (fold increases in trimethylation = 32, 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 27 to 32; 45, 95% CI = 41 to 49; and 2.2, 95% CI = 1.7 to 2.7,
respectively) were observed in the bone marrow of Arid4a-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Arid4a-deficient mice initially display ineffective hematopoiesis,
followed by transition to chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)-like
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, and then transformation to AML. The 
disease processes in the Arid4a-deficient mice are very similar to the course of 
events in humans with CMML and AML. This mouse model has the potential to furnish
additional insights into the role of epigenetic alterations in leukemogenesis,
and it may be useful in developing novel pharmacological approaches to treatment 
of preleukemic and leukemic states.

PMCID: PMC2528019
PMID: 18728284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Genome Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):1433-45. doi: 10.1101/gr.078378.108. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Long noncoding RNAs in mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency and
differentiation.

Dinger ME(1), Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce SJ, Gardiner BB,
Askarian-Amiri ME, Ru K, Soldà G, Simons C, Sunkin SM, Crowe ML, Grimmond SM,
Perkins AC, Mattick JS.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Special Research Centre for Functional and Applied Genomics, Institute for
Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072, Australia.

The transcriptional networks that regulate embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency 
and lineage specification are the subject of considerable attention. To date such
studies have focused almost exclusively on protein-coding transcripts. However,
recent transcriptome analyses show that the mammalian genome contains thousands
of long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), many of which appear to be expressed in a
developmentally regulated manner. The functions of these remain untested. To
identify ncRNAs involved in ES cell biology, we used a custom-designed microarray
to examine the expression profiles of mouse ES cells differentiating as embryoid 
bodies (EBs) over a 16-d time course. We identified 945 ncRNAs expressed during
EB differentiation, of which 174 were differentially expressed, many correlating 
with pluripotency or specific differentiation events. Candidate ncRNAs were
identified for further characterization by an integrated examination of
expression profiles, genomic context, chromatin state, and promoter analysis.
Many ncRNAs showed coordinated expression with genomically associated
developmental genes, such as Dlx1, Dlx4, Gata6, and Ecsit. We examined two novel 
developmentally regulated ncRNAs, Evx1as and Hoxb5/6as, which are derived from
homeotic loci and share similar expression patterns and localization in mouse
embryos with their associated protein-coding genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we provide evidence that both ncRNAs are associated with
trimethylated H3K4 histones and histone methyltransferase MLL1, suggesting a role
in epigenetic regulation of homeotic loci during ES cell differentiation. Taken
together, our data indicate that long ncRNAs are likely to be important in
processes directing pluripotency and alternative differentiation programs, in
some cases through engagement of the epigenetic machinery.

PMCID: PMC2527704
PMID: 18562676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Gastroenterology. 2008 Apr;134(4):1104-15. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.028.
Epub 2008 Jan 17.

Perturbation of hoxb5 signaling in vagal neural crests down-regulates ret leading
to intestinal hypoganglionosis in mice.

Lui VC(1), Cheng WW, Leon TY, Lau DK, Garcia-Barcelo MM, Miao XP, Kam MK, So MT, 
Chen Y, Wall NA, Sham MH, Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China. vchlui@hkucc.hku.hk

Erratum in
    Gastroenterology. 2008 Aug;135(2):713. Garcia-Bareclo, Maria-Mercedes [corrected 
to Garcia-Barcelo, Maria-Mercedes].

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The enteric nervous system (ENS) controls intestinal
peristalsis, and defective development of this system results in
hypo/aganglionosis, as seen in Hirschsprung's disease. In the embryo, vagal
neural crest cells (NCC) migrate and colonize the intestine rostrocaudally then
differentiate into the ganglia of the ENS. Vagal NCC express the homeobox gene
Hoxb5, a transcriptional activator, in human and mouse, so we used transgenic
mice to investigate the function of Hoxb5 and the receptor tyrosine kinase gene
Ret, which is affected in many patients with Hirschsprung's disease, in ENS
development.
METHODS: We perturbed the Hoxb5 pathway by expressing a chimeric protein enb5, in
which the transcription activation domain of Hoxb5 was replaced with the
repressor domain of the Drosophila engrailed protein (en), in vagal NCC. This
enb5 transcriptional repressor competes with wild-type Hoxb5 for binding to
target genes, exerting a dominant negative effect.
RESULTS: We observed that 30.6% +/- 2.3% of NCC expressed enb5 and that these
enb5-expressing NCC failed to migrate to the distal intestine. A 34%-37%
reduction of ganglia (hypoganglionosis) and slow peristalsis and, occasionally,
absence of ganglia and intestinal obstruction were observed in enb5-expressing
mice. Ret expression was markedly reduced or absent in NCC and ganglia, and enb5 
blocked Hoxb5 induction of Ret in neuroblastoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that Ret is a downstream target of Hoxb5 whose
perturbation causes Ret haploinsufficiency, impaired NCC migration, and
hypo/aganglionosis, suggesting that Hoxb5 may contribute to the etiology of
Hirschsprung's disease.

PMID: 18395091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cir Pediatr. 2007 Oct;20(4):223-8.

[The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: the Hox 
genes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez L(1), Martínez-Calonge W, Matesanz R, Fernández-Dumont V, Pederiva F,
Vallejo MT, Salinas J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid.
lmartinezm.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Prenatal administration of adriamycin or nitrofen to pregnant mice
produce in the embryos, respectively, esophageal atresia/VACTERL association (EA)
or congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Various genes and signalling pathways
like sonic hedgehog, Gli family, retinoic acid and homeotic genes have been
pointed out in the origin of these malformations. Hox genes are master regulatory
genes involved in embryo segmentation and other main development processes.
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 knock-out mice show cardiac, tracheal, lung 
and diaphragmatic malformations, EA and phenotypes that resemble that of VACTERL 
syndrome. We present herein some of our findings in the expression of these genes
in both experimental models.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin 
or vehicle on embryonic days 7,5 and 8,5; embryos were recovered at four
endpoints (E13 to 16). On the other hand, nitrofen was given to pregnant mice on 
embryonic day 8th and embryos were recovered at E14, E16 and E19. The embryos or,
separately, their lungs and hearts, were randomly processed for
immunohistochemical or molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). We used antibodies for
Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins and specific primers for Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxb3,
Hoxb5, Hoxc4 and Hoxd3 genes.
RESULTS: EA: Upon immunohistochemistry, adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a
severe decrease in expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxb3 proteins in heart, skin, 
foregut but not in the heart. RT-PCR studies showed a statistically significant
decrease of the four genes studied in the lungs of OA mice when compared to
controls. CDH: Upon RT-PCR assessment the expression of Hoxa5 and Hoxb3 were
higher in nitrofen-exposed mice than in controls on E14 and E19 and weaker on
E16. As regards immunohistochemical localization, expression of the three genes
was similar in nitrofen and control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Both experimental models exhibit an alteration in the expression of 
several proximal Hox genes, specially in lung and car- diac tissues. The
malformations in these organs associated with CDH and EA could be in part caused 
by these alterations. Due to their specific participation in lung and foregut
morphogenesis, their study could let us to better understand the mechanisms of
CDH and EA.

PMID: 18351244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Epigenetics. 2008 Jan-Feb;3(1):43-50. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Real-time PCR analysis of candidate imprinted genes on mouse chromosome 11 shows 
balanced expression from the maternal and paternal chromosomes and
strain-specific variation in expression levels.

Tuskan RG(1), Tsang S, Sun Z, Baer J, Rozenblum E, Wu X, Munroe DJ, Reilly KM.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, National Cancer Institute at Frederick,
Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Imprinted genes are monoallelically expressed from either the maternal or
paternal genome. Because cancer develops through genetic and epigenetic
alterations, imprinted genes affect tumorigenesis depending on which parental
allele undergoes alteration. We have shown previously in a mouse model of
neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) that inheriting mutant alleles of Nf1 and Trp53 on
chromosome 11 from the mother or father dramatically changes the tumor spectrum
of mutant progeny, likely due to alteration in an imprinted gene(s) linked to Nf1
and Trp53. In order to identify imprinted genes on chromosome 11 that are
responsible for differences in susceptibility, we tested candidate imprinted
genes predicted by a bioinformatics approach and an experimental approach. We
have tested 30 candidate genes (Havcr2, Camk2b, Ccdc85a, Cntnap1, Ikzf1,
5730522E02Rik, Gria1, Zfp39, Sgcd, Jup, Nxph3, Spnb2, Asb3, Rasd1, Map2k3,
Map2k4, Trp53, Serpinf1, Crk, Rasl10b, Itga3, Hoxb5, Cbx1, Pparbp, Igfbp4,
Smarce1, Stat3, Atp6v0a1, Nbr1 and Meox1), two known imprinted genes (Grb10 and
Impact) and Nf1, which has not been previously identified as an imprinted gene.
Although we confirmed the imprinting of Grb10 and Impact, we found no other genes
imprinted in the brain. We did, however, find strain-biased expression of Camk2b,
5730522E02Rik, Havcr2, Map2k3, Serpinf1, Rasl10b, Itga3, Asb3, Trp53, Nf1,
Smarce1, Stat3, Cbx1, Pparbp and Cntnap1. These results suggest that the
prediction of imprinted genes is complicated and must be individually validated. 
This manuscript includes supplementary data listing primer sequences for Taqman
assays and Ct values for Taqman PCR.

PMCID: PMC2507877
PMID: 18188004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Jan 10;430(2):157-62. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Morphologic analysis of the neuromuscular development of the anorectal unit in
fetal rats with retinoic acid induced myelomeningocele.

Danzer E(1), Radu A, Robinson LE, Volpe MV, Adzick NS, Flake AW.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Center for Fetal Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Abramson Research Center, Room
1116B, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

To investigate whether myelomeningocele (MMC) is associated with a global
neuromuscular maldevelopment of the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract and
anorectum, the distribution and staining intensity of non-neuronal
(alpha-smooth-muscle-actin), neural crest cell (NCC, [Hoxb5]), and neuronal
markers (PGP-9.5, synaptophysin, neurotubulin-beta-III) within the distal colon, 
rectum, and anal sphincters were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and Western
blot in rat fetuses with retinoic acid (RA) induced MMC. At term (E22), no
gross-morphological differences of the anorectal unit of OIL (n=21) MMC (n=31),
and RA-exposed-non MMC (RA, n=19) fetuses were found. Smooth muscle cells were
evenly distributed within the muscle layers of the rectum and the internal anal
sphincter in OIL, MMC, and RA fetuses. Density and staining intensity of NCC and 
mature enteric neurons within the myenteric plexus of the distal colon and rectum
and innervation pattern within anal sphincters in MMC fetuses were analogous to
RA and OIL controls. Normal smooth muscle and myenteric plexus development of the
rectum and normal innervation of the anal sphincters and pelvic floor suggests
that MMC is not associated with a global neuromuscular maldevelopment of lower GI
structures in this short-gestational model.

PMID: 18063303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2007 Sep;197(3):269.e1-4.

Effects of acute alcohol intoxication in the second trimester of pregnancy on
development of the murine fetal lung.

Wang X(1), Gomutputra P, Wolgemuth DJ, Baxi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. lvb1@columbia.edu <lvb1@columbia.edu>

OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that administration of alcohol during the second
trimester of gestation at the pseudoglandular phase of lung development might
lead to aberrant differentiation and growth, similar to that seen in congenital
cystic adenomatoid malformation in human. We further hypothesized that these
effects would be apparent morphologically and by altered Hoxb5 expression.
STUDY DESIGN: C57BL/6J mice, exposed to ethanol at embryonic day (E) 11.5 to
E13.5, which corresponds to the pseudoglandular stage of lung development, were
examined at E18.5. The lungs were analyzed histologically by immunostaining.
RESULTS: The average body and lung weight of alcohol-exposed (AE) fetuses were
lower than those of control fetuses, the reduction in lung mass being more than
the body weight. Histology showed that AE lungs were less developed and exhibited
higher expression of Hoxb5 in AE lungs than controls.
CONCLUSION: Alcohol exposure at E13.5 affected fetal lung development, with
delayed differentiation and increased Hoxb5.

PMID: 17826415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cancer. 2007 Jul 10;6:45.

DNA methylation profiling of ovarian carcinomas and their in vitro models
identifies HOXA9, HOXB5, SCGB3A1, and CRABP1 as novel targets.

Wu Q(1), Lothe RA, Ahlquist T, Silins I, Tropé CG, Micci F, Nesland JM, Suo Z,
Lind GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Oslo,
Norway. qinghuaw@labmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND: The epigenetics of ovarian carcinogenesis remains poorly described.
We have in the present study investigated the promoter methylation status of 13
genes in primary ovarian carcinomas (n = 52) and their in vitro models (n = 4;
ES-2, OV-90, OVCAR-3, and SKOV-3) by methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (MSP). Direct bisulphite sequencing analysis was used to confirm the
methylation status of individual genes. The MSP results were compared with
clinico- pathological features.
RESULTS: Eight out of the 13 genes were hypermethylated among the ovarian
carcinomas, and altogether 40 of 52 tumours were methylated in one or more genes.
Promoter hypermethylation of HOXA9, RASSF1A, APC, CDH13, HOXB5, SCGB3A1 (HIN-1), 
CRABP1, and MLH1 was found in 51% (26/51), 49% (23/47), 24% (12/51), 20% (10/51),
12% (6/52), 10% (5/52), 4% (2/48), and 2% (1/51) of the carcinomas, respectively,
whereas ADAMTS1, MGMT, NR3C1, p14ARF, and p16INK4a were unmethylated in all
samples. The methylation frequencies of HOXA9 and SCGB3A1 were higher among
relatively early-stage carcinomas (FIGO I-II) than among carcinomas of later
stages (FIGO III-IV; P = 0.002, P = 0.020, respectively). The majority of the
early-stage carcinomas were of the endometrioid histotype. Additionally, HOXA9
hypermethylation was more common in tumours from patients older than 60 years of 
age (15/21) than among those of younger age (11/30; P = 0.023). Finally, there
was a significant difference in HOXA9 methylation frequency among the
histological types (P = 0.007).
CONCLUSION: DNA hypermethylation of tumour suppressor genes seems to play an
important role in ovarian carcinogenesis and HOXA9, HOXB5, SCGB3A1, and CRABP1
are identified as novel hypermethylated target genes in this tumour type.

PMCID: PMC1964763
PMID: 17623056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Front Biosci. 2007 Jan 1;12:860-73.

Hoxb-5 down regulation alters Tenascin-C, FGF10 and Hoxb gene expression patterns
in pseudoglandular period fetal mouse lung.

Volpe MV(1), Ramadurai SM, Pham LD, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Newborn Medicine, Tufts-New England
Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
mvolpe1@tufts-nemc.org

Organ-specific patterning is partly determined by Hox gene regulatory
interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM), cell adhesion and fibroblast
growth factor (FGFs) signaling pathways but coordination of these mechanisms in
lung development is unknown. We have previously shown that Hoxb-5 affects airway 
patterning during lung morphogenesis. Hoxb-5 regulation in fetal lung affects ECM
expression of tenascin-C and alters FGF10 spatial and cellular expression. To
test this hypothesis, gestational day 13.5 (Gd13.5) fetal mouse lung fibroblasts 
and whole lungs were cultured with Hoxb-5-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA).
Western blots showed that siRNA-down regulation of Hoxb-5 led to decreased
tenascin-C and FGF10 and was associated with increased Hoxb-4 and decreased
Hoxb-6 protein levels. Hoxa-5 protein levels were not affected. Hoxb-5
siRNA-treated whole lung cultures had a significant decrease in total lung and
peripheral branching region surface area. Immunostaining showed negligible levels
of Hoxb-5 protein and tenascin-C, and loss of FGF10 spatial restriction. We
conclude that Hoxb-5 helps regulate lung airway development through modulation of
ECM expression of tenascin-C. ECM changes induced by Hoxb-5 may affect
mesenchymal-epithelial cell signaling to alter spatial and cellular restriction
of FGF10. Hoxb-5 may also affect lung airway branching indirectly by cross
regulation of other Hoxb genes.

PMID: 17127343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1472-8. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

The histone methyltransferase MLL is an upstream regulator of endothelial-cell
sprout formation.

Diehl F(1), Rössig L, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S, Urbich C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Germany.

Posttranslational histone modification by acetylation or methylation regulates
gene expression. Here, we investigated the role of the histone lysine
methyltransferase MLL for angiogenic functions in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Suppression of MLL expression by siRNA or incubation with the 
pharmacologic methyltransferase inhibitor 5'-deoxy-5'-(methylthio)adenosine
significantly decreased endothelial-cell migration and capillary sprout
formation, indicating that methyltransferase activity is required for
proangiogenic endothelial-cell functions. Because the expression of homeodomain
transcription factors (Hox) is regulated by MLL, we elucidated the role of Hox
gene expression. MLL silencing was associated with reduced mRNA and protein
expression of HoxA9 and HoxD3, whereas HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxB5, and HoxB9 were not
altered. Overexpression of HoxA9 or HoxD3 partially compensated for impaired
migration in MLL siRNA-transfected endothelial cells, suggesting that HoxA9 and
HoxD3 both contribute to MLL-dependent migration. As a potential underlying
mechanism, MLL siRNA down-regulated mRNA and protein levels of the
HoxA9-dependent axon guidance factor EphB4. In contrast, MLL knockdown effects on
capillary sprouting were not rescued by HoxA9 or HoxD3 overexpression, indicating
that MLL affects additional targets required for 3-dimensional sprout formation. 
We conclude that MLL regulates endothelial-cell migration via HoxA9 and EphB4,
whereas sprout formation requires MLL-dependent signals beyond HoxA9 and HoxD3.

PMID: 17047146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Pathol. 2006 Dec;210(4):441-9.

Novel epigenetically deregulated genes in testicular cancer include homeobox
genes and SCGB3A1 (HIN-1).

Lind GE(1), Skotheim RI, Fraga MF, Abeler VM, Esteller M, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.

Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) are classified into two main histological
subgroups: seminomas and non-seminomas. The latter comprise several subtypes:
embryonal carcinomas, yolk sac tumours, choriocarcinomas, and teratomas. These
embryonal and extra-embryonal-like differentiation lineages represent a
caricature of early normal development, and inactivation of gene expression
through promoter hypermethylation may therefore be of particular importance in
germ cell tumourigenesis. The promoter methylation status of ten candidate
genes-CDH13, DLX6, EMX2, HOXA9, HOXB5, MSX1, MSX2, RASSF1A, RUNX3, and SCGB3A1
(alias HIN-1)-was assessed by methylation-specific PCR in seven intratubular germ
cell neoplasias and 55 primary TGCTs. Furthermore, by a discovery-based global
approach, comparing cDNA microarray expression profiles of two germ cell tumour
cell lines before and after treatment with the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a gene list of potentially epigenetic targets was
identified, from which CGGBP1, CGRRF1, SMARCC2, SORBS1, and XPA were analysed
further. Overall, the non-seminomas were significantly more often methylated than
were seminomas (p < 0.001). The three most frequently methylated genes among this
subtype were SCGB3A1 (54%), RASSF1A (29%), and HOXA9 (26%). CDH13 and HOXB5 were 
methylated at low frequencies (10-15%), and EMX2, MSX1, RUNX3, SORBS1, and XPA
only rarely (<10%). In conclusion, this study has identified several novel
epigenetically deregulated target genes in TGCT development, including homeobox
genes and SCGB3A1, suggesting that epigenetic inactivation of key genes in normal
development also has an important role in TGCTs.

PMID: 17029216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Gene. 2006 Oct 1;380(2):151-8. Epub 2006 Jun 15.

Developmental methylation of the regulatory region of HoxB5 gene in mouse
correlates with its tissue-specific expression.

Sachan M(1), Raman R.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi-221005, India.

We have studied the dynamics of de novo CpG methylation in the regulatory region 
of one of the homeobox gene HoxB5 during mouse development by sodium bisulfite
sequencing. Methylation pattern was examined at embryonic day 18.5 and adult in
kidney and spleen while in the liver the same exercise has been done in 11.5 dpc,
18.5 dpc, 5 dpp and in adult. In the liver at 11.5 dpc, all the 47 contiguous
sites (including a CpG island from 2035 to 2330 bp) at 5' regulatory region of
HoxB5 were unmethylated. Random methylation commences from 18.5 dpc and continues
in 5 dpp and in the adult. In the kidney at 18.5 dpc, 26 CpGs were examined
(excluding the CpG island region) and all of them were unmethylated but the fetal
spleen had at least a few sites considerably methylated. In the adult there was a
low level methylation in the kidney, on the other hand, in the spleen, all the
CpGs were methylated except a few sites and certain sites were totally
methylated. Thus in the adult, the level of methylation was much higher than in
the fetal stage. On the other hand semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that the
extent of expression of HoxB5 was higher in embryonic stages than in the adult.
Thus HoxB5 is a good paradigm to support that the developmental methylation of
HoxB5 and its expression pattern show an inverse correlation.

PMID: 16870358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Apr;41(4):774-80.

Tracheal occlusion in fetal rats alters expression of mesenchymal nuclear
transcription factors without affecting surfactant protein expression.

Danzer E(1), Robinson LE, Davey MG, Schwarz U, Volpe M, Adzick NS, Flake AW,
Hedrick HL.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Institute for Surgical Science, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA
19104-4318, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Mesenchymal nuclear transcription factors (MNTF) are involved
in lung development and maturation and regulate surfactant protein (SP)
expression. Prolonged (>2 weeks) fetal tracheal occlusion (TO) has been shown to 
accelerate lung growth and inhibit pulmonary surfactant synthesis. The effects of
TO on SP expression and MNTF, however, have not been formally assessed. The
objectives of this study were to evaluate the effects of short-term (3 days) TO
on normal lung growth and protein expression of pulmonary MNTF involved in SP
synthesis.
METHODS: At E19 (term, 22 days), 2 fetuses per time-dated Sprague-Dawley rats
underwent either TO (n = 23) or a sham (n = 22) operation. Lungs were harvested
72 hours post surgery. Pulmonary SP-A; SP-B; SP-C messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression; and SP-A and SP-B, Hoxb5, thyroid transcription factor 1, and
retinoic X receptor-alpha protein expression were analyzed.
RESULTS: Lung weight was significantly increased by TO (TO 0.32 +/- 0.02g vs SHAM
0.14 +/- 0.01 g; P < .001), resulting in 123% increase of the lung-to-body-weight
ratio. No difference of SP-A-mRNA (177 +/- 4.3 TO vs 169 +/- 4.4 SHAM; P = .25), 
SP-B-mRNA (87.7 +/- 0.2 TO vs 87.4 +/- 0.02 SHAM; P = .33), and SP-C-mRNA (186.5 
+/- 3.2 TO vs 183.2 +/- 2.7 SHAM; P = .45) expression was found. Surfactant
protein A (175.6 +/- 25.3 TO vs 192.5 +/- 19.8 SHAM; P = .59) and SP-B (163.4 +/-
5.2 TO vs 166.8 +/- 9.3 SHAM; P = .75) protein expression were similar in both
groups; however, Hoxb5 (70.3 +/- 18.9 TO vs 130.6 +/- 5.1 SHAM; P = .02) and
thyroid transcription factor 1 (102.6 +/- 19 TO vs 181.1 +/- 6.3 SHAM; P = .007) 
expression were significantly decreased. Retinoic X receptor-alpha expression
tended to be increased by TO (171.9 +/- 6.0 TO vs 155.4 +/- 6.7 SHAM; P = .06).
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term TO late in gestation induces rapid lung growth.
Surfactant protein-mRNA and protein expression are not significantly altered.
Thyroid transcription factor 1 and Hoxb5 are down-regulated by TO, suggesting
that duration and timing of occlusion are important in balancing the effects of
TO on lung growth vs lung maturation.

PMID: 16567192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1759-65. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Murine mesenchymal and embryonic stem cells express a similar Hox gene profile.

Phinney DG(1), Gray AJ, Hill K, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Health Science Center, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA. dphinne@tulane.edu

Using degenerate oligonucleotide primers targeting the homeobox domain, we
amplified by PCR and sequenced 723 clones from five murine cell populations and
lines derived from embryonic mesoderm and adult bone marrow. Transcripts from all
four vertebrate Hox clusters were expressed by the different populations.
Hierarchical clustering of the data revealed that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
and the embryonic stem (ES) cell line D3 shared a similar Hox expression profile.
These populations exclusively expressed Hoxb2, Hoxb5, Hoxb7, and Hoxc4,
transcripts regulating self-renewal and differentiation of other stem cells.
Additionally, Hoxa7 transcript quantified by real-time PCR strongly correlated
(r2=0.89) with the number of Hoxa7 clones identified by sequencing, validating
that data from the PCR screen reflects differences in Hox mRNA abundance between 
populations. This is the first study to catalogue Hox transcripts in murine MSCs 
and by comparative analyses identify specific Hox genes that may contribute to
their stem cell character.

PMID: 16288716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Dec 10;311(2):251-64. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells induces progesterone receptor gene
expression.

Sauter CN(1), McDermid RL, Weinberg AL, Greco TL, Xu X, Murdoch FE, Fritsch MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1300 University Ave., MSC 5250, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The role of steroid hormone receptors in very early embryonic development remains
unknown. Clearly, expression during organogenesis is important for
tissue-specific development. However, progesterone receptor (PR) and estrogen
receptors (ERalpha, ERbeta) are expressed during early development through the
blastocyst stage in mice and other species, and yet are not essential for
embryonic viability. We have utilized the mouse embryonic stem (mES) cell model
to investigate the regulated expression of these receptors during
differentiation. Surprisingly, one of the earliest changes in gene expression in 
response to a differentiation signal observed is PR gene induction. It parallels 
the time course of expression for the patterning genes Hoxb1 and Hoxa5.
Unexpectedly, PR gene expression is not regulated in an estrogen-dependent manner
by endogenous ERs or by transiently overexpressed ERalpha. Our results suggest a 
potentially novel mechanism of PR gene regulation within mES cells compared to
adult tissues and the possibility of unique targets of PR action during early mES
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1350973
PMID: 16223481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 24;24(9):1580-8.

Distinct gene expression patterns associated with FLT3- and NRAS-activating
mutations in acute myeloid leukemia with normal karyotype.

Neben K(1), Schnittger S, Brors B, Tews B, Kokocinski F, Haferlach T, Müller J,
Hahn M, Hiddemann W, Eils R, Lichter P, Schoch C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics (B060), Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), constitutive activation of the FLT3 receptor
tyrosine kinase, either by internal tandem duplications (FLT3-ITD) of the
juxtamembrane region or by point mutations in the second tyrosine kinase domain
(FLT3-TKD), as well as point mutations of the NRAS gene (NRAS-PM) are among the
most frequent somatic gene mutations. To elucidate whether these mutations cause 
aberrant signal transduction in AML, we used gene expression profiling in a
series of 110 newly diagnosed AML patients with normal karyotype. The different
algorithms used for data analysis revealed highly concordant sets of genes,
indicating that the identified gene signatures are specific for each analysed
subgroup. Whereas samples with FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD could be separated with up
to 100% accuracy, this did not apply for NRAS-PM and wild-type samples,
suggesting that only FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD are associated with an apparent
signature in AML. The set of discriminating genes included several known genes,
which are involved in cell cycle control (CDC14A, WEE1), gene transcription
(HOXB5, FOXA1), and signal transduction (SMG1). In conclusion, we showed that
unique gene expression patterns can be correlated with FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD.
This might lead to the identification of further pathogenetic relevant candidate 
genes particularly in AML with normal karyotype.

PMID: 15674343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2004 Mar 15;302(2):147-64.

Comparative genomic analysis of vertebrate Hox3 and Hox4 genes.

Hadrys T(1), Prince V, Hunter M, Baker R, Rinkwitz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical School, New York, New
York 10016, USA.

We used a comparative genomic approach to identify putative cis-acting regulatory
sequences of the zebrafish hoxb3a and hoxb4a genes. We aligned genomic sequences 
spanning the clustered Hoxb1 to Hoxb5 genes from pufferfish, mice, and humans
with the zebrafish hoxba and hoxbb cluster sequences. We identified multiple
blocks of conserved sequences in non-coding regions within and surrounding the
Hoxb3/b4 gene locus; a subset of these blocks are conserved in the zebrafish
hoxbb cluster, despite loss of hoxb3/b4 genes. Overall, we find that the
architecture of the Hoxb3/b4 loci and of the conserved sequence elements is very 
similar in teleosts and mammals. Our analyses also revealed two alternative
transcripts of the zebrafish hoxb3a gene and an exon sequence unusually located
10 kb upstream of adjacent hoxb4a; an equivalent murine Hoxb3 exon has not yet
been confirmed. We show that many of the Hoxb3/b4 conserved non-coding sequences 
correlate with functional neural enhancers previously described in the mouse.
Further, within the conserved non-coding sequences we have identified binding
sites for transcription factors, including Kreisler/Valentino, Krox20, Hox, and
Pbx, some of which had not been previously described for the mouse. Finally, we
demonstrate that the regulatory sequences of zebrafish hoxa3a are divergent with 
respect to the mouse ortholog Hoxa3, or the paralog hoxb3a. Despite limited
conservation of regulatory sequences, zebrafish hoxa3a and hoxb3a genes share
very similar expression profiles.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15054858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2003 Aug;67(8):550-6.

Expression of Hoxb-5 during human lung development and in congenital lung
malformations.

Volpe MV(1), Pham L, Lessin M, Ralston SJ, Bhan I, Cutz E, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Newborn Medicine, New England Medical
Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.
mvolpe1@tufts-nemc.org

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that the Hox gene Hoxb-5 is necessary for
normal mouse lung branching morphogenesis. Abnormal Hoxb-5 regulation causes
specific alterations in airway branching. We hypothesized that Hoxb-5 is
similarly involved in human lung branching morphogenesis, and is abnormally
expressed in bronchopulmonary sequestration (BPS) and congenital cystic
adenomatoid malformation (CCAM), both of which are congenital lung malformations 
with abnormal airway development.
METHODS: The temporal, spatial, and cellular expression of the Hoxb-5 protein was
evaluated in normal human lung and BPS and CCAM tissue using Western blot
analysis and immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: The expression of Hoxb-5 during human lung development showed strong
similarities to that during mouse lung development. Western blots showed high
Hoxb-5 protein levels in the pseudoglandular period (PSG), decreased but
sustained levels in the canalicular period (CAN), and negligible levels during
the alveolar period (ALV). Immunocytochemistry showed Hoxb-5 protein expression
in mesenchymal cells around branching airways in the pseuodglandular period,
subepithelial fibroblast localization (especially at airway branch points) in the
CAN and minimal expression in the ALV. In BPS and CCAM tissue, Hoxb-5 protein
levels were increased compared to age- and developmentally-matched lung tissue,
and were more similar to the PSG and CAN with Hoxb-5-positive cells in mesenchyme
surrounding abnormally branched airways.
CONCLUSIONS: Hoxb-5 expression during human lung branching morphogenesis, which
is similar to that observed in mouse lung development, indicates that it plays a 
role in controlling airway patterning. This notion is supported by results from
BPS and CCAM tissue, in which Hoxb-5 is maintained in a manner typical of an
earlier developmental stage and is associated with development of abnormal lung
tissue.

PMID: 14632303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Pathol. 2003 Nov;163(5):1721-7.

Gene expression patterns in ependymomas correlate with tumor location, grade, and
patient age.

Korshunov A(1), Neben K, Wrobel G, Tews B, Benner A, Hahn M, Golanov A, Lichter
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Neurosurgical Nikolai Nilovich Burdenko
Institute, Moscow, Russia.

To elucidate the molecular events responsible for tumorigenesis and progression
of ependymomas, we analyzed molecular alterations on the gene expression level in
a series of newly diagnosed ependymal neoplasms (n = 39). To this aim, tumor RNA 
was hybridized to microarrays comprising 2600 different genes with relevance to
mitosis, cell-cycle control, oncogenesis, or apoptosis. For CLU, IGF-2, and
RAF-1, which are apparent candidate genes because they had been previously
described to be involved in tumorigenesis of other human malignancies, we found a
high expression on the mRNA as well as the protein level. We identified gene
expression signatures for the differentiation of tumors with respect to location,
grade, and patient age. Spinal ependymomas were characterized by high-expression 
levels of HOXB5, PLA2G, and CDKN2A and tumors in young patients (< or =16 years
of age) by high-expression levels of LDHB and STAM. Notably, we were able to
classify supratentorial grade II and III tumors with 100% accuracy, whereas this 
did not apply for infratentorial ependymomas. The similar gene expression
patterns of grade II and III infratentorial malignancies suggest that grade III
tumors may develop through a secondary multistep transformation process involving
genes that are related to cell proliferation (LDHA, cyclin B, MAT2A) or tumor
suppression (PTEN). In summary, our results provide new insight in the
biochemical pathways particularly intriguing in the pathomechanism of ependymomas
and suggest that this entity comprises molecularly distinct diseases.

PMCID: PMC1892422
PMID: 14578171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Dyn. 2003 Sep;228(1):1-10.

HOXB5 expression is spatially and temporarily regulated in human embryonic gut
during neural crest cell colonization and differentiation of enteric neuroblasts.

Fu M(1), Lui VC, Sham MH, Cheung AN, Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Hong Kong Medical Centre, Queen Mary
Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.

HOX genes from paralogous groups 4 and 5 are particularly relevant to the gut
neuromusculature development because these genes are expressed at the splanchnic 
mesoderm surrounding the gut diverticulum, and at the level of the neural tube
from where the vagal neural crest cells (NCCs) originate. In this study, we
examined the migration and differentiation of NCCs, and investigated the
expression patterns of HOXB5 in human embryonic guts. Human embryos of
gestational week-4 to -8.5 were studied. Vagal NCCs enter the esophagus, migrate,
and colonize the entire gut in a rostrocaudal manner between week-4 and week-7.
The migrating NCCs in gut express HOXB5. Two separate and discontinuous
mesenchymal expression domains of HOXB5 were detected in the gut: the distal
domain preceding the migratory NCCs; and the proximal domain overlapping with the
NCCs. The two expression domains shift caudally in parallel with the rostrocaudal
migration of NCCs between week-4 and week-5. Neuron and glia differentiation of
NCCs are concomitant with HOXB5 down-regulation in NCCs and the mesenchyme. By
week-7, myenteric plexuses have formed; HOXB5 expression is switched on in the
plexuses. We found that (1) the migratory route of NCCs in human embryonic gut
was similar to that in mice and chicks; and (2) the expression pattern of HOXB5
correlated with the migration and differentiation of NCCs, suggesting a
regulatory role of HOXB5 in the development of NCCs.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12950074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(16):5680-91.

HoxB5 is an upstream transcriptional switch for differentiation of the vascular
endothelium from precursor cells.

Wu Y(1), Moser M, Bautch VL, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Endothelial cells differentiate from mesoderm-derived precursors to initiate the 
earliest events in vascular development. Although the signaling events that
regulate the successive steps of vascular development are known in some detail,
the transcriptional processes that regulate the first steps in vasculogenesis are
not well defined. We have studied the regulatory mechanisms of flk1 expression as
a model to understand the upstream events in endothelial cell differentiation,
since flk1 is the earliest marker of endothelial precursors. Using a variety of
biochemical approaches, we identified a cis-acting element in the first intron of
the flk1 gene that is required for endothelium-dependent expression in transgenic
reporter gene assays. Using the yeast one-hybrid system, we identified HoxB5 as
the transcription factor that binds this cis-acting element, the HoxB5-binding
element (HBE). HoxB5 mRNA colocalized with flk1 expression in differentiating
embryoid bodies, and HoxB5 potently transactivated the flk1 promoter in an
HBE-dependent fashion in transient-transfection assays. Overexpression of HoxB5
led to expansion of flk1(+) angioblasts in differentiating embryoid bodies and
increased the number of PECAM (platelet-endothelial cell adhesion
molecule)-positive primitive blood vessels. HoxB5 is necessary and sufficient to 
activate the cell-intrinsic events that regulate the differentiation of
angioblasts and mature endothelial cells from their mesoderm-derived precursors.

PMCID: PMC166331
PMID: 12897140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Jun 28;26(3):189-91.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in human embryo lung cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LY(1), Wu GJ, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in
human embryo lung (HEL) cells and influence of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection on the expressions of these genes.
METHOD: The expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes were detected
with semi-quantitative RT-PCR method.
RESULTS: 1. HEL cells expressed HOXB5 and HOXB6 genes, but they did not express
HOXB1 and HOXB9 genes. 2. After HCMV infection, HEL cell was induced to express
HOXB9 gene, as the expression of HOXB6 gene was elevated. The expression of HOXB5
gene had no significant change. HOXB1 was still not expressed. 3. Treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the expression of HOXB9 gene in HEL cells
infected by HCMV was significantly increased. But during the advanced infect
period, the expression of HOXB6 was significantly decreased.
CONCLUSION: HCMV can induce abnormal expressions of HOXB6 and HOXB9 genes, which 
may play an important role in HCMV-induced abnormal embryogenesis.

PMID: 12536675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Oct 28;26(5):409-11.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of HOXB5, HOXB6, 
HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes in gliomaous cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu GJ(1), Chen LY, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: The expressions of HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes of U251 cell
infected by human cytomegalovirus and/or treated with all trans-retinoic
acid(ATRA) were detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The results were that U251 
cell did not express HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB8 but expressed HOXB7 without
infecting HCMV and/or being treated with ATRA. After infected with HCMV and/or
treated with ATRA, the expressions of HOXB7 and HOXB8 were up-regulated and the
expression of HOXB7 lasted the fourth generation, while HOXB8 was up-regulated
only in the second generation. These results indicate that the abnormal
expression of HOXB gene induced by HCMV may play an important role in the
maldevelopment.

PMID: 12536483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Gene. 2003 Jan 2;302(1-2):65-72.

Methylation of HoxA5 and HoxB5 and its relevance to expression during mouse
development.

Hershko AY(1), Kafri T, Fainsod A, Razin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, The Hebrew University 
Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Expression and function of homeobox genes (Hox genes) in development have been
subject to extensive study in a variety of organisms including mammals, however
practically nothing is known regarding the methylation patterns of these genes.
Here we describe the methylation patterns of HoxA5 and HoxB5 in various tissues
of fetal and adult mice and their relevance to expression. Both genes exhibit
tissue specific methylation patterns that are established postnatally. This
methylation appears to play a role in stabilizing the newly acquired silent state
of the genes. In contrast to the postimplantation wave of de novo methylation
that takes place across the mammalian genome, the methylation of the Hox genes
represents a different time window for de novo methylation which might be
characteristic of developmental genes. In the case of HoxA5 this postnatal de
novo methylation can cover a domain of at least 25 kb that includes several genes
of the HoxA cluster and the CpG islands within. Our observations suggest that the
establishment of tissue specific methylation patterns of HoxA5 and HoxB5 and the 
relationship between these methylation patterns and activity are different from
what had been known for non-developmental genes. This may reflect the specialized
functions played by Hox genes in development.

PMID: 12527197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. EMBO J. 2003 Jan 15;22(2):262-9.

Retinoids regulate the anterior expression boundaries of 5' Hoxb genes in
posterior hindbrain.

Oosterveen T(1), Niederreither K, Dollé P, Chambon P, Meijlink F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute of Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We describe the regulatory interactions that cause anterior extension of the
mouse 5' Hoxb expression domains from spinal cord levels to their definitive
boundaries in the posterior hindbrain between embryonic day E10 and E11.5. This
anterior expansion is retinoid dependent since it does not occur in mouse embryos
deficient for the retinoic acid-synthesizing enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase
2. A retinoic acid response element (RARE) was identified downstream of Hoxb5 and
shown to be essential for expression of Hoxb5 and Hoxb8 reporter transgenes in
the anterior neural tube. The spatio-temporal activity of this element overlaps
with rostral extension of the expression domain of endogenous Hoxb5, Hoxb6 and
Hoxb8 into the posterior hindbrain. The RARE and surrounding sequences are found 
at homologous positions in the human, mouse and zebrafish genome, which supports 
an evolutionarily conserved regulatory function.

PMCID: PMC140104
PMID: 12514132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Surg Res. 2002 Dec;108(2):203-11.

Mesenchymal nuclear transcription factors in nitrofen-induced hypoplastic lung.

Chinoy MR(1), Nielsen HC, Volpe MV.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Development Research Program, Department of Surgery, Hershey Medical
Center, Pennsylvania State University, 17033, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nitrofen-induced pulmonary hypoplasia (PH) with or without coexistent
congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) in animals mimics the human condition. We
have demonstrated reduced steroid-thyroid-retinoid receptors in hypoplastic
lungs. Therefore, we hypothesize that expression of two additional mesenchymally 
derived nuclear transcription factors, retinoid X receptor alpha (RXR-alpha) and 
homeobox b-5 (Hoxb-5), would also be altered in hypoplastic lungs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used timed-pregnant CD-1 mice either untreated or
gavaged with nitrofen on gestational day (Gd) 8. Normal lungs were compared with 
hypoplastic lungs with severe left PH and CDH at Gd 14, 16, and 19 and from
neonates. We performed immunoblotting for RXR-alpha and Hoxb-5 proteins and
immunohistochemistry for Hoxb-5 protein.
RESULTS: Almost 70-80% of nitrofen-exposed mice had no apparent external
phenotypic abnormalities, such as craniofacial defects. Fetal body and lung
weights were reduced. RXR-alpha and Hoxb-5 proteins were highest at Gd 14 and
decreased as development progressed. Densitometric analysis of RXR-alpha or
Hoxb-5 proteins in normal and hypoplastic lungs showed no significant difference;
however, the immunolocalization pattern of Hoxb-5 protein differed. Hoxb-5
protein was primarily in mesenchymal cells of normal lungs on Gd 14; however, by 
Gd 19, it appeared to be mainly in the epithelial cells of prealveolar structures
and in adjacent subepithelial mesenchymal cells. In hypoplastic lungs no
significant changes were observed in Hoxb-5 staining in mesenchymal cells at Gd
14 nor at Gd 16; however, Hoxb-5 expression persisted in mesenchyme and
epithelium at Gd 19 and in neonatal hypoplastic lungs, unlike normal lungs.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Unaltered RXR-alpha protein implies that despite altered
retinoic acid receptors (RARs) in hypoplastic lungs, the mechanisms of
nitrofen-induced PH may be independent of RXR-alpha pathways. (2) In hypoplastic 
lungs, the persistent mesenchymal expression of Hoxb-5, in later stages of
development and at birth, suggests delayed development and maturation compared to
normal lungs. We speculate that nitrofen induces PH via RAR-dependent but
RXR-independent interactions, which may be downstream of the Hoxb-5 gene or may
involve other more anteriorly expressed Hox genes.

PMID: 12505043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Life Sci. 2002 Oct 11;71(21):2543-52.

A vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor analog alters the expression of homeobox
genes.

Steingart RA(1), Heldenberg E, Pinhasov A, Brenneman DE, Fridkin M, Gozes I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.

A lipophilic analog of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
stearyl-Nle(17)-neurotensin(6-11)VIP(7-28) (SNH), that inhibited lung cancer
growth, has been previously described. The mechanism of SNH inhibition of cancer 
growth is still being elucidated. The present study examined the effects of SNH
on homeobox genes in the colon cancer cell line HT 29 that expresses VIP
receptors. Homeobox genes contain a characteristic DNA sequence, coding for a
stretch of 61 amino acid homeodomain that binds specific DNA motifs. While the
HOX gene family contains a single homeodomain, the POU gene family contains an
additional DNA binding homeodomain. HT 29 cells were incubated with SNH; RNA was 
extracted and subjected to reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) with primers that matched the conserved area of the various HOX or POU
genes. The PCR products that were altered by SNH treatment were sequenced. Three 
candidate SNH-responsive genes, the HOX A4, the HOX B5 and the PUO V
transcription factor I (Oct-3) were identified. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR with
specific primers confirmed the increase in HOX A4 and the decrease in Oct-3
expression levels following SNH treatment. Thus, the HOX A4 and the Oct-3
homeobox genes may partially mediate SNH activity on cancer cells.

PMID: 12270759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Mar;282(3):L359-69.

Thyroid hormone affects embryonic mouse lung branching morphogenesis and cellular
differentiation.

Archavachotikul K(1), Ciccone TJ, Chinoy MR, Nielsen HC, Volpe MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Newborn Medicine, New England Medical
Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Although thyroid hormone (T(3)) influences epithelial cell differentiation during
late fetal lung development, its effects on early lung morphogenesis are unknown.
We hypothesized that T(3) would alter embryonic lung airway branching and
temporal-spatial differentiation of the lung epithelium and mesenchyme.
Gestational day 11.5 embryonic mouse lungs were cultured for 72 h in BGJb
serum-free medium without or with added T(3) (0.2, 2.0, 10.0, or 100 nM).
Evaluation of terminal bud counts showed a dose- and time-dependent decrease in
branching morphogenesis. Cell proliferation was also significantly decreased with
higher doses of T(3). Morphometric analysis of lung histology showed that T(3)
caused a dose-dependent decrease in mesenchyme and increase in cuboidal epithelia
and airway space. Immunocytochemistry showed that with T(3) treatment, Nkx2.1 and
surfactant protein SP-C proteins became progressively localized to cuboidal
epithelial cells and mesenchymal expression of Hoxb5 was reduced, a pattern
resembling late fetal lung development. We conclude that exogenous T(3) treatment
during early lung development accelerated epithelial and mesenchymal cell
differentiation at the expense of premature reduction in new branch formation and
lung growth.

PMID: 11839528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Pathol. 2001 Dec;159(6):2321-9.

Embryonic gut anomalies in a mouse model of retinoic Acid-induced caudal
regression syndrome: delayed gut looping, rudimentary cecum, and anorectal
anomalies.

Pitera JE(1), Smith VV, Woolf AS, Milla PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College of
London, London, United Kingdom.

Vitamin A and its derivatives such as retinoic acid (RA) are important signaling 
molecules for morphogenesis of vertebrate embryos. Little is known, however,
about morphogenetic factors controlling the development of the gastrointestinal
tract and RA is likely to be involved. In the mouse, teratogenic doses of RA
cause truncation of the embryonic caudal body axis that parallel the caudal
regression syndrome as described in humans. These changes are often associated
with anomalies of the lower digestive tract. Overlapping spatiotemporal
expression of retinoic acid receptor-beta (RAR beta) and cellular retinol-binding
protein I, CRBPI, with Hoxb5 and c-ret in the gut mesoderm imply possible
cooperation required for proper neuromuscular development. To determine
susceptibility and responsiveness of the developing gut and its neuromusculature 
to exogenous retinoids we used a mouse model of RA-induced caudal regression
syndrome. The results showed that stage-specific RA treatment both in vivo and in
vitro affected gut looping/rotation morphogenesis and growth of asymmetrical
structures such as the cecum together with delayed differentiation of the gut
mesoderm and colonization of the postcecal gut by neural crest-derived enteric
neuronal precursors. These observations demonstrate that RA has a direct effect
on gut morphogenesis and innervation.

PMCID: PMC1850584
PMID: 11733381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Evol Dev. 2001 May-Jun;3(3):127-44.

Additional hox clusters in the zebrafish: divergent expression patterns belie
equivalent activities of duplicate hoxB5 genes.

Bruce AE(1), Oates AC, Prince VE, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, NJ 08544, USA.
abruce@molbio.princeton.edu

The evolution of metazoan body plans has involved changes to the Hox genes, which
are involved in patterning the body axis and display striking evolutionary
conservation of structure and expression. Invertebrates contain a single Hox
cluster whereas tetrapods possess four clusters. The zebrafish has seven unlinked
hox clusters, a finding that is difficult to reconcile with the notion that
genomic complexity, reflected by Hox cluster number, and morphological complexity
are causally linked, as the body plan of the zebrafish is not obviously more
complex than that of the mouse or human. Why have the additional hox genes in
zebrafish been conserved? To address the role of these additional zebrafish hox
genes, we have examined the duplicate hoxB5 genes, hoxB5a, and hoxB5b.
Conservation of gene duplicates can occur when one gene acquires a new function
(neofunctionalization), or when the ancestral function is divided between the two
duplicates (subfunctionalization). hoxB5a and hoxB5b are expressed in distinct
domains, and their combined expression domain is strikingly similar to that of
single Hoxb5 genes in other species. The biochemical functions encoded by the two
genes were studied by overexpression, which resulted in identical developmental
defects in the anterior hindbrain and cranial neural crest, suggesting strongly
that hoxB5a and hoxB5b have equivalent biochemical properties with respect to
early development. From these studies, we conclude that conservation of hoxB5a
and hoxB5b is likely the result of division of the ancestral Hoxb5 function
between the two genes, without significant changes in biochemical activity. These
results suggest a resolution to the conundrum of the extra hox genes and clusters
in the zebrafish, since if any of the additional hox genes in the zebrafish are
similarly subfunctionalized, they are unlikely to supply novel genetic functions.
Thus, the morphological complexity potentially conferred by the majority of
additional zebrafish hox clusters may not be substantially greater than that
conferred by the four tetrapod clusters.

PMID: 11440248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):233-6.

HoxA and HoxB cluster genes subdivide the digestive tract into morphological
domains during chick development.

Sakiyama J(1), Yokouchi Y, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602, Nagoya, Japan.

The digestive tract exhibits region-specific morphology and cytodifferentiation
along the anteroposterior axis. We analyzed the spatial expression patterns of
Hox genes belonging to the HoxA and HoxB cluster (Hoxa-4 approximately a-9,
Hoxb-5 approximately b-9) in the developing chick digestive tract. The expression
domains of these Hox genes correlated with morphological subdivision of the
digestive tract along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 11231082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Biol. 2000 Apr 15;220(2):263-84.

Vitamin A deficiency results in the dose-dependent acquisition of anterior
character and shortening of the caudal hindbrain of the rat embryo.

White JC(1), Highland M, Kaiser M, Clagett-Dame M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706-1544, USA.

The developing nervous system is particularly vulnerable to vitamin A deficiency.
Retinoid has been proposed to be a posteriorizing factor during hindbrain
development, although direct evidence in the mammalian embryo is lacking. In the 
present study, pregnant vitamin A-deficient (VAD) rats were fed purified diets
containing varying levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA; 0, 0.5, 1.5, 6, 12,
25, 50, 125, or 250 microg/g diet) or were supplemented with retinol. Hindbrain
development was studied from embryonic day 10 to 12.5 ( approximately 6 to 40
somites). Normal morphogenesis was observed in all embryos from groups fed 250
microg atRA/g diet or retinol. The most caudal region of the hindbrain was the
most sensitive to retinoid insufficiency, as evidenced by a loss of the
hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) in embryos from the 125 microg atRA/g diet 
group. Further reduction of atRA to 50 microg/g diet led to the loss of cranial
nerves IX, X, XI, and XII and associated sensory ganglia IX and X in all embryos 
as well as the loss of hindbrain segmentation caudal to the rhombomere (r) 3/4
border in a subset of embryos. Dysmorphic orthotopic otic vesicles or immature
otic-like vesicles in both orthotopic and caudally ectopic locations were also
observed. As the level of atRA was reduced, a loss of caudal hindbrain
segmentation was observed in all embryos and the incidence of otic vesicle
abnormalities increased. Perturbations in hindbrain segmentation, cranial nerve
formation, and otic vesicle development were associated with abnormal patterning 
of the posterior hindbrain. Embryos from VAD dams fed between 0.5 and 50 microg
atRA/g diet exhibited Hoxb-1 protein expression along the entire neural tube
caudal to the r3/r4 border at a time when it should be restricted to r4. Krox-20 
protein expression was expanded in r3 but absent or reduced in presumptive r5.
Hoxd-4 mRNA expression was absent in the posterior hindbrain, and the rostral
limit of Hoxb-5 protein expression in the neural tube was anteriorized,
suggesting that the most posterior hindbrain region (r7/r8) had been deleted
and/or improperly patterned. Thus, when limiting amounts of atRA are provided to 
VAD dams, the caudal portion of the hindbrain is shortened and possesses
r4/r5-like characteristics, with this region finally exhibiting r4-like gene
expression when retinoid is restricted even more severely. Thus, regions of the
anterior hindbrain (i.e., r3 and r4) appear to be greatly expanded, whereas the
posterior hindbrain (r5-r8) is reduced or absent. This work shows that retinoid
plays a critical role in patterning, segmentation, and neurogenesis of the caudal
hindbrain and serves as an essential posteriorizing signal for this region of the
central nervous system in the mammal.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10753515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Dec;35(12):1817-9.

Association of bronchopulmonary sequestration with expression of the homeobox
protein Hoxb-5.

Volpe MV(1), Archavachotikul K, Bhan I, Lessin MS, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Department of
Pathology, New England Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Bronchopulmonary sequestration (BPS) is caused by the abnormal development of an 
accessory lung diverticulum from the foregut very early in embryogenesis. The
developmental abnormalities seen with BPS suggest that this anomaly is caused by 
abnormal expression of homeobox genes, which control axial identity and
organ-specific patterning during embryogenesis. The authors previously have shown
that the homeobox gene Hoxb-5 is necessary for normal airway branching during
lung development. The authors now report that BPS is associated with aberrant
developmental expression of Hoxb-5 protein, suggesting that this Hox gene is
involved in the development of BPS.

PMID: 11101743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 26;1475(3):337-45.

Hoxb-5 control of early airway formation during branching morphogenesis in the
developing mouse lung.

Volpe MV(1), Vosatka RJ, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Newborn Medicine, The Floating Hospital 
for children at New England Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA. mvolpel@lifespan.org

Hox proteins control structural morphogenesis, pattern formation and cell fate in
the developing embryo. To determine if Hoxb-5 participates in patterning of early
airway branching during lung morphogenesis, gestational day 11.5 embryonic lung
cultures were treated with retinoic acid (RA) to up-regulate and antisense
oligonucleotides to down-regulate Hoxb-5 protein expression. RA (10(-6) M) and
Hoxb-5 antisense oligonucleotide (20 microM) treatment each significantly
decreased branching morphogenesis (P<0. 001), but the morphology of branching
under these conditions was very different. RA-treated lungs had elongated primary
branches but decreased further branching with increased Hoxb-5 immunostaining in 
subepithelial regions underlying these elongated airways. Western blots confirmed
that Hoxb-5 protein was increased by 189+/-20% (mean+/-S.E.M., P<0.05) in
RA-treated lungs compared to controls. In contrast, lungs treated with Hoxb-5
antisense oligos plus RA had foreshortened primary branches with rudimentary
distal clefts resulting in decreased numbers of primary and subsequent branches. 
Immunohistochemistry confirmed that Hoxb-5 antisense oligos inhibited Hoxb-5
protein expression even in the presence of RA. We conclude that regional and
quantitative changes in Hoxb-5 protein expression influence morphogenesis of the 
first airway divisions from the mainstem bronchi. RA-induced alterations in
branching are mediated in part through regulated Hoxb-5 expression.

PMID: 10913834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1999 Dec;200(6):559-71.

Comparative anatomy and ontogeny of the ductus arteriosus, a vascular outsider.

Bergwerff M(1), DeRuiter MC, Gittenberger-de Groot AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Centre, P.O.
Box 9602, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. Bergwerff@mail.medfac.leidenuniv.nl

In its function of separating pulmonary and systemic arterial blood flow, the
ductus arteriosus, which connects both circuits, either closes permanently at a
certain stage in development or attains a capacity to close and reopen depending 
on the physiological needs in certain species. In air-breathing vertebrates
varying from lungfish to mammals, the ductus arteriosus derives from the sixth
pharyngeal arch artery, and in preparation for its specific task, undergoes its
own unique differentiation programme, starting early in development. To date, the
mechanisms involved in defining this unique status, as compared to the other
great arteries, are unclear. This review clarifies some of the elusiveness of the
ductus arteriosus. It includes a comparative description of this artery in
species exemplifying the different classes of air-breathing vertebrates, and
illustrates similarities and differences in morphogenesis and closure mechanisms 
among the species. It also deals with possible influences of vascular innervation
and with congenital anomalies in which the ductus arteriosus is involved. New
data suggest that HOXB5 expression in the neural crest along the dorsal half of
the sixth arch artery may be involved in the instigation of ductus arteriosus
differentiation.

PMID: 10592060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gastroenterology. 1999 Dec;117(6):1339-51.

Coordinated expression of 3' hox genes during murine embryonal gut development:
an enteric Hox code.

Pitera JE(1), Smith VV, Thorogood P, Milla PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, England. J.Pitera@ich.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hox genes are highly conserved developmental control genes
that may be organized and expressed in the form of a code required for correct
morphogenesis. Little is known about their control of the embryonal gut. However,
Hox paralogues 4 and 5, which are expressed at the sites of origin of vagal
neural crest cells and splanchnic mesoderm, are likely to be important. We have
studied the expression domains of these genes in the gut both spatially and
temporally.
METHODS: CD1 mice embryos of embryonic days E8.5-E17.5 were studied. The spatial 
and temporal expression patterns of messenger RNA of Hoxa4, b4, c4, d4, a5, c5,
and b5 homeoprotein were determined by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry in whole embryos, whole gastrointestinal tracts, and
vibratome sections.
RESULTS: There were different spatial, temporal, and combinatorial expression
patterns in different morphological regions: foregut, prececal gut, cecum, and
postcecal gut. Two dynamic gradients, rostral and caudal, were coordinated with
nested expression domains along the gut primordium. Region-specific domains were 
present in the stomach and cecum.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression patterns of genes in paralogous groups 4 and 5
suggest that they are organized to form a specific enteric Hox code required for 
correct enteric development.

PMID: 10579975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Nov;208(9):517-22.

Hox gene expression reveals regionalization along the anteroposterior axis of the
zebrafish notochord.

Prince VE(1), Price AL, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy and The Committee on
Developmental Biology, University of Chicago, 1027 E. 57th St., Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

The vertebrate Hox genes have been shown to confer regional identity along the
anteroposterior axis of the developing embryo, especially within the central
nervous system (CNS) and the paraxial mesoderm. The notochord has been shown to
play vital roles in patterning adjacent tissues along both the dorsoventral and
mediolateral axes. However, the notochord's role in imparting anteroposterior
information to adjacent structures is less well understood, especially as the
notochord shows no morphological distinctions along the anteroposterior axis and 
is not generally described as a segmental or compartmentalized structure. Here we
report that four zebrafish hox genes: hoxb1, hoxb5, hoxc6 and hoxc8 are
regionally expressed along the anteroposterior extent of the developing
notochord. Notochord expression for each gene is transient, but maintains a
definite, gene-specific anterior limit throughout its duration. The hox gene
expression in the zebrafish notochord is spatially colinear with those genes
lying most 3' in the hox clusters having the most anterior limits. The expression
patterns of these hox cluster genes in the zebrafish are the most direct
molecular evidence for a system of anteroposterior regionalization of the
notochord in any vertebrate studied to date.

PMID: 9799433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Am J Physiol. 1998 Apr;274(4 Pt 1):L610-20.

Growth factors and dexamethasone regulate Hoxb5 protein in cultured murine fetal 
lungs.

Chinoy MR(1), Volpe MV, Cilley RE, Zgleszewski SE, Vosatka RJ, Martin A, Nielsen 
HC, Krummel TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hershey Medical Center, Pennsylvania State University
17033, USA.

Studies on lung morphogenesis have indicated a role of homeobox (Hox) genes in
the regulation of lung development. In the present study, we attempted to
modulate the synthesis of Hoxb5 protein in cultured murine fetal lungs after
mechanical or chemical stimuli. Murine fetuses at gestational day 14 (GD14) were 
removed from pregnant CD-1 mice, and lungs were excised and cultured for 7 days
in BGJb media. The experimental groups were 1) untreated, unligated; 2) tracheal 
ligation; 3) supplemented media with either epidermal growth factor (EGF; 10
ng/ml), transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 (2 ng/ml), dexamethasone (10 nM),
EGF + TGF-beta 1, or EGF + TGF-beta 1 + dexamethasone. After 3 or 7 days, the
cultured lungs were compared with in vivo lungs. Immunoblotting signals at 3 days
in culture were stronger than those at 7 days. Western blot analyses showed that 
ligation, EGF, TGF-beta 1, and EGF + TGF-beta 1 downregulated Hoxb5 protein to
approximately 20-70% of Hoxb5 protein levels in unligated, untreated cultured
lungs. Furthermore, dexamethasone alone or in combination with EGF and TGF-beta 1
downregulated Hoxb5 protein by > 90% (P < 0.05) signal strength, similar to that 
seen in GD19 or in neonatal lungs. Immunostaining showed that Hoxb5 protein was
expressed strongly in the lung mesenchyme at early stages in gestation. However, 
by GD19 and in neonates, it was present only in specific epithelial cells. A
persistent level of Hoxb5 protein in the mesenchyme after EGF or TGF-beta 1
treatments or tracheal ligation was noted. Hoxb5 protein was significantly
downregulated by EGF + TGF-beta 1, and it was least in lungs after dexamethasone 
or EGF + TGF-beta 1 + dexamethasone treatment. The decrease in Hoxb5 protein was 
significant only in the groups with dexamethasone added to the media. Thus
immunostaining results parallel those of immunoblotting. The degree of Hoxb5
downregulation by dexamethasone or EGF + TGF-beta 1 + dexamethasone was similar
to that seen in vivo in very late gestation, which correlated to the advancing
structural development of the lung.

PMID: 9575880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1788-98.

Selectivity, sharing and competitive interactions in the regulation of Hoxb
genes.

Sharpe J(1), Nonchev S, Gould A, Whiting J, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The clustered organisation of Hox complexes is highly conserved in vertebrates
and the reasons for this are believed to be linked with the regulatory mechanisms
governing their expression. In analysis of the Hoxb4-Hoxb6 region of the HoxB
complex we identified enhancers which lie in the intergenic region between Hoxb4 
and Hoxb5, and which are capable of mediating the correct boundaries of neural
and mesodermal expression for Hoxb5. We examined their regulatory properties in
the context of the local genomic region spanning the two genes by transgenic
analysis, in which each promoter was independently marked with a different
reporter, to monitor simultaneously the relative transcriptional read-outs from
each gene. Our analysis revealed that within this intergenic region: (i) a limb
and a neural enhancer selectively activate Hoxb4 as opposed to Hoxb5; (ii) a
separate neural enhancer is able to activate both genes, but expression is
dependent upon competition between the two promoters for the enhancer and is
influenced by the local genomic context; (iii) mesodermal enhancer activities can
be shared between the genes. We found similar types of regulatory interactions
between Hoxb5 and Hoxb6. Together these results provide evidence for three
separate general mechanisms: selectivity, competition and sharing, that control
the balance of cis-regulatory interactions necessary for generating the proper
spatial and temporal patterns of Hox gene expression. We suggest that these
mechanisms are part of a regulatory basis for maintenance of Hox organisation.

PMCID: PMC1170526
PMID: 9501100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Histochem Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;108(6):495-504.

Hoxb-5 expression in the developing mouse lung suggests a role in branching
morphogenesis and epithelial cell fate.

Volpe MV(1), Martin A, Vosatka RJ, Mazzoni CL, Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Floating Hospital for Children at New England
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Hoxb-5 is one of the few homeobox genes strongly expressed in the developing
mouse lung. To explore the hypothesis that Hoxb-5 acts to regulate epithelial
cell fate and branching morphogenesis in the developing lung, we studied the
temporal, spatial, and cell-specific expression of Hoxb-5 from gestational day
(d) 13.5 to postnatal day (P) 2. Immunocytochemistry demonstrated regional
localization of Hoxb-5 protein to developing conducting airways and surrounding
mesenchyme. The cellular expression pattern changed from diffusely positive
nuclei of mesenchymal cells on d13.5 to become more localized to nuclei of
subepithelial fibroblasts and some adjacent columnar and cuboidal epithelial
cells on d14.5. After d14.5, Hoxb-5 protein expression continued to decrease in
mesenchymal cells distal from developing airways, but persisted in fibroblasts
underlying conducting airways. Hoxb-5 protein expression persisted in nuclei of
columnar and cuboidal epithelial cells on d16.5 and d17.5, with expression in low
cuboidal epithelial cells as well from d17.5 to P2. Western blot analysis showed 
temporal and quantitative changes in Hoxb-5 protein expression with peak
expression on d14.5-15.5. We conclude that Hoxb-5 protein is developmentally
regulated in a temporal, spatial, and cell-specific manner throughout the
pseudoglandular, canalicular, and terminal saccular periods of lung development
in the mouse. This localization and expression pattern suggests that Hoxb-5 may
influence branching morphogenesis, cell-cell communication, cell fate, and
differentiation of conducting airway epithelia.

PMID: 9450632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1997 May 20;100(1):5-12.

A target of the HoxB5 gene from the mouse nervous system.

Safaei R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Rutgers University, Camden, NJ 08102, USA.

An epitope-specific antibody against the protein product of the murine HoxB5 gene
was used to select an enriched library of Hox target sequences. Genomic DNA was
purified by immunoaffinity chromatography, using glutaraldehyde-cross-linked
chromatin from CNS of mouse embryos at gestational day 15. Screening was done by 
colony hybridization with TAAT-containing oligonucleotides, filter DNA-protein
binding, and gel mobility shift assay. Nucleotide sequencing identified a 910 bp 
DNA fragment, containing a consensus Antennapedia-like binding site, and
identical in 640 bps at 3' end of the clone to the promoter of the SPI3 gene,
which encodes a serine protease inhibitor protein [Sun, J., Rose, J.B. and Bird, 
P., J. Biol. Chem., 270 (1995) 16089-16096]. In situ hybridization experiments
were performed to see if a correlation could be found between the expression
patterns the SPI3 and the HoxB5 genes. Using a 120 bp cDNA fragment as probe,
SPI3 expression was detected mainly in the CNS of 15 day mouse embryos, a pattern
which is similar to that of the HoxB5 gene at this stage [Hogan, B.L., Holland,
P.W. and Lumsden, A., Cell Diff. Dev., 25 Suppl. (1988) 39-44; Sakach, M. and
Safaei, R., Int. J. Dev. Neurosci., 14 (1996) 567-573]. In conclusion, data
presented here suggest that the SPI3 gene is a candidate target of the HoxB5 gene
in vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 9174240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Blood. 1997 Apr 15;89(8):2723-35.

Mammalian homeobox B6 expression can be correlated with erythropoietin production
sites and erythropoiesis during development, but not with hematopoietic or
nonhematopoietic stem cell populations.

Zimmermann F(1), Rich IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.

There has been increasing interest in the involvement of mammalian homeobox (HOX)
genes in hematopoietic regulation. The HOX genes are clustered in 4 chromosomes
in mice and humans. In general, 5' end HOX gene expression is predominant in
hematopoietic stem cell populations, whereas 3' end HOX gene expression are
primarily found in committed progenitor cells. Furthermore, HOX genes of the A
cluster are generally found in myelomonocytic cells, B cluster genes in
erythropoietic cells, and C cluster genes in lymphoid cells. The results
presented here concentrate on a single gene, namely HOX B6. Preliminary
observations using whole mount in situ hybridization showed that both HOX B6 and 
erythropoietin (EPO) gene expression occurred in exactly the same areas of the
8.5-day mouse embryo. As a consequence, we studied the expression of HOX B6 and
EPO gene expression from 6.5 to 19.5 days of gestation, in the neonate, and in
the adult. It was found that the sequential transfer of erythropoiesis in
different organs during development was followed by a similar transfer of HOX B6 
and EPO gene expression. Between days 16.5 and 17.5, both HOX B6 and EPO gene
expression decrease in the fetal liver, even though hepatic erythropoiesis
continues to decline and is transferred to the fetal spleen. Precisely at this
time point, HOX B6 and EPO gene expression are transferred to both the fetal
spleen and fetal kidney. However, surprisingly, expression of both genes
increases again in the fetal liver just before birth. HOX B6 is expressed in
cells from in vitro erythropoietic colonies (colony-forming unit-erythroid and
burst-forming unit-erythroid) and TER-119+ erythroid cells but not in
hematopoietic or nonhematopoietic stem cell populations. When the latter two
populations are allowed to differentiate into erythropoietic cells, HOX B6 and
erythroid-relevant markers are expressed. The results indicate that HOX B6 is
intimately involved in the regulation of the erythropoietic system and could be a
marker for this lineage.

PMID: 9108390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 1;11(7):900-13.

Positive cross-regulation and enhancer sharing: two mechanisms for specifying
overlapping Hox expression patterns.

Gould A(1), Morrison A, Sproat G, White RA, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC)
National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

Vertebrate Hox genes display nested and overlapping patterns of expression.
During mouse hindbrain development, Hoxb3 and Hoxb4 share an expression domain
caudal to the boundary between rhombomeres 6 and 7. Transgenic analysis reveals
that an enhancer (CR3) is shared between both genes and specifies this domain of 
overlap. Both the position of CR3 within the complex and its sequence are
conserved from fish to mammals, suggesting it has a common role in regulating the
vertebrate HoxB complex. CR3 mediates transcriptional activation by multiple Hox 
genes, including Hoxb4, Hoxd4, and Hoxb5 but not Hoxb1. It also functions as a
selective HOX response element in Drosophila, where activation depends on
Deformed, Sex combs reduced, and Antennapedia but not labial. Taken together,
these data show that a Deformed/Hoxb4 autoregulatory loop has been conserved
between mouse and Drosophila. In addition, these studies reveal the existence of 
positive cross-regulation and enhancer sharing as two mechanisms for reinforcing 
the overlapping expression domains of vertebrate Hox genes. In contrast,
Drosophila Hox genes do not appear to share enhancers and where they overlap in
expression, negative cross-regulatory interactions are observed. Therefore,
despite many well documented aspects of Hox structural and functional
conservation, there are mechanistic differences in Hox complex regulation between
arthropods and vertebrates.

PMID: 9106661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Dev Neurosci. 1996 Aug;14(5):567-73.

Localization of the HoxB5 protein in the developing CNS of late gestational mouse
embryos.

Sakach M(1), Safaei R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey, Stratford 08084, USA.

We cloned a full-length HoxB5 cDNA from the human neuroblastoma cell line,
SHSY5Y, and used it to raise specific antibodies against a divergent domain of
its protein. The antibodies then were used to immunolocalize and determine the
expression pattern of the HoxB5 homeodomain protein in the late gestational mouse
embryos. With particular reference to the structures of the developing nervous
system, relatively high levels of the HoxB5 protein were detected in 15- and
18-day-old gestational mouse embryos. Expression domains were similar in both
stages and were limited almost exclusively to the central nervous system.
Expression of the HoxB5 protein was found in areas that extended from the rostral
medulla oblongata to the caudal parts of the spinal cord. In all regions of the
CNS, expression levels were higher in the rostral and ventral regions compared to
the caudal and dorsal areas, respectively. These findings suggest that the
function of the HoxB5 protein is not limited to the early stages of neural
development and extends into later stages as well. These findings suggest also
that the HoxB5 protein may play a role in the organization of the neural
structures along both of the dorsoventral and craniocaudal axes of the developing
fetus in vertebrate species.

PMID: 8930688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Assist Reprod Genet. 1996 Feb;13(2):177-81.

Expression of homebox-containing genes in human preimplantation development and
in embryos with chromosomal aneuploidies.

Kuliev A(1), Kukharenko V, Morozov G, Freidine M, Rechitsky S, Verlinsky O,
Ivakhnenko V, Gindilis V, Strom C, Verlinsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Genetics Institute, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to investigate homeobox gene expression in 
human oocytes and preembryos and in postimplantation embryos with impaired
embryonic development determined by chromosomal abnormalities.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with intron
spanning primer sets for Homeobox gene sequences was used.
RESULTS: The homeobox genes HoxA4, HoxA7, HoxB4, and HoxB5 were present in human 
oocytes and cleaving normal and triploid embryos. The expression pattern was
different between chromosomally abnormal and normal first-trimester embryos. Of
four homeobox transcripts (HoxA7, HoxB4+ ++, HoxB5, and HoxC6) that are expressed
in diploid embryos, only HoxA7, HoxB4 and HoxC6 were present in a trisomy 7
embryo, and only HoxB4 and HoxB 5 in triploid embryos and an embryo with trisomy 
9. Cloning experiments revealed differences in the number of homeobox clones
obtained from trisomy 7 and control embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcripts of homeobox genes, HoxA4, HoxA7, HoxB4, and HoxB5,
were present in oocytes and cleaving embryos. The pattern of expression of
homeobox genes in cultured fibroblasts derived from spontaneously aborted embryos
with aneuploidies was different from that in control diploid cells.

PMID: 8688592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Experientia. 1995 Jun 14;51(6):616-22.

Characterization of the 3' untranslated region of the mouse homeobox gene HoxB5.

Yu CC(1), Paige CJ, Wu GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Canada.

The mouse pre-B cell line, 70Z/3, expresses multiple transcripts of the homeobox 
gene, HoxB5. We show here that this heterogeneity is due, at least in part, to
the usage of alternative poly-A addition sites in the 3' untranslated region (UT)
of the primary HoxB5 transcript. Furthermore, upon analysis of the subcellular
distribution of the different HoxB5 RNA species, we found that the transcripts
are present mainly in the nucleus, with two-to-five-fold less RNA present in the 
cytoplasm. These studies suggest that multiple post-transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms are involved in the expression of HoxB5 RNA.

PMID: 7541756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genes Dev. 1995 Jan 1;9(1):108-22.

Genetic interaction between hoxb-5 and hoxb-6 is revealed by nonallelic
noncomplementation.

Rancourt DE(1), Tsuzuki T, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112.

hoxb-5 and hoxb-6 are adjacent genes in the mouse HoxB locus and are members of
the homeotic transcription factor complex that governs establishment of the
mammalian body plan. To determine the roles of these genes during development, we
generated mice with a targeted disruption in each gene. Three phenotypes
affecting brachiocervicothoracic structures were found in the mutant mice. First,
hoxb-5- homozygotes have a rostral shift of the shoulder girdle, analogous to
what is seen in the human Sprengel anomaly. This suggests a role for hoxb-5 in
specifying the position of limbs along the anteroposterior axis of the vertebrate
body. Second, hoxb-6- homozygotes frequently have a missing first rib and a bifid
second rib. The third phenotype, an anteriorizing homeotic transformation of the 
cervicothoracic vertebrae from C6 through T1, is common to both hoxb-5- and
hoxb-6- homozygotes. Quite unexpectedly, hoxb-5, hoxb-6 transheterozygotes
(hoxb-5-hoxb-6+/hoxb-5+ hoxb-6-) also show the third phenotype. By this classical
genetic complementation test, these two mutations appear as alleles of the same
gene. This phenomenon is termed nonallelic noncomplementation and suggests that
these two genes function together to specify this region of the mammalian
vertebral column.

PMID: 7828847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 7;91(12):5335-9.

Inhibition of retinoic acid-induced activation of 3' human HOXB genes by
antisense oligonucleotides affects sequential activation of genes located
upstream in the four HOX clusters.

Faiella A(1), Zappavigna V, Mavilio F, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Most homeobox genes belonging to the Hox family are sequentially activated in
embryonal carcinoma cells upon treatment with retinoic acid. Genes located at the
3' end of each one of the four Hox clusters are activated first, whereas upstream
Hox genes are activated progressively later. This activation has been extensively
studied for human HOX genes in the NT2/D1 cell line and shown to take place at
the transcriptional level. To understand the molecular mechanisms of sequential
HOX gene activation in these cells, we tried to modulate the expression of 3' HOX
genes through the use of antisense oligonucleotides added to the culture medium. 
We chose the HOXB locus. A 5- to 15-fold reduction of the expression of HOXB1 and
HOXB3 was sufficient to produce a significant inhibition of the activation of the
upstream HOXB genes, as well as of their paralogs in the HOXA, HOXC, and HOXD
clusters. Conversely, no effect was detectable on downstream HOX genes. The
extent of this inhibition increased for progressively more-5' genes. The
stability of the corresponding mRNAs appeared to be unaffected, supporting the
idea that the observed effect might be mediated at the transcriptional level.
These data suggest a cascade model of progressive activation of Hox genes, with a
3'-to-5' polarity.

PMCID: PMC43989
PMID: 7911240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4609-17.

Cooperative DNA binding of the human HoxB5 (Hox-2.1) protein is under redox
regulation in vitro.

Galang CK(1), Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, California 92037.

The human HoxB5 (Hox-2.1) gene product is a sequence-specific DNA binding
protein. Cooperative interactions stabilize in vitro DNA binding of the HoxB5
protein to tandem binding sites by at least 100-fold relative to binding to a
single site. The HoxB5 homeodomain is sufficient for sequence-specific DNA
binding but not for cooperative DNA binding. Here we report that the additional
protein sequence required for cooperativity is a small domain adjacent to the
homeodomain on the amino-terminal side. We further show that cooperative DNA
binding is under redox regulation. The HoxB5 protein binds to DNA in vitro both
when oxidized or reduced but binds cooperatively only when oxidized. Mutational
analysis has revealed that the cysteine residue in the turn between homeodomain
helices 2 and 3 is necessary for cooperative binding and redox regulation. The
enhanced DNA binding of oxidized HoxB5 protein is the opposite of the redox
regulation reported for other mammalian transcription factors such as Fos, Jun,
USF, NF-kappa B, c-Myb, and v-Rel, in which oxidation of cysteine residues
inhibits DNA binding. Thus, specific oxidation of nuclear proteins is a potential
regulatory mechanism that can act to either decrease or increase their DNA
binding activity.

PMCID: PMC360087
PMID: 8101633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Dyn. 1992 Sep;195(1):15-28.

Expression of Hox 2.1 protein in restricted populations of neural crest cells and
pharyngeal ectoderm.

Kuratani SC(1), Wall NA.

Author information: 
(1)V. and M. McLean Biochemistry Department, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030.

A polyclonal antibody, alpha Hox 2.1a, was used to localize Hox 2.1 protein in
presumptive neural crest cells and nodose ganglion of 8.5-10.0 day p.c. mouse
embryos. The following results were obtained: (1) The nodose placode, in its
epithelial state, first expresses Hox 2.1 protein at 9.0 d.p.c. By 9.5 d.p.c.
presumptive migrating neuroblasts between the nodose placode and ganglion
primordium also express Hox 2.1 protein. (2) At 9.5 d.p.c., presumptive crest
cells lateral to the cephalic cardinal vein and within pharyngeal arches 4 and 6 
are immunoreactive for alpha Hox 2.1a. In the arch 6 region, positive cells
extend medially to a mesenchymal cell population on the lateral aspect of the
foregut wall. (3) At 10.0 d.p.c., Hox 2.1 protein expression in putative crest
cells is restricted to the arch 6 cell population. A similar staining pattern is 
seen using alpha Hox 2.1a with chick embryos. Comparison with the chicken embryo 
suggests that the Hox 2.1 positive cells in the pharyngeal arch and those on the 
lateral aspect of the foregut in the mouse embryo correspond to the caudalmost
subpopulation of the circumpharyngeal crest (Kuratani and Kirby: Am. J. Anat.
191:215-227, 1991; Anat. Rec. 234:263-280, 1992). These results are consistent
with a role for Hox 2.1 in pattern formation in the caudalmost region of the
vertebrate head.

PMID: 1292750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. New Biol. 1992 May;4(5):558-68.

Cooperative DNA binding of the highly conserved human Hox 2.1 homeodomain gene
product.

Galang CK(1), Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, CA 92037.

The human homeobox-containing gene Hox 2.1 (hHox 2.1) and its murine cognate mHox
2.1 are part of evolutionarily conserved gene clusters, encode an identical
Antennapedia-type homeodomain, and are expressed in a similar pattern in the
developing embryo. We have isolated cDNA clones of hHox 2.1 and found that the
human/murine Hox 2.1 gene structure is strikingly conserved, with only 3 out of
269 amino acid differences in the entire predicted protein sequence. We show that
purified hHox 2.1 protein is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein capable of
binding to a variety of DNA sequences, including multiple sites in the promoter
of the hHox 2.1 gene. In a footprint titration assay, the apparent affinity of
the hHox 2.1 protein for a consensus binding site (LP) increases when the site is
present in tandem copies. Quantitative footprint challenge experiments revealed
that the in vitro half-life of the protein-DNA complex is less than 30 s for a
single LP binding site (kd greater than 1.4 min-1), but 126 min for proteins
bound to two tandem LP binding sites (kd = 5.5 x 10(-3) min-1). A domain distinct
from the homeodomain is necessary for cooperative DNA binding, because a
61-amino-acid peptide containing only the Hox 2.1 homeodomain can specifically
bind to LP sites, but exhibits no cooperativity. A different full-length human
homeodomain protein, hHox 1.3, was also found to show cooperative DNA binding
quantitatively similar to hHox 2.1. Therefore, cooperative DNA binding to
adjacent sites may be a crucial component in the overall affinity of mammalian
Antennapedia-type homeodomain proteins for their DNA target sites.

PMID: 1355360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mech Dev. 1992 May;37(3):111-20.

Expression and modification of Hox 2.1 protein in mouse embryos.

Wall NA(1), Jones CM, Hogan BL, Wright CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232.

A polyclonal antibody, alpha Hox 2.1a, has been generated and used to
immunolocalize Hox 2.1 protein in mouse embryos. Protein is present in nuclei of 
all tissues previously shown to express Hox 2.1 RNA. In addition, protein is seen
in somites and proximal regions of the limb buds, tissues in which Hox 2.1 RNA
expression was not clearly detected previously by in situ hybridization. At the 7
somite stage, protein is detectable in the neural tube up to the level of somite 
1, but later retracts to a more posterior position. Immunoblot, in vitro
translation, and immunoprecipitation experiments were carried out to characterize
the Hox 2.1 protein. The results show that the Hox 2.1 gene produces at least two
related phosphorylated proteins present in different proportions in different
tissues.

PMID: 1353982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Gene. 1991 Sep 15;105(2):213-9.

Production of mouse Hox-2.1 protein in Escherichia coli: characterisation of in
vitro binding to DNA.

Budd PS(1), Jackson IJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, Scotland.

The developmentally regulated mouse Hox-2.1 gene encodes a homeodomain-containing
(Hox) protein which is likely to function as a transcription factor. We expressed
the DNA coding for full-length Hox-2.1 protein in a T7 promoter-containing vector
in bacteria, which produced low levels of protein showing weak DNA-binding
activity. Synthesis of a truncated polypeptide lacking all the sequence upstream 
from the homeodomain enabled us to produce greater amounts of protein and
demonstrate its sequence-dependent DNA binding. The tetranucleotide ATTA is
necessary for binding, but a single copy is not by itself sufficient. Flanking
sequences are important; in particular a cytosine immediately 5' to the ATTA
enhances binding.

PMID: 1937017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 1987 Apr;99(4):603-17.

Developmental and spatial patterns of expression of the mouse homeobox gene, Hox 
2.1.

Krumlauf R(1), Holland PW, McVey JH, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London, UK.

The Hox 2.1 gene forms part of a cluster of homeobox-containing genes on mouse
chromosome 11. Analysis of Hox 2.1 cDNAs isolated from an 8 1/2-day p.c. mouse
embryo library predicts that the gene encodes a 269 amino acid protein (Mr,
29,432). This deduced protein contains a homeobox 15 amino acids from the carboxy
terminus and is very rich in serine and proline. A second partially conserved
region present in several other genes containing homeoboxes, the hexapeptide
Ile-Phe-Pro-Trp-Met-Arg, is located 12 amino acids upstream of the homeodomain
and is encoded by a separate exon. Analysis of Hox 2.1 gene expression reveals a 
complex and tissue-specific series of RNA transcripts in a broad range of fetal
tissues (lung, spinal cord, kidney, gut, spleen, liver and visceral yolk sac).
Comparison of the temporal patterns of gene expression during development and in 
the adult suggests that Hox 2.1 is regulated independently in different tissues. 
Evidence is also presented that transcripts from other loci have extensive
homology to the Hox 2.1 gene in sequences outside of the homeobox. In situ
hybridization shows that Hox 2.1 transcripts are regionally localized in the
spinal cord in an apparent anterior-posterior gradient extending from the hind
brain. The distribution of RNA also displays a cell-type specificity in the lung,
where mesodermal cells surrounding the branching epithelial cell layer accumulate
high levels of Hox 2.1 transcripts.

PMID: 2889591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


