
1. J Oral Pathol Med. 2016 Mar 15. doi: 10.1111/jop.12438. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunoexpression of hoxb7 and hoxb9 in salivary gland tumours.

Fonseca FP(1,)(2), Bingle L(2), Santos-Silva AR(1), Lopes MA(1), Coletta RD(1),
de Andrade BA(3), Mariano FV(1), Kowalski LP(4), Rangel AL(5), Martins MD(6),
Meurer L(6), Hunter KD(2,)(7), Speight PM(2), Vargas PA(1,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Piracicaba Dental School and Faculty of Medicine, University of Campinas,
Piracicaba, Brazil. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of 
Clinical Dentistry, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. (3)Dental School,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Piracicaba, Brazil. (4)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, Sao
Paulo, Brazil. (5)Dental School, State University of Western Paraná, Cascavel,
Brazil. (6)Medical and Dental Schools, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul,
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. (7)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Biology,
School of Dentistry, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Salivary gland carcinomas are uncommon neoplasms and the
identification of new prognostic indicators could improve their management. HOXB7
and HOXB9 are members of the class I homeobox-containing genes important for
normal embryogenesis and that are dysregulated in several human neoplasms. This
study investigated HOXB7 and HOXB9 expressions in salivary gland tumourigenesis, 
their correlation with neoplastic proliferative and angiogenic features and their
importance as prognostic markers.
METHODS: A hundred and fifty salivary gland tumours were organized in tissue
microarray and expressions of CD105, Ki67, HOXB7 and HOXB9 were determined
through immunohistochemistry. Reactions were quantified and correlated with
clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: In normal glands, HOXB7 was found in basal cells, whereas HOXB9 was seen
in serous acinar and scattered ductal cells. Malignancies exhibited an increased 
vascular density, proliferative index, HOXB7 and HOXB9 expressions when compared 
with pleomorphic adenoma and Warthin's tumour. Significant correlation was found 
between HOXB7 and CD105 (P = 0.004) in adenoid cystic carcinomas, and HOXB7
higher expression significantly correlated with the presence of paresthesia (P = 
0.02). No marker exhibited a significant association with survival rates (P >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: HOXB7 and HOXB9 were expressed in normal salivary gland and were
present in benign and malignant tumours derived from these structures, and HOXB7 
significantly correlated with neoangiogenesis in AdCC. These findings suggest
that both proteins might play a role in salivary gland tumourigenesis, but they
were not significant prognostic determinants in this sample.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26991799  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Immunol Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.1038/icb.2016.13. [Epub ahead of print]

HOXB9 acts as a negative regulator of activated human T cells in response to
amino acid deficiency.

Hayashi K(1), Ouchi M(1), Endou H(2), Anzai N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dokkyo Medical University School of
Medicine, Tochigi, Japan. (2)J-Pharma Co, Ltd, Kanagawa, Japan.

T-cell activation is an energy expenditure process and should be properly
controlled in accordance with the availability of nutrients such as amino acids
to eliminate wasteful energy consumption. However, the details of response to
amino acids insufficiency in activated T cells remain largely unknown. Here we
show that homeobox B9 (HOXB9), a member of the homeobox gene family that is known
as a morphogenesis regulator, acts as a suppressor of activated human T cells to 
address amino acid starvation. The expression of HOXB9 was triggered by amino
acid deprivation as well as functional inhibition of L-type amino acid
transporter 1 (also known as SLC7A5) via activating transcription factor 4 in
activated T cells. HOXB9 interfered the activities of NF-<U+03BA>B, nuclear factor of
activated T-cells (NFAT) and AP-1 but not retinoic acid receptor-related orphan
receptor, resulting in attenuation of the production of selective cytokines in
activated T cells. Thus, the morphogenetic gene plays an unexpected role in the
regulation of cellular metabolism with changes in the nutrition status in human T
cells.Immunology and Cell Biology advance online publication, 1 March 2016;
doi:10.1038/icb.2016.13.

PMID: 26926958  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):41916-28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6019.

GalNAc-T14 promotes metastasis through Wnt dependent HOXB9 expression in lung
adenocarcinoma.

Kwon OS(1), Oh E(2), Park JR(1), Lee JS(1), Bae GY(1), Koo JH(3), Kim H(4), Choi 
YL(5), Choi YS(6), Kim J(6), Cha HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Natural Sciences, Department of Life Sciences, Sogang University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics and Molecular
Pathology, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, DGIST, Daegyu, 
Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University, School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University, School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

While metastasis, the main cause of lung cancer-related death, has been
extensively studied, the underlying molecular mechanism remains unclear. A
previous clinicogenomic study revealed that expression of
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GalNAc-T14), is highly inversely correlated
with recurrence-free survival in those with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
However, the underlying molecular mechanism(s) has not been determined. Here, we 
showed that GalNAc-T14 expression was positively associated with the invasive
phenotype. Microarray and biochemical analyses revealed that HOXB9, the
expression of which was increased in a GalNAc-T14-dependent manner, played an
important role in metastasis. GalNAc-T14 increased the sensitivity of the WNT
response and increased the stability of the ß-catenin protein, leading to induced
expression of HOXB9 and acquisition of an invasive phenotype. Pharmacological
inhibition of ß-catenin in GalNAc-T14-expressing cancer cells suppressed HOXB9
expression and invasion. A meta-analysis of clinical genomics data revealed that 
expression of GalNAc-T14 or HOXB9 was strongly correlated with reduced
recurrence-free survival and increased hazard risk, suggesting that targeting
ß-catenin within the GalNAc-T14/WNT/HOXB9 axis may be a novel therapeutic
approach to inhibit metastasis in NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4747198
PMID: 26544896  [PubMed - in process]


4. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 15;6(40):42838-53. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5814.

HOXB9 induction of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in gastric carcinoma is
negatively regulated by its hexapeptide motif.

Chang Q(1,)(2), Zhang L(1,)(3), He C(1), Zhang B(1), Zhang J(2), Liu B(1), Zeng
N(4), Zhu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Shanghai 
Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Ruijin
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Current Address: Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Guizhou Provincial
People's Hospital, Guiyang, China. (4)Department of Pathology and
Pathophysiology, Key laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese 
Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

HOXB9, a transcription factor, plays an important role in development. While
HOXB9 has been implicated in tumorigenesis and metastasis, its mechanisms are
variable and its role in gastric carcinoma (GC) remains unclear. In the present
study, we demonstrated that the expression of HOXB9 decreased in gastric
carcinoma and was associated with malignancy and metastasis. Re-expression of
HOXB9 in gastric cell lines resulted in the suppression of cell proliferation,
migration, and invasion, which was accompanied by the induction of
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET). Comparative sequence analysis and
examination of a HOXB9 structural model indicated that three sites might possibly
be involved in MET regulation. The in vitro study of HOXB9 mutants showed that
these were unable to inhibit MET induction. However, when overexpressing a HOXB9 
mutant lacking the hexapeptide motif, a more potent MET induction and tumor
suppression was observed compared to that of the wild-type, indicating that the
presence of the hexapeptide motif reduced HOXB9 MET induction and tumor
suppression activity. Therefore, the results of the present study suggested that 
HOXB9 is a tumor suppressor in gastric carcinoma, and its activity was controlled
by different regulatory mechanisms such as the hexapeptide motif as a "brake" in 
this case. The results of these regulatory effects could lead to either oncogenic
or tumor suppressive roles of HOXB9, depending on the context of the particular
type of cancer involved.

PMCID: PMC4767475
PMID: 26536658  [PubMed - in process]


5. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 May;72:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.10.032. Epub
2015 Feb 11.

The effect and mechanism of miR196a in HepG2 cell.

Hao Y(1), Wang J(2), Zhao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanxi Provincial People's Hospital, 030012 Shanxi, Taiyuan, China. (2)Shanxi 
Provincial People's Hospital, 030012 Shanxi, Taiyuan, China. Electronic address: 
Junpingwang@gmail.com.

AIM: To explore the role of miR-196a on the regulatory mechanism in hepatocelluar
carcinoma.
METHODS: The antisense RNA of microRNA-196a was synthesized and cloned into the
vector. HepG2 cells were infected by inhibiting miR196a vector. The HepG2 cells
were divided into miR196a lower expression group, NC group and N group in vitro. 
The expression of the targets of miR-196a was detected by qPCR. Cell growth was
analyzed by cck8 assay. The invasion was detected by transwell method. Apoptosis 
was detected by annexinV/PI. The P53, caspase-3, HOXB9, HOXB8 mRNA and their
protein was detected by qPCR and Western-blot.
RESULTS: (1) The expression level of miR-196a was less than normal (41%). (2) The
proliferation of HepG2 was also markedly suppressed in inhibiting miR196a at the 
24 h point than normal about 72.29±2.51% (P<0.01). (3) The number of cells that
migrated through the chamber of miR196a inhibiting group is less than normal and 
NC (P<0.01). (4) The cell apoptosis in miR196a inhibiting group is more than NC
and normal group (P<0.05). HOXB8 mRNA and protein expression, in HepG2 cell line 
miR196a inhibiting group is significantly less than normal, NC (P<0.05).
Caspase-3 mRNA and protein expression is maximum in three groups (P<0.05). In
three groups there was no significant difference in the expression of P53 mRNA
and protein and HOXB9mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that miR-196a can effect the proliferation, 
the apoptosis and migration of HepG2 cell lines by gene HOXB8, caspase-3
regulation. However, there is no correlation between miRNA196a and P53 and HOXB9.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26054667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 28;6(25):20902-20.

Gene expression patterns through oral squamous cell carcinoma development: PD-L1 
expression in primary tumor and circulating tumor cells.

Oliveira-Costa JP(1), de Carvalho AF(2), da Silveira da GG(1), Amaya P(3), Wu
Y(3), Park KJ(3), Gigliola MP(2), Lustberg M(4), Buim ME(5), Ferreira EN(2),
Kowalski LP(6), Chalmers JJ(3), Soares FA(5), Carraro DM(2), Ribeiro-Silva A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ribeirao Preto School of Medicine, University of Sao 
Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Genomics and Molecular Biology,
CIPE, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (3)William G. Lowrie
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA. (4)Stefanie Spielman Comprehensive Breast Center, Wexner
Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (5)Department of
Anatomic Pathology, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (6)Department 
of Head and Neck Surgery and Otorhinolaryngology, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, Sao
Paulo, Brazil.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most common tumor of the oral cavity
and has been associated with poor prognosis. Scarce prognostic markers are
available for guiding treatment and/or sub-classifying patients. This study aims 
to identify biomarkers by searching for genes whose expression is increased or
decreased during tumor progression (through T1 to T4 stages). Thirty-six samples 
from all tumor size stages (from T1 to T4) were analyzed using cDNA microarrays. 
Selected targets were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and in circulating tumor
cells by immunofluorescence and Nanostring. Correlation was shown between PD-L1
and tumor size and lymph node metastasis, HOXB9 and tumor size, BLNK and
perineural invasion, and between ZNF813 and perineural invasion. PD-L1 positivity
was an independent prognostic factor in this cohort (p = 0.044, HH = 0.426). In
CTCs from patients with locally advanced OSCC, we found a strong cytoplasmatic
expression of PD-L1. PD-L1 is a ligand of PD-1 and is believed to limit T cell
activity in inflammatory responses and limit autoimmune diseases. We demonstrated
an important role for PD-L1 in primary tumors according to tumor size, and in
disease specific survival. Therefore, we could further determine individuals with
PD-L1+ CTCs, and possibly follow treatment using CTCs.

PMCID: PMC4673238
PMID: 26041877  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Orthop Res. 2015 Oct;33(10):1412-23. doi: 10.1002/jor.22944. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Genetic loci that regulate ectopic calcification in response to knee trauma in
LG/J by SM/J advanced intercross mice.

Rai MF(1), Schmidt EJ(1), Hashimoto S(1), Cheverud JM(2), Sandell LJ(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Musculoskeletal Research Center, Washington
University School of Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 425 S. Euclid Avenue MS 
8233, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110. (2)Department of Biology, Loyola University,
1050 W. Sheridan Road, Chicago, Illinois, 60660. (3)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis at Engineering and Applied
Sciences, Whitaker Hall, MS 1097, St. Louis, MO, 63130. (4)Department of Cell
Biology and Physiology, Washington University School, of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, 425 S. Euclid Avenue MS 8233, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110.

This study reports on genetic susceptibility to ectopic calcification in the LG/J
and SM/J advanced intercross mice. Using 347 mice in 98 full-sibships,
destabilization of medial meniscus (DMM) was performed to induce joint injury. We
found that joint destabilization instigated ectopic calcifications as detected
and quantified by micro-CT. We performed quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis 
to map ectopic calcification phenotypes to discrete genomic locations. To
validate the functional significance of the selected QTL candidate genes, we
compared mRNA expression between parental LG/J and SM/J inbred strains. Overall, 
we detected 20 QTLs affecting synovial and meniscus calcification phenotypes with
11 QTLs linked to synovial calcification. Functional and bioinformatic analyses
of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) identified functional classifications
relevant to angiogenesis (Myo1e, Kif26b, Nprl3, Stab2, Fam105b), bone
metabolism/calcification (Tle3, Tgfb2, Lipc, Nfe2l1, Ank, Fam105b), arthritis
(Stab2, Tbx21, Map4k4, Hoxb9, Larp6, Col1a2, Adam10, Timp3, Nfe2l1, Trpm3), and
ankylosing-spondylitis (Ank, Pon1, Il1r2, Tbkbp1) indicating that ectopic
calcification involves multiple mechanisms. Furthermore, the expression of 11 out
of 78 candidate genes was significantly different between LG/J and SM/J.
Correlation analysis showed that Aff3, Fam81a, Syn3, and Ank were correlated with
synovial calcification. Taken together, our findings of multiple genetic loci
suggest the involvement of multiple genes contributing to ectopic calcification.

© 2015 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25989359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 Jun-Jul;58(6-7):336-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.04.002.
Epub 2015 Apr 20.

De novo deletion of HOXB gene cluster in a patient with failure to thrive,
developmental delay, gastroesophageal reflux and bronchiectasis.

Pajusalu S(1), Reimand T(2), Uibo O(3), Vasar M(3), Talvik I(3), Zilina O(4),
Tammur P(5), Õunap K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia; Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Department of
Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Electronic address:
sander.pajusalu@kliinikum.ee. (2)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories,
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia; Institute of Biomedicine and
Translational Medicine, Department of Biomedicine, University of Tartu, Tartu,
Estonia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia; Children's
Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. (4)Department of Genetics,
United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia; Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. (5)Department of
Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
(6)Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu,
Estonia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.

We report a female patient with a complex phenotype consisting of failure to
thrive, developmental delay, congenital bronchiectasis, gastroesophageal reflux
and bilateral inguinal hernias. Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed a 230
kilobase deletion in chromosomal region 17q21.32 (arr[hg19]
17q21.32(46 550 362-46 784 039)×1) encompassing only 9 genes - HOXB1 to HOXB9.
The deletion was not found in her mother or father. This is the first report of a
patient with a HOXB gene cluster deletion involving only HOXB1 to HOXB9 genes. By
comparing our case to previously reported five patients with larger chromosomal
aberrations involving the HOXB gene cluster, we can suppose that HOXB gene
cluster deletions are responsible for growth retardation, developmental delay,
and specific facial dysmorphic features. Also, we suppose that bilateral inguinal
hernias, tracheo-esophageal abnormalities, and lung malformations represent
features with incomplete penetrance. Interestingly, previously published
knock-out mice with targeted heterozygous deletion comparable to our patient did 
not show phenotypic alterations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 10;10(4):e0122285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122285.
eCollection 2015.

The role of HOXB9 and miR-196a in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Darda L(1), Hakami F(1), Morgan R(2), Murdoch C(3), Lambert DW(1), Hunter KD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (2)Institute of Cancer
Therapeutics, University of Bradford, Bradford, United Kingdom. (3)Unit of Oral
and Maxillofacial Medicine & Surgery, School of Clinical Dentistry, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (4)Unit of Oral and Maxillofacial
Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom; Department of Oral Pathology and Biology, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated that a number of HOX genes, a
family of transcription factors with key roles in early development, are
up-regulated in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and other cancers. 
The loci of several Homeobox (HOX) genes also contain microRNAs (miRs), including
miR-196a.
METHODS: Global miR expression and expression of all 39 HOX genes in normal oral 
keratinocytes (NOKs), oral pre-malignant (OPM) and HNSCC cells was assessed by
expression microarray and qPCR and in tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
qPCR of laser microdissected (LCM) tissues. Expression of miR196a and HOXB9 was
reduced using anti-miR-196a and siRNA, respectively. Expression microarray
profiles of anti-miR196a and pre-miR196a transfected cells were compared to
parental cells in order to identify novel targets of miR-196a. Putative miR196a
targets were validated by qPCR and were confirmed as binding to the 3'UTR of
miR196a by a dual luciferase reporter assay combined with mutational analysis of 
the miR-196a binding site.
RESULTS: miR-196a and HOXB9 are highly expressed in HNSCC compared to NOKs, a
pattern also seen in HNSCC tissues by HOXB9 IHC and qPCR of miR-196a in LCM
tissue. Knock-down of miR-196a expression decreased HNSCC cell migration,
invasion and adhesion to fibronectin, but had no effect on proliferation.
Furthermore, knock-down of HOXB9 expression decreased migration, invasion and
proliferation but did not alter adhesion. We identified a novel primary mRNA
transcript containing HOXB9 and miR196a-1 as predicted from in-silico analysis.
Expression array analysis identified a number of miR196a targets, including
MAMDC2 and HOXC8. We confirmed that MAMDC2 is a novel miR-196a target using a
dual luciferase reporter assay with the effect abolished on mutation of the
binding site.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that miR-196a and HOXB9 are overexpressed,
perhaps co-ordinately, as HNSCC develops and exert a pro-tumourigenic phenotype
in HNSCC and OPM cells.

PMCID: PMC4393232
PMID: 25860510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Bone Joint Res. 2015 Apr;4(4):50-5. doi: 10.1302/2046-3758.44.2000349.

Possible association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 3' untranslated
region of HOXB9 with acetabular overcoverage.

Sekimoto T(1), Kurogi S(1), Funamoto T(1), Ota T(1), Watanabe S(1), Sakamoto
T(1), Hamada H(1), Chosa E(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki, 889-1692, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Excessive acetabular coverage is the most common cause of pincer-type
femoroacetabular impingement. To date, an association between acetabular
over-coverage and genetic variations has not been studied. In this study we
investigated the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of
paralogous Homeobox (HOX)9 genes and acetabular coverage in Japanese individuals 
to identify a possible genetic variation associated with acetabular
over-coverage.
METHODS: We investigated 19 total SNPs in the four HOX9 paralogs, then focused in
detail on seven of those located in the 3' untranslated region of HOXB9 (rs8844, 
rs3826541, rs3826540, rs7405887, rs2303485, rs2303486, rs79931349) using a
case-control association study. The seven HOXB9 SNPs were genotyped in 316
subjects who had all undergone radiological examination. The association study
was performed by both single-locus and haplotype-based analyses.
RESULTS: The genotype and allele frequencies of the five HOXB9 SNPs showed
significant association with acetabular over-coverage compared with controls
(rs7405887 OR = 3.16, p = 5.29E-6, 95% CI 1.91 to 5.25). A significant difference
was also detected when haplotypes were evaluated (OR = 2.59, p = 2.61E-5, 95% CI 
1.65 to 4.08). The two HOXB9 SNPs (rs2303485, rs2303486) were associated with
decreased acetabular coverage (rs2303485 OR = 0.524, p = 0.0091, 95% CI 0.322 to 
0.855; rs2303486 OR = 0.519, p = 0.011, 95% CI 0.312 to 0.865).
CONCLUSIONS: The five HOXB9 SNPs (rs8844, rs3826541, rs3826540, rs7405887,
rs79931349) were associated with acetabular over-coverage. On the other hand, the
two SNPs (rs2303485 and rs2303486) were associated with the lower acetabular
coverage. The association of rs2303486 would be consistent with the previous
study. Therefore, the HOXB9 SNPs might be involved in the morphogenesis of
acetabular coverage, and could be an independent risk factor for developing
pincer-type femoroacetabular impingement. Cite this article: Bone Joint Res
2015;4:50-5.

©2015 The British Editorial Society of Bone & Joint Surgery.

PMCID: PMC4413364
PMID: 25833894  [PubMed]


11. Cancer Lett. 2015 May 28;361(1):75-85. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.02.039. Epub
2015 Feb 24.

Kindlin-2 induced by TGF-ß signaling promotes pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
progression through downregulation of transcriptional factor HOXB9.

Zhan J(1), Song J(1), Wang P(1), Chi X(1), Wang Y(1), Guo Y(2), Fang W(3), Zhang 
H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Health
Science Center, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China; Department of Anatomy, 
Histology and Embryology, Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology,
Beijing 100191, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sino-Japan Friendship
Hospital, Beijing 100123, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research, Ministry of Education, and State Key Laboratory of
Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing
100191, China; Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, Peking University,
Beijing 100191, China. Electronic address: wgfang@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Key Laboratory 
of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education, and State
Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Health Science Center, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, China; Department of Anatomy, Histology and
Embryology, Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology, Beijing
100191, China. Electronic address: hongquan.zhang@bjmu.edu.cn.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths with no effective therapeutics. Invasion and metastasis are
the major characteristics of PDAC. However, mechanisms underlying PDAC invasion
and metastasis are elusive. In this report, we found that Kindlin-2 is a target
protein of transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) signaling and is upregulated by
TGF-ß1 in PDAC cells. TGF-ß1-upregulated Kindlin-2 promotes PDAC cell growth,
migration and invasion, whereas Kindlin-2 upregulates transforming growth factor 
receptor I (TßRI), a key component of TGF-ß signaling. Thereby Kindlin-2 and
TGF-ß signaling constitute a positive feedback loop. Mechanistically, Kindlin-2
promotes PDAC progression by downregulation of HOXB9 and E-cadherin. For clinical
relevance, enhanced expression of Kindlin-2 predicts a poor overall survival for 
PDAC patients. Gene expression levels of Kindlin-2, TGF-ß, TßRI and HOXB9 are all
correlated with the overall survival of PDAC patients in an Oncomine dataset.
Taken together, our findings demonstrated that TGF-ß1-induced Kindlin-2
expression promotes PDAC progression by downregulation of HOXB9 and E-cadherin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25724625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Histopathology. 2015 Jun;66(7):955-65. doi: 10.1111/his.12585. Epub 2015 Feb 8.

High expression of transcriptional factor HoxB9 predicts poor prognosis in
patients with lung adenocarcinoma.

Zhan J(1,)(2), Wang P(1,)(2), Niu M(1,)(2), Wang Y(1,)(2), Zhu X(1,)(3), Guo
Y(4), Zhang H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology,
Beijing, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sino-Japan Friendship 
Hospital, Beijing, China.

AIMS: HoxB9, as a Hox family member, is known to play important roles in
embryonic development. Recent studies showed that HoxB9 is engaged in cancer
progression. However, the role of Hoxb9 in lung adenocarcinoma is unknown. The
purpose of this study is to investigate the expression and prognostic value of
HoxB9 in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The localization and expression of HoxB9 in lung
adenocarcinoma were examined by immunohistochemistry. The correlation between
HoxB9 expression levels with patient survival was assessed by Kaplan-Meier
analysis. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers and migratory
ability were evaluated in HoxB9 up- and down-regulated H1299 lung adenocarcinoma 
cells. HoxB9 was found to be localized predominantly in the cell nuclei and
expressed in 21.3% of lung adenocarcinomas. A significant increase in HoxB9
intensity in the high stage of lung adenocarcinoma was observed (P < 0.01).
Increased expression of HoxB9 was related to T classification, more lymph node
metastasis and a shorter patient overall survival (P < 0.05). However, the
expression level of HoxB9 was not correlated with age and gender. Functionally,
HoxB9 up-regulated EMT-related molecules and promoted cell migration in H1299
cells.
CONCLUSION: High expression of HoxB9 is a prognostic marker for lung
adenocarcinoma patients.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25324169  [PubMed - in process]


13. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):172-81. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0152.

Isolation and propagation of neural crest stem cells from mouse embryonic stem
cells via cranial neurospheres.

Minamino Y(1), Ohnishi Y, Kakudo K, Nozaki M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Second Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka Dental University
, Osaka, Japan .

The developmental fate of the multipotent neural crest (NC) is determined along
with the neural axis in which NC cells are generated. Only the cranial NC can
differentiate into mesectodermal derivatives such as osteoblasts, chondrocytes,
and adipocytes in vivo. Here, we attempted to selectively differentiate mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells into cranial NC stem cells and propagate them to
explore their developmental potential to differentiate into mesectodermal
derivatives. Using aggregation cultures in feeder- and serum-free neural
induction medium (NIM) without serum replacement and l-glutamine, we obtained NIM
neurospheres composed of neuroepithelium. The NIM neurospheres expressed the
rostral markers Otx1 and Otx2, but not nonrostral markers Hoxb4, Hoxb9, Lbx1, and
TH, which characterize cranial neurospheres. Subsequently, AP2a, Sox9, p75,
Snail, Slug, and Twist-positive NC cells were differentiated in 4-day adhesion
cultures of cranial neurospheres. In addition, sphere clusters in adhesion
cultures were differentiated into osteoblasts, while migrating cells were not. By
taking advantage of the sphere-formation capability, we isolated and propagated
NC stem cells from the sphere clusters and confirmed their multipotency. NC stem 
cells expressed NC and stem cell markers, and they maintained differentiation
potency in the NC derivatives. These results show that cranial NC stem cells were
obtained reproducibly and efficiently without special inducing factors, gene
transfection, or fluorescence-activated cell sorting selection.

PMID: 25141025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e105285. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105285.
eCollection 2014.

An E2F1-HOXB9 transcriptional circuit is associated with breast cancer
progression.

Zhussupova A(1), Hayashida T(1), Takahashi M(1), Miyao K(1), Okazaki H(1), Jinno 
H(1), Kitagawa Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Homeobox B9 (HOXB9), a member of the homeobox gene family, is overexpressed in
breast cancer and promotes tumor progression and metastasis by stimulating
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and angiogenesis within the tumor
microenvironment. HOXB9 activates the TGFß-ATM axis, leading to checkpoint
activation and DNA repair, which engenders radioresistance in breast cancer
cells. Despite detailed reports of the role of HOXB9 in breast cancer, the
factors that regulate HOXB9 transcription have not been extensively examined.
Here we uncover an underlying mechanism that may suggest novel targeting
strategies for breast cancer treatment. To identify a transcription factor
binding site (TFBS) in the HOXB9 promoter region, a dual luciferase reporter
assay was conducted. Protein candidates that may directly attach to a TFBS of
HOXB9 were examined by Q-PCR, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA),
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and mutation analysis. A HOXB9 promoter
region from -404 to -392 was identified as TFBS, and E2F1 was a potential binding
candidate in this region. The induction of HOXB9 expression by E2F1 was observed 
by Q-PCR in several breast cancer cell lines overexpressing E2F1. The stimulatory
effect of E2F1 on HOXB9 transcription and its ability to bind the TFBS were
confirmed by luciferase, EMSA and ChIP assay. Immunohistochemical analysis of 139
breast cancer tissue samples revealed a significant correlation between E2F1 and 
HOXB9 expression (p<0.001). Furthermore, a CDK4/6 inhibitor suppressed E2F1
expression and also reduced expression of HOXB9 and its downstream target genes. 
Our in vitro analysis identified the TFBS of the HOXB9 promoter region and
suggested that E2F1 is a direct regulator of HOXB9 expression; these data support
the strong correlation we found between E2F1 and HOXB9 in clinical breast cancer 
samples. These results suggest that targeting the E2F1/HOXB9 axis may be a novel 
strategy for the control or prevention of cancer progression and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4138122
PMID: 25136922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Clin Exp Med. 2015 Feb;15(1):55-64. doi: 10.1007/s10238-014-0276-7. Epub 2014 Aug
1.

HOXB9 promotes epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via transforming growth
factor-ß1 pathway in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Sha L(1), Dong L, Lv L, Bai L, Ji X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, No. 467 Zhongshan Street, Dalian, 116027, China.

The function of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression is well established. However, the
regulatory mechanisms modulating this phenomenon remain unclear. Homeobox B9
(HOXB9) has been proposed as an oncogene in many cancer developments, but its
function and underlying mechanisms in HCC metastasis remain unknown. HOXB9
modulates EMT through the transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) pathway, which
is a recognized regulator of EMT in HCC cells. The knockdown of HOXB9 decreased
the migration and invasion of HCC cells. Conversely, the HOXB9 overexpression led
to an increase in the above-mentioned phenotypes in HCC cells. Further analysis
of HOXB9-regulated cellular functions showed the ability of this transcription
factor to induce EMT. Moreover, we demonstrated that the TGF-ß1 pathway is
important in HOXB9-induced EMT in HCC cells. These findings define a novel
cellular mechanism regulated by HOXB9, which controls EMT phenotype in HCC. This 
study is the first to illustrate the pivotal function of HOXB9 in regulating the 
metastatic behavior of HCC cells.

PMID: 25081022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 15;74(18):5287-300. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0284. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

Ubiquitin-like protein FAT10 promotes the invasion and metastasis of
hepatocellular carcinoma by modifying ß-catenin degradation.

Yuan R(1), Wang K(1), Hu J(2), Yan C(2), Li M(2), Yu X(1), Liu X(3), Lei J(1),
Guo W(4), Wu L(1), Hong K(5), Shao J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, China. Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center of
Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Second 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China. (3)Department of
General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang,
China. Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang, China.
(4)Department of Digestion, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, China. (5)Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine,
Nanchang, China. shao5022@163.com Hongkui88@163.com. (6)Department of General
Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
Jiangxi Province Engineering Research Center of Hepatobiliary Disease, Nanchang, 
China. Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang, China.
shao5022@163.com Hongkui88@163.com.

The ubiquitin-like protein FAT10 and the homeobox protein HOXB9 each promote
metastatic progression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we
investigated the clinicopathologic significance of FAT10 and HOXB9 in HCC and
investigated a mechanistic role for FAT10 in HOXB9-mediated invasiveness and
metastasis. Relative to adjacent normal tissues, FAT10 and HOXB9 were markedly
overexpressed in HCC, where a positive correlation in their expression and
associated malignant characteristics were found. RNAi-mediated silencing of FAT10
decreased HOXB9 expression and inhibited HCC invasion and metastasis in vitro and
in vivo. The effects of FAT10 silencing were reversed by HOXB9 overexpression,
whereas RNAi-mediated silencing of HOXB9 decreased HCC invasion and metastasis
driven by FAT10 overexpression. Mechanistically, FAT10 regulated HOXB9 expression
by modulating the ß-catenin/TCF4 pathway, directly binding to ß-catenin and
preventing its ubiquitination and degradation. Together, our results identified a
novel HCC regulatory circuit involving FAT10, ß-catenin/TCF4, and HOXB9, the
dysfunction of which drives invasive and metastatic character in HCC. Cancer Res;
74(18); 5287-300. ©2014 AACR.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25056121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Br J Cancer. 2014 Aug 26;111(5):883-93. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.387. Epub 2014 Jul 
15.

Elevated HOXB9 expression promotes differentiation and predicts a favourable
outcome in colon adenocarcinoma patients.

Zhan J(1), Niu M(1), Wang P(1), Zhu X(2), Li S(1), Song J(1), He H(2), Wang Y(3),
Xue L(4), Fang W(2), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [2]
State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [3] Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology
and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. (2)1] Key Laboratory of 
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [2] Laboratory of
Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China. (3)1] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research, Ministry of Education, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China [2] State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic 
Drugs, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China [3]
Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China. (4)1] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research, Ministry of Education, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China [2] Department of Biochemistry, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the tumour suppressive proteins and the
underlying mechanisms that suppress colon cancer progression.
Homeodomain-containing transcription factor HOXB9 plays an important role in
embryogenesis and cancer development. We here aim to uncover the potential role
of HOXB9 in the regulation of colon adenocarcinoma progression including
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.
METHODS: HOXB9 expression in colon adenocarcinoma cells and patients was analysed
by western blot and immunohistochemistry separately. Correlation between HOXB9
expressions with patients' survival was assessed by Kaplan-Meier analysis.
HOXB9-regulated target gene expression was determined by RNA sequencing in
HOXB9-overexpressing colon adenocarcinoma cells.
RESULTS: Elevated HOXB9 expression was identified in well-differentiated colon
adenocarcinoma patients and was associated with a better overall patients'
survival. Overexpression of HOXB9 inhibited colon adenocarcinoma cell growth,
migration, invasion in vitro and tumour growth, liver as well as lung metastases 
in nude mice; whereas silencing HOXB9 promoted these functions. HOXB9 promoted
colon adenocarcinoma differentiation via a mechanism that stimulates
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, involving downregulation of EMT-promoting
transcriptional factors including Snail, Twist, FOXC2 and ZEB1 and upregulation
of epithelial proteins including E-cadherin, claudins-1, -4, -7, occludin and
ZO-1.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB9 is a novel tumour suppressor that inhibits colon
adenocarcinoma progression by inducing differentiation. Elevated expression of
HOXB9 predicts a longer survival in colon adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC4150282
PMID: 25025961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 May 15;7(5):1244-54. eCollection 2014.

Gene microarray analysis of the lncRNA expression profile in human urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder.

Luo H(1), Zhao X(1), Wan X(1), Huang S(1), Wu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji University Shanghai 200065,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the expression profile variation of lncRNAs in normal
urinary bladder tissue and urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder through
microarray technology. The differentially expressed lncRNAs were identified and
classified, and their biological information was analyzed. The data obtained in
the study will prove helpful for the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three specimens of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and
three specimens of normal bladder tissue were identified by histology. The total 
RNA was isolated from the bladder urothelial carcinomas and normal tissue and
purified. The targets were mixed and hybridized with the genes on the microarray,
which contained thirty thousand lncRNAs. The bladder urothelial carcinomas were
then compared with the normal bladder tissue. The lncRNAs that were
differentially expressed between the two groups were identified based on the
signal-to-noise ratios using the Agilent Feature Extraction software and were
analyzed with the Agilent Genespring GX software (Agilent). The outcome was
obtained, and the biological information of these genes was deposited in GenBank.
RESULTS: The expression profile of lncRNAs was significantly different between
normal bladder tissue and urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Compared with
normal bladder tissue, 1,122 lncRNAs exhibited at least a twofold, significant
difference (P < 0.05) and are thus regarded as differentially expressed lncRNAs. 
Of these, 734 and 388 lncRNAs were upregulated and down regulated. The
differentially expressed lncRNAs in the urothelial carcinoma of the bladder are
distributed on every chromosome, and most of these lncRNAs are distributed on
chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and X.
CONCLUSIONS: Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a complicated disease that
involves the regulation of multiple genes and the participation of multiple
chromosomes. Some of the differentially expressed lncRNAs that were upregulated, 
such as AK124776, lincRNA-RAB12-1, KRT8P25, RP11-474J18.4, AC000110.1, KRT8P13,
KRT8P10, BC072678, and downregulated, such as nc-HOXB9-206, RP11-160A10.2,
nc-HOXA11-86, nc-HOXD10-7, nc-HOXB9-205, CES4, nc-HOXD12-3, systematic research
on these lncRNAs will help clarify the mechanisms of urothelial carcinoma of the 
bladder and guide the early diagnosis and treatment of this cancer in the future.

PMCID: PMC4073740
PMID: 24995079  [PubMed]


19. Mol Cancer. 2014 May 5;13:102. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-102.

Bevacizumab terminates homeobox B9-induced tumor proliferation by silencing
microenvironmental communication.

Hoshino Y, Hayashida T(1), Hirata A, Takahashi H, Chiba N, Ohmura M, Wakui M,
Jinno H, Hasegawa H, Maheswaran S, Suematsu M, Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. tetsu@z7.keio.jp.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox B9 (HOXB9), a transcriptional factor, regulates
developmental processes and tumor progression and has recently been recognized as
one of important transcriptional factors related to angiogenesis. This study
aimed to investigate the role of HOXB9 in tumorigenesis and angiogenesis.
METHODS: We examined the expression of HOXB9 in colorectal cancer using qPCR and 
in situ hybridization. We also examined the effect of HOXB9 overexpression in
colorectal cancer using a proliferation assay, ELISA, a multiplex assay, and
xenograft models. The clinical significance of HOXB9 was statistically evaluated 
in resected specimens.
RESULTS: HOXB9 was expressed in colorectal cancer specimens. HOXB9 induced
angiogenesis and tumor proliferation in vitro, which resulted in high
tumorigenicity in vivo and poor overall survival. Bevacizumab, an anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) antibody, remarkably suppressed tumor
proliferation by inhibiting angiogenesis in HOXB9-overexpressing xenografts, and 
it improved overall survival and provided prolonged progression-free survival in 
HOXB9-overexpressing patients. A comprehensive multiplex assay of the supernatant
of cancer cells co-cultured with human vascular endothelial cells and fibroblasts
indicated significantly higher interleukin-6 (IL6) levels than those in the
supernatant of monocultured cells. HOXB9 overexpression in clinical specimens was
significantly correlated with increased IL6 expression. An IL6-neutralizing
antibody inhibited VEGF secretion and tumor proliferation in the co-culture
system.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB9 promotes the secretion of angiogenic factors, including VEGF, 
to induce tumor proliferation through microenvironmental production of cytokines 
including IL6 signaling. Moreover, silencing of VEGF or IL6 terminates cytokine
release in tumor microenvironment. Thus, HOXB9 and IL6 may be potential
biomarkers for bevacizumab treatment.

PMCID: PMC4023179
PMID: 24885802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Apr;109(2):250-5.

Genetic characterisation of Langerin gene in human immunodeficiency
virus-1-infected women from Bahia, Brazil.

Costa GC(1), Jesus JG(1), Rego FF(1), Santos ES(2), Galvão-Castro B(1), Gonçalves
Mde S(1), Alcantara LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Hematologia, Genética e Biologia Computacional, Centro de
Pesquisas Gonçalo Moniz, Fiocruz, Salvador, BA, Brasil. (2)Escola Bahiana de
Medicina e Saúde Pública, Fundação Bahiana para o Desenvolvimento das Ciências,
Salvador, BA, Brasil.

Studies on human genetic variations are a useful source of knowledge about human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 infection. The Langerin protein, found at the
surface of Langerhans cells, has an important protective role in HIV-1 infection.
Differences in Langerin function due to host genetic factors could influence
susceptibility to HIV-1 infection. To verify the frequency of mutations in the
Langerin gene, 118 samples from HIV-1-infected women and 99 samples from
HIV-1-uninfected individuals were selected for sequencing of the promoter and
carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD)-encoding regions of the Langerin gene.
Langerin promoter analysis revealed two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
and one mutation in both studied groups, which created new binding sites for
certain transcription factors, such as NFAT5, HOXB9.01 and STAT6.01, according to
MatInspector software analysis. Three SNPs were observed in the CRD-encoding
region in HIV-1-infected and uninfected individuals: p.K313I, c.941C>T and
c.983C>T. This study shows that mutations in the Langerin gene are present in the
analysed populations at different genotypic and allelic frequencies. Further
studies should be conducted to verify the role of these mutations in HIV-1
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4015252
PMID: 24676666  [PubMed - in process]


21. Chin J Cancer Res. 2014 Feb;26(1):72-80. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.1000-9604.2014.01.11.

Overexpression of HOXB9 promotes metastasis and indicates poor prognosis in colon
cancer.

Huang K(1), Yuan R(1), Wang K(1), Hu J(1), Huang Z(1), Yan C(1), Shen W(1), Shao 
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of General Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang 330006, China ; 2 Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Jiangxi Provincial Cancer Hospital, Nanchang 330029, China ; 3 Jiangxi Province
Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Nanchang 330006, China.

OBJECTIVE: Homeobox B9 (HOXB9) is proposed to be involved in tumor angiogenesis
and metastasis. We investigated the role of HOXB9 in the progression of colon
cancer.
METHODS: HOXB9 expression was investigated by immunohistochemically and Western
blotting in 128 colon cancer patients and the results were analyzed statistically
associated with clinicopathological data and survival of the patients. The effect
of HOXB9 on cell invasion and metastases abilities were analyzed in vitro and in 
vivo.
RESULTS: HOXB9 is overexpressed in colon cancer tissues and significantly
correlated with metastasis and poor survival of patients (P<0.05, respectively). 
Additionally, high levels of expression of HOXB9 were observed in metastatic
lymph nodes. The down-regulation of HOXB9 expression can inhibit the migration
and invasive ability of colon cancer cells, while exogenous expression of HOXB9
in colon cancer cells enhanced cell migration and invasiveness. Moreover, stable 
knockdown of HOXB9 reduced the liver and lung metastasis of colon cancer in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB9 may play an important role in the invasion and metastasis of
colon cancer cells and may be a useful biomarker for metastasis and prognostic of
colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3937747
PMID: 24653628  [PubMed]


22. J Orthop Res. 2014 Feb;32(2):179-82. doi: 10.1002/jor.22507. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Association of a single nucleotide polymorphism in HOXB9 with developmental
dysplasia of the hip: a case-control study.

Hao Z, Dai J, Shi D, Xu Z, Chen D, Zhao B, Teng H, Jiang Q.

Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is one of the most common skeletal
disorders. It comprises a spectrum of abnormalities, including shallow acetabulum
and decreased coverage of the femoral head. Genetic component plays a
considerable role in the aetiology of DDH. HOXB9 may be involved in the aetiology
and pathogenesis of DDH, as it plays an important role in the development of the 
limbs. Our objective was to evaluate whether single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of HOXB9 (rs2303486 and rs8844) were associated with DDH in Chinese
population. The HOXB9 tag SNPs were genotyped in 460 DDH cases and 562 control
subjects by Taqman assay, and their association was examined. rs8844 was not
associated with DDH. rs2303486 was associated with DDH in the dominant genetic
model (p = 0.037; odds ratio (OR) = 1.32; 95% confidence interval (CI) =
1.021.71). After stratification by sex, significant association of the dominant 
genetic model still existed in the female subjects (p = 0.015; OR = 1.46; 95% CI 
= 1.081.98),but not in the male subjects. After stratification by severity, we
discovered an association with hip dislocation in the dominant model(p=0.042; OR 
= 1.35; 95% CI = 1.011.80), but not with subluxation or instability. HOXB9 is
associated with DDH in Chinese.

© 2013 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24600698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):272-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.095. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Overexpressed homeobox B9 regulates oncogenic activities by transforming growth
factor-ß1 in gliomas.

Fang L(1), Xu Y(2), Zou L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, 
467 Zhong Shan Road, Dalian 116023, Liaoning, China. (2)Department of
Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 
116023, Liaoning, China. (3)Department of Oncology, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of
Dalian Medical University, 467 Zhong Shan Road, Dalian 116023, Liaoning, China.
Electronic address: zoulijuantg@126.com.

Glioma is the leading cause of deaths related to tumors in the central nervous
system. The mechanisms of gliomagenesis remain elusive to date. Homeobox B9
(HOXB9) has a crucial function in the regulation of gene expression and cell
survival, but its functions in glioma formation and development have yet to be
elucidated. This study showed that HOXB9 expression in glioma tissues was
significantly higher than that in nontumor tissues. Higher HOXB9 expression was
also significantly associated with advanced clinical stage in glioma patients.
HOXB9 overexpression stimulated the proliferation, migration, and sphere
formation of glioma cells, whereas HOXB9 knockdown elicited an opposite effect.
HOXB9 overexpression also increased the tumorigenicity of glioma cells in vivo.
Moreover, the activation of transforming growth factor-ß1 contributed to
HOXB9-induced oncogenic activities. HOXB9 could be used as a predictable
biomarker to be detected in different pathological and histological subtypes in
glioma for diagnosis or prognosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Biol. 2014 Apr 1;388(1):134-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.027. Epub 2014
Feb 10.

Long-range regulation by shared retinoic acid response elements modulates dynamic
expression of posterior Hoxb genes in CNS development.

Ahn Y(1), Mullan HE(1), Krumlauf R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA. (2)Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA; Department of Anatomy
and Cell Biology, Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.
Electronic address: rek@stowers.org.

Retinoic acid (RA) signaling plays an important role in determining the anterior 
boundary of Hox gene expression in the neural tube during embryogenesis. In
particular, RA signaling is implicated in a rostral expansion of the neural
expression domain of 5<U+05F3> Hoxb genes (Hoxb9-Hoxb5) in mice. However, underlying
mechanisms for this gene regulation have remained elusive due to the lack of RA
responsive element (RARE) in the 5<U+05F3> half of the HoxB cluster. To identify
cis-regulatory elements required for the rostral expansion, we developed a
recombineering technology to serially label multiple genes with different
reporters in a single bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) vector containing the
mouse HoxB cluster. This allowed us to simultaneously monitor the expression of
multiple genes. In contrast to plasmid-based reporters, transgenic BAC reporters 
faithfully recapitulated endogenous gene expression patterns of the Hoxb genes
including the rostral expansion. Combined inactivation of two RAREs, DE-RARE and 
ENE-RARE, in the BAC completely abolished the rostral expansion of the 5<U+05F3> Hoxb
genes. Knock-out of endogenous DE-RARE lead to significantly reduced expression
of multiple Hoxb genes and attenuated Hox gene response to exogenous RA treatment
in utero. Regulatory potential of DE-RARE was further demonstrated by its ability
to anteriorize 5<U+05F3> Hoxa gene expression in the neural tube when inserted into a
HoxA BAC reporter. Our data demonstrate that multiple RAREs cooperate to remotely
regulate 5<U+05F3> Hoxb genes during CNS development, providing a new insight into the
mechanisms for gene regulation within the Hox clusters.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Feb 7;444(2):241-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.059. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Homeobox B9 is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinomas and promotes tumor cell
proliferation both in vitro and in vivo.

Li F(1), Dong L(2), Xing R(3), Wang L(1), Luan F(1), Yao C(1), Ji X(4), Bai L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Dalian Municipal Friendship Hospital, No. 8
Sanba Square, Zhongshan District, Dalian 116001, China. (2)Department of
Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, No.
193 Lianhe Street, Shahekou District, Dalian 116001, China. Electronic address:
dlleidong@126.com. (3)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Dalian Medical
University, No. 9 Lvshunnan Road, Lvshunkou District, Dalian 116044, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University, No. 6 Jiefang
Street, Zhongshan District, Dalian 116001, China. (5)Department of Emergency,
Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University, No. 6 Jiefang Street, Zhongshan
District, Dalian 116001, China. Electronic address: dllizhibai@126.com.

HomeoboxB9 (HOXB9), a nontransforming transcription factor that is overexpressed 
in multiple tumor types, alters tumor cell fate and promotes tumor progression.
However, the role of HOXB9 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development has not 
been well studied. In this paper, we found that HOXB9 is overexpressed in human
HCC samples. We investigated HOXB9 expression and its prognostic value for HCC.
HCC surgical tissue samples were taken from 89 HCC patients. HOXB9 overexpression
was observed in 65.2% of the cases, and the survival analysis showed that the
HOXB9 overexpression group had significantly shorter overall survival time than
the HOXB9 downexpression group. The ectopic expression of HOXB9 stimulated the
proliferation of HCC cells; whereas the knockdown of HOXB9 produced an opposite
effect. HOXB9 also modulated the tumorigenicity of HCC cells in vivo. Moreover,
we found that the activation of TGF-ß1 contributes to HOXB9-induced proliferation
activities. The results provide the first evidence that HOXB9 is a critical
regulator of tumor growth factor in HCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):823-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.283. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Exome sequencing reveals novel and recurrent mutations with clinical impact in
blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm.

Menezes J(1), Acquadro F(2), Wiseman M(3), Gómez-López G(4), Salgado RN(1),
Talavera-Casañas JG(5), Buño I(6), Cervera JV(7), Montes-Moreno S(8),
Hernández-Rivas JM(9), Ayala R(10), Calasanz MJ(11), Larrayoz MJ(11), Brichs
LF(12), Gonzalez-Vicent M(13), Pisano DG(4), Piris MA(8), Álvarez S(1), Cigudosa 
JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cytogenetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Program, Spanish National 
Cancer Research Centre-CNIO, Madrid, Spain. (2)1] Molecular Cytogenetics Group,
Human Cancer Genetics Program, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre-CNIO,
Madrid, Spain [2] NIMGenetics, R&D Department, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain.
(3)NIMGenetics, R&D Department, Tres Cantos, Madrid, Spain. (4)Bioinformatic
Unit, Structural Biology and Biocomputing Program, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre-CNIO, Madrid, Spain. (5)Servicio de Hematología y Hemoterapia,
Complejo Hospitalario Ntra. Sra. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
(6)Laboratorio de Genética Hematológica, Servicio de Hematología, Hospital
General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria
Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. (7)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitario
La Fe, Valencia, Spain. (8)Pathology Department, Hospital Universitario Marqués
de Valdecilla, Fundación IFIMAV, Santander, Spain. (9)IBSAL, IBMCC, Centro de
Investigación del Cáncer, Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Servicio de Hematología,
Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (10)Hematology Department,
Hospital Universitario 12 de octubre, Madrid, Spain. (11)Departamento de
Genética, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (12)Laboratori de Citologia
Hematològica, Laboratori de Citogenètica Molecular, Servei de Patologia, Hospital
del Mar, GRETNHE, IMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Unidad de Trasplante Hematopoyético, Hospital Niño Jesus, Madrid, Spain.

Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm (BPDCN) is a very rare disease that 
currently lacks genomic and genetic biomarkers to assist in its clinical
management. We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) of three BPDCN cases. Based
on these data, we designed a resequencing approach to identify mutations in 38
selected genes in 25 BPDCN samples. WES revealed 37-99 deleterious gene mutations
per exome with no common affected genes between patients, but with clear overlap 
in terms of molecular and disease pathways (hematological and dermatological
disease). We identified for the first time deleterious mutations in IKZF3, HOXB9,
UBE2G2 and ZEB2 in human leukemia. Target sequencing identified 29 recurring
genes, ranging in prevalence from 36% for previously known genes, such as TET2,
to 12-16% for newly identified genes, such as IKZF3 or ZEB2. Half of the tumors
had mutations affecting either the DNA methylation or chromatin remodeling
pathways. The clinical analysis revealed that patients with mutations in DNA
methylation pathway had a significantly reduced overall survival (P=0.047). We
provide the first mutational profiling of BPDCN. The data support the current WHO
classification of the disease as a myeloid disorder and provide a biological
rationale for the incorporation of epigenetic therapies for its treatment.

PMID: 24072100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 25;8(6):e65944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065944. Print 2013.

Adaptive evolution of the Hox gene family for development in bats and dolphins.

Liang L(1), Shen YY, Pan XW, Zhou TC, Yang C, Irwin DM, Zhang YP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

Bats and cetaceans (i.e., whales, dolphins, porpoises) are two kinds of mammals
with unique locomotive styles and occupy novel niches. Bats are the only mammals 
capable of sustained flight in the sky, while cetaceans have returned to the
aquatic environment and are specialized for swimming. Associated with these novel
adaptations to their environment, various development changes have occurred to
their body plans and associated structures. Given the importance of Hox genes in 
many aspects of embryonic development, we conducted an analysis of the coding
regions of all Hox gene family members from bats (represented by Pteropus
vampyrus, Pteropus alecto, Myotis lucifugus and Myotis davidii) and cetaceans
(represented by Tursiops truncatus) for adaptive evolution using the available
draft genome sequences. Differences in the selective pressures acting on many Hox
genes in bats and cetaceans were found compared to other mammals. Positive
selection, however, was not found to act on any of the Hox genes in the common
ancestor of bats and only upon Hoxb9 in cetaceans. PCR amplification data from
additional bat and cetacean species, and application of the branch-site test 2,
showed that the Hoxb2 gene within bats had significant evidence of positive
selection. Thus, our study, with genomic and newly sequenced Hox genes,
identifies two candidate Hox genes that may be closely linked with developmental 
changes in bats and cetaceans, such as those associated with the pancreatic,
neuronal, thymus shape and forelimb. In addition, the difference in our results
from the genome-wide scan and newly sequenced data reveals that great care must
be taken in interpreting results from draft genome data from a limited number of 
species, and deep genetic sampling of a particular clade is a powerful tool for
generating complementary data to address this limitation.

PMCID: PMC3692524
PMID: 23825528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nihon Rinsho. 2012 Sep;70 Suppl 7:166-9.

[HOXB9 as a novel prognostic factor in breast cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Seki H(1), Hayashida T, Jinno H, Takahashi M, Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine.

PMID: 23350386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dig Liver Dis. 2013 May;45(5):422-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2012.12.004. Epub 2013
Jan 14.

Decreased expression of HOXB9 is related to poor overall survival in patients
with gastric carcinoma.

Sha S(1), Gu Y, Xu B, Hu H, Yang Y, Kong X, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology & Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, PR
China. shasumei001@163.com

BACKGROUND: Studies have demonstrated the implication of HOXB9 in tumorigenesis, 
but its role in gastric carcinoma remains unknown.
AIMS: To investigate the expression and prognostic value of HOXB9 in patients
with gastric carcinoma.
METHODS: The localization and expression of HOXB9 in gastric cancer cells lines
were detected by immunofluorescence and western blot. The mRNA and protein
expression level of HOXB9 was detected in subjects with gastric carcinoma and
paired non-cancerous tissues. Correlation between HOXB9 expression and
clinicopathological parameters, the association of HOXB9 expression with the
patients' survival rate was also assessed.
RESULTS: HOXB9 was predominantly localized in the cell nucleus. A significant
decrease in HOXB9 intensity in poorly differentiated gastric cancer cells is
evident (P<0.01). A lower mRNA and protein expression level of HOXB9 was detected
in gastric carcinoma (P<0.01). Decreased expression of HOXB9, poorly
differentiation status and the presence of lymph node metastasis predict shorter 
overall survival (P<0.05). Patients without HOXB9 expression had a lower overall 
survival rate (P<0.01). Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed HOXB9 was an 
independent prognostic factor in gastric carcinoma (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB9 is down-regulation in gastric carcinoma and may be a novel
prognostic marker for poorer clinical outcome for patients with gastric
carcinoma.

Copyright © 2013 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23332081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. BMC Genomics. 2012 Dec 22;13:719. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-719.

Structural analysis of the genome of breast cancer cell line ZR-75-30 identifies 
twelve expressed fusion genes.

Schulte I(1), Batty EM, Pole JC, Blood KA, Mo S, Cooke SL, Ng C, Howe KL, Chin
SF, Brenton JD, Caldas C, Howarth KD, Edwards PA.

Author information: 
(1)Hutchison/MRC Research Centre and Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: It has recently emerged that common epithelial cancers such as breast
cancers have fusion genes like those in leukaemias. In a representative breast
cancer cell line, ZR-75-30, we searched for fusion genes, by analysing genome
rearrangements.
RESULTS: We first analysed rearrangements of the ZR-75-30 genome, to around 10kb 
resolution, by molecular cytogenetic approaches, combining array painting and
array CGH. We then compared this map with genomic junctions determined by
paired-end sequencing. Most of the breakpoints found by array painting and array 
CGH were identified in the paired end sequencing-55% of the unamplified
breakpoints and 97% of the amplified breakpoints (as these are represented by
more sequence reads). From this analysis we identified 9 expressed fusion genes: 
APPBP2-PHF20L1, BCAS3-HOXB9, COL14A1-SKAP1, TAOK1-PCGF2, TIAM1-NRIP1,
TIMM23-ARHGAP32, TRPS1-LASP1, USP32-CCDC49 and ZMYM4-OPRD1. We also determined
the genomic junctions of a further three expressed fusion genes that had been
described by others, BCAS3-ERBB2, DDX5-DEPDC6/DEPTOR and PLEC1-ENPP2. Of this
total of 12 expressed fusion genes, 9 were in the coamplification. Due to the
sensitivity of the technologies used, we estimate these 12 fusion genes to be
around two-thirds of the true total. Many of the fusions seem likely to be driver
mutations. For example, PHF20L1, BCAS3, TAOK1, PCGF2, and TRPS1 are fused in
other breast cancers. HOXB9 and PHF20L1 are members of gene families that are
fused in other neoplasms. Several of the other genes are relevant to cancer-in
addition to ERBB2, SKAP1 is an adaptor for Src, DEPTOR regulates the mTOR pathway
and NRIP1 is an estrogen-receptor coregulator.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first structural analysis of a breast cancer genome that
combines classical molecular cytogenetic approaches with sequencing. Paired-end
sequencing was able to detect almost all breakpoints, where there was adequate
read depth. It supports the view that gene breakage and gene fusion are important
classes of mutation in breast cancer, with a typical breast cancer expressing
many fusion genes.

PMCID: PMC3548764
PMID: 23260012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(2):389-98. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2259-2. 
Epub 2012 Sep 30.

Targeting the HOX/PBX dimer in breast cancer.

Morgan R(1), Boxall A, Harrington KJ, Simpson GR, Gillett C, Michael A, Pandha
HS.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Institute of Bioscience and Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, Leggett Building, University of Surrey, Surrey, GU2 7WG, UK.
r.morgan@surrey.ac.uk

The HOX genes are a family of closely related transcription factors that help to 
define the identity of cells and tissues during embryonic development and which
are also frequently deregulated in a number of malignancies, including breast
cancer. While relatively little is known about the roles that individual HOX
genes play in cancer, it is however clear that these roles can be both
contradictory, with some members acting as oncogenes and some as tumor
suppressors, and also redundant, with several genes essentially having the same
function. Here, we have attempted to address this complexity using the HXR9
peptide to target the interaction between HOX proteins and PBX, a second
transcription factor that serves as a common co-factor for many HOX proteins. We 
show that HXR9 causes apoptosis in a number of breast cancer-derived cell lines
and that sensitivity to HXR9 is directly related to the averaged expression of
HOX genes HOXB1 through to HOXB9, providing a potential biomarker to predict the 
sensitivity of breast tumors to HXR9 or its derivatives. Measuring the expression
of HOX genes HOXB1-HOXB9 in primary tumors revealed that a subset of tumors show 
highly elevated expression indicating that these might be potentially very
sensitive to killing by HXR9. Furthermore, we show that while HXR9 blocks the
oncogenic activity of HOX genes, it does not affect the known tumor-suppressor
properties of a subset of HOX genes in breast cancer.

PMID: 23053648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. FEBS J. 2012 Oct;279(19):3715-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.08733.x. Epub
2012 Aug 31.

Homeodomain-containing protein HOXB9 regulates expression of growth and
angiogenic factors, facilitates tumor growth in vitro and is overexpressed in
breast cancer tissue.

Shrestha B(1), Ansari KI, Bhan A, Kasiri S, Hussain I, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, TX, USA.

HOXB9 is a homeobox-containing gene and is critical for the development of
mammary gland and sternum. HOXB9 is also regulated by estrogen and is critical
for angiogenesis. We investigated the biochemical roles of HOXB9 and its
homeodomain in cell-cycle progression and tumorigenesis. Our studies demonstrated
that HOXB9 is overexpressed in breast cancer tissue. HOXB9 overexpression
stimulated 3D formation in soft agar assay. HOXB9 binds to the promoters of
various tumor growth and angiogenic factors and regulates their expression. The
homeodomain of HOXB9 plays crucial roles in transcriptional regulation of tumor
growth factors and also in 3D colony formation, indicating crucial roles of the
HOXB9 homeodomain in tumorigenesis. Overall, we demonstrated that HOXB9 is a
critical regulator of tumor growth factors and is associated with tumorigenesis.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

PMCID: PMC3445661
PMID: 22863320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jun;19(6):1831-40. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2295-5. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

HOXB9 expression promoting tumor cell proliferation and angiogenesis is
associated with clinical outcomes in breast cancer patients.

Seki H(1), Hayashida T, Jinno H, Hirose S, Sakata M, Takahashi M, Maheswaran S,
Mukai M, Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Studies have suggested that HOXB9 expression in breast cancer cells
promotes cellular invasiveness, metastatic ability, and tumor neovascularization 
in the surrounding tissue in in vitro and in vivo assays. These findings imply
that HOXB9 overexpression may alter tumor-specific cell fates and the tumor
stromal microenvironment, contributing to breast cancer progression. The
objective of this study was to analyze whether these results could be applied to 
clinical practice.
METHODS: A total of 141 consecutive, invasive ductal carcinoma patients who
underwent surgical treatment were examined. Immunohistochemical staining was
performed to evaluate the expression of HOXB9, Ki-67, CD31, and CD34, and the
association of tumor proliferation and angiogenesis with HOXB9 expression was
analyzed.
RESULTS: Of the 141 tumor specimens immunostained for HOXB9, 69 (48.9%) stained
positive. Larger primary tumor size, hormone receptor negativity, HER2
positivity, higher nuclear grade, and number of pathologic nodal metastases were 
significant variables associated with HOXB9 expression. Notably, 12 (92.3%) of 13
triple-negative breast cancer cases showed HOXB9 expression. Disease-free
survival and overall survival were significantly different between the
HOXB9-positive and HOXB9-negative groups (hazard ratio 20.714, P = 0.001; and
hazard ratio 9.206, P = 0.003, respectively). Multivariate analysis indicated
that HOXB9 expression was the only independent prognostic factor for disease-free
survival (hazard ratio 15.532, P = 0.009). HOXB9-positive tumors showed a
significant increase in the number of vasculature and the Ki-67 ratio compared
with HOXB9-negative tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB9 expression, which promotes tumor proliferation and
angiogenesis, is a significant prognostic factor in breast cancer.

PMID: 22396001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):219-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.026. Epub 2011
Dec 24.

HoxB8 in noradrenergic specification and differentiation of the autonomic nervous
system.

Huber L(1), Ferdin M, Holzmann J, Stubbusch J, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Different prespecification of mesencephalic and trunk neural crest cells
determines their response to environmental differentiation signals and
contributes to the generation of different autonomic neuron subtypes,
parasympathetic ciliary neurons in the head and trunk noradrenergic sympathetic
neurons. The differentiation of ciliary and sympathetic neurons shares many
features, including the initial BMP-induced expression of noradrenergic
characteristics that is, however, subsequently lost in ciliary but maintained in 
sympathetic neurons. The molecular basis of specific prespecification and
differentiation patterns has remained unclear. We show here that HoxB gene
expression in trunk neural crest is maintained in sympathetic neurons. Ectopic
expression of a single HoxB gene, HoxB8, in mesencephalic neural crest results in
a strongly increased expression of sympathetic neuron characteristics like the
transcription factor Hand2, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) in ciliary neurons. Other subtype-specific
properties like RGS4 and RCad are not induced. HoxB8 has only minor effects in
postmitotic ciliary neurons and is unable to induce TH and DBH in the enteric
nervous system. Thus, we conclude that HoxB8 acts by maintaining noradrenergic
properties transiently expressed in ciliary neuron progenitors during normal
development. HoxC8, HoxB9, HoxB1 and HoxD10 elicit either small and transient or 
no effects on noradrenergic differentiation, suggesting a selective effect of
HoxB8. These results implicate that Hox genes contribute to the differential
development of autonomic neuron precursors by maintaining noradrenergic
properties in the trunk sympathetic neuron lineage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22236961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Hum Pathol. 2012 Aug;43(8):1221-8. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.09.008. Epub 2012 
Jan 4.

Silencing of homeobox B9 is associated with down-regulation of CD56 and
extrathyroidal extension of tumor in papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Kim JH(1), Kim YH, Han JH, Lee KB, Sheen SS, Lee J, Soh EY, Park TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 443-721,
Korea.

Papillary thyroid carcinoma is the most common type of thyroid malignancy, and
CD56, a neural cell adhesion molecule, is typically down-regulated in almost all 
cases of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Homeobox B9 is a transcription factor,
belongs to the products of the homeobox transcription factor gene family, and has
been known to regulate transcription of CD56 and to promote tumorigenicity and
metastasis in some malignancies. In this study, we investigated the expression
and relation of homeobox B9 to reduced expression of CD56 in papillary thyroid
carcinomas and also a relationship between their expression and clinicopathologic
parameters. Therefore, we performed CD56 and homeobox B9 immunohistochemical
staining on 72 papillary thyroid carcinomas and Western blotting on 31 papillary 
thyroid carcinomas. CD56 protein staining revealed that it was reduced or absent 
in 65 papillary thyroid carcinomas (90.3%) and was related to silencing of
homeobox B9 (77.8%) (P = .003). The loss of homeobox B9 expression was associated
with extrathyroidal extension (P = .002), pathologic stage of tumor (P = .01),
and age older than 45 years (P = .032). However, the CD56 staining did not reveal
any significant relationship with clinicopathologic features (P > .05). In
conclusion, reduced expression of CD56 is associated with homeobox B9 in
papillary thyroid carcinomas. Furthermore, silencing of homeobox B9 is more
common in older age and is linked to extrathyroidal extension and advanced
pathologic stage of papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22225776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2760-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018867108. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

Homeobox B9 induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-associated
radioresistance by accelerating DNA damage responses.

Chiba N(1), Comaills V, Shiotani B, Takahashi F, Shimada T, Tajima K, Winokur D, 
Hayashida T, Willers H, Brachtel E, Vivanco MD, Haber DA, Zou L, Maheswaran S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Pathology and Cancer Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Homeobox 9 (HOXB9), a nontransforming transcription factor overexpressed in
breast cancer, alters tumor cell fate and promotes tumor progression and
metastasis. Here we show that HOXB9 confers resistance to ionizing radiation by
promoting DNA damage response. In nonirradiated cells, HOXB9 induces spontaneous 
DNA damage, phosphorylated histone 2AX and p53 binding protein 1 foci, and
increases baseline ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) phosphorylation. Upon
ionizing radiation, ATM is hyperactivated in HOXB9-expressing cells during the
early stages of the double-stranded DNA break (DSB) response, accelerating
accumulation of phosphorylated histone 2AX, mediator of DNA-damage checkpoint 1, 
and p53 binding protein 1, at DSBs and enhances DSB repair. The effect of HOXB9
on the response to ionizing radiation requires the baseline ATM activity before
irradiation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition induced by TGF-ß, a HOXB9
transcriptional target. Our results reveal the impact of a HOXB9-TGF-ß-ATM axis
on checkpoint activation and DNA repair, suggesting that TGF-ß may be a key
factor that links tumor microenvironment, tumor cell fate, DNA damage response,
and radioresistance in a subset of HOXB9-overexpressing breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC3286905
PMID: 21930940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 May;58(5):715-21. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23279. Epub 2011
Aug 4.

Differentially expressed miRNAs in cytogenetic and molecular subtypes of
pediatric acute myeloid leukemia.

Danen-van Oorschot AA(1), Kuipers JE, Arentsen-Peters S, Schotte D, de Haas V,
Trka J, Baruchel A, Reinhardt D, Pieters R, Zwaan CM, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs regulate gene expression, and thus play an important role in
critical cellular processes. Aberrant miRNA expression patterns have been found
in various types of cancer. So far, information about the expression of miRNAs in
pediatric acute myeloid leukemia is limited.
PROCEDURE: We studied expression of miR-29a, -155, -196a, and -196b by stem-loop 
based RT-qPCR in 82 pediatric acute myeloid leukemia patients selected to
represent relevant cytogenetic and molecular subgroups.
RESULTS: High miR-196a and -b expression was observed in patients carrying MLL
gene rearrangements (P < 0.001), NPM1 mutations (P < 0.001), or FLT3-ITD in a
cytogenetically normal background (P = 0.02), compared to all other patients. In 
contrast, CEBPA mutated cases had a low expression of miR-196a and -b (P =
0.001). Expression of miR-196a and -b was correlated with expression of
neighboring HOXA and HOXB genes (Spearman's r = 0.46-0.82, P < 0.01). Expression 
of miR-155 was not related to cytogenetic features but high expression of miR-155
was observed in FLT3-ITD (P = 0.001) and NPM1-mutated cases (P = 0.04). Lower
miR-29a expression was mainly observed in MLL-rearranged pediatric acute myeloid 
leukemia, specifically in cases carrying t(10;11) (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We show aberrant expression of specific miRNAs in clinically
relevant cytogenetic and molecular subgroups of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia,
suggesting a role for these miRNAs in the underlying biology in these specific
subgroups.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21818844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Jun;78(6):436-49. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21321. Epub 2011 May 12.

HOX genes are expressed in bovine and mouse oocytes and early embryos.

Paul D(1), Bridoux L, Rezsöhazy R, Donnay I.

Author information: 
(1)Université Catholique de Louvain, Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Embryologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire Animale, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

HOX proteins are transcription factors that play a major role in patterning the
body axis of vertebrates from the gastrulation stage. While nothing has been
reported so far about their roles at earlier stages, there is evidence that some 
HOX genes are expressed before gastrulation. The objective of this work was to
study the pattern of expression of several HOX genes during oocyte maturation and
early embryonic development up to the blastocyst stage. Using nested PCR, HOXD1, 
HOXA3, HOXD4, HOXB7, HOXB9, and HOXC9 transcripts were detected in bovine oocytes
and early embryos at various frequencies depending on the stage of development.
Quantitative PCR was performed on bovine oocytes and early embryos: relative
expression of HOXD1, HOXA3, and HOXC9 decreased sharply after the 5-8 cell stage.
HOXB9 relative expression increased between the oocyte and the morula stage. All 
transcripts seemed to be of maternal origin before the maternal to embryonic
transition, as demonstrated by blocking transcription with a-amanitin. Reverse
transcription was performed with either hexamers or oligo-dT, allowing for the
determination that HOXC9 transcripts were slightly deadenylated during oocyte
maturation; HOXD1, HOXA3, and HOXB9 transcripts were not, indicating that they
could be translated. Hoxd1, Hoxa3, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 expression was also detected 
in mouse oocytes and early embryos. A similar pattern of expression was found in 
the two species. In conclusion, mammalian HOX genes might be implicated in the
control of oocyte maturation, the maternal-to-embryonic transition or the first
steps of embryo differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21567651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochemistry. 2011 May 3;50(17):3517-27. doi: 10.1021/bi102037t. Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Histone methylases MLL1 and MLL3 coordinate with estrogen receptors in
estrogen-mediated HOXB9 expression.

Ansari KI(1), Shrestha B, Hussain I, Kasiri S, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, 76019, United States.

Homeobox gene HOXB9 is a critical player in development of mammary gland and
sternum and in regulation of renin which is closely linked with blood pressure
control. Our studies demonstrated that HOXB9 gene is transcriptionally regulated 
by estrogen (E2). HOXB9 promoter contains several estrogen-response elements
(ERE). Reporter assay based experiments demonstrated that HOXB9 promoter EREs are
estrogen responsive. Estrogen receptors ERa and ERß are essential for E2-mediated
transcriptional activation of HOXB9. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ERs bind to HOXB9 EREs as a function of E2. Similarly, histone 
methylases MLL1 and MLL3 also bind to HOXB9 EREs and play a critical role in
E2-mediated transcriptional activation of HOXB9. Overall, our studies
demonstrated that HOXB9 is an E2-responsive gene and ERs coordinate with MLL1 and
MLL3 in E2-mediated transcriptional regulation of HOXB9.

PMCID: PMC3082634
PMID: 21428455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4888-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018161108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Axial Hox9 activity establishes the posterior field in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Current models hold that the early limb field becomes polarized into anterior and
posterior domains by the opposing activities of Hand2 and Gli3. This polarization
is essential for the initiation of Shh expression in the posterior margin of the 
limb bud, but how this polarity is established is not clear. Here we show that
initial anteroposterior polarization of the early forelimb field requires the
function of all four Hox9 paralogs (Hoxa9, Hoxb9, Hoxc9, and Hoxd9). This is
unexpected, given that only HoxA and HoxD AbdB group genes have been shown to
play a role in forelimb patterning, regulating the activation and maintenance of 
Shh expression and subsequent proximal-distal patterning of the forelimb. Our
analysis of Hox9 quadruple mutants demonstrates that Hox9 function is required
for the expression of Hand2 in the posterior limb field. Subsequently, Gli3
expression is not repressed posteriorly, Shh expression is not initiated, and
collinear expression of HoxA/D10-13 is not established, resulting in severely
malformed forelimbs lacking all posterior, Shh-regulated elements. This Hox9
mutant phenotype is restricted to the forelimbs; mutant hindlimbs are normal,
revealing fundamental differences in the patterning mechanisms governing the
establishment of forelimb and hindlimb fields.

PMCID: PMC3064354
PMID: 21383175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 14;404(2):610-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.014. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Inhibition of Sirt1 promotes neural progenitors toward motoneuron differentiation
from human embryonic stem cells.

Zhang Y(1), Wang J, Chen G, Fan D, Deng M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University Third Hospital, Haidian District,
Beijing 100191, China.

Several protocols direct human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) toward
differentiation into functional motoneurons, but the efficiency of motoneuron
generation varies based on the human ESC line used. We aimed to develop a novel
protocol to increase the formation of motoneurons from human ESCs. In this study,
we tested a nuclear histone deacetylase protein, Sirt1, to promote neural
precursor cell (NPC) development during differentiation of human ESCs into
motoneurons. A specific inhibitor of Sirt1, nicotinamide, dramatically increased 
motoneuron formation. We found that about 60% of the cells from the total NPCs
expressed HB9 and ßIII-tubulin, commonly used motoneuronal markers found in
neurons derived from ESCs following nicotinamide treatment. Motoneurons derived
from ESC expressed choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), a positive marker of mature 
motoneuron. Moreover, we also examined the transcript levels of Mash1, Ngn2, and 
HB9 mRNA in the differentiated NPCs treated with the Sirt1 activator resveratrol 
(50 µM) or inhibitor nicotinamide (100 µM). The levels of Mash1, Ngn2, and HB9
mRNA were significantly increased after nicotinamide treatment compared with
control groups, which used the traditional protocol. These results suggested that
increasing Mash1 and Ngn2 levels by inhibiting Sirt1 could elevate HB9
expression, which promotes motoneuron differentiation. This study provides an
alternative method for the production of transplantable motoneurons, a key
requirement in the development of hESC-based cell therapy in motoneuron disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21144831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 May;68(10):1769-83. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0548-7. Epub 
2010 Oct 28.

Preservation of positional identity in fetus-derived neural stem (NS) cells from 
different mouse central nervous system compartments.

Onorati M(1), Binetti M, Conti L, Camnasio S, Calabrese G, Albieri I, Di Febo F, 
Toselli M, Biella G, Martynoga B, Guillemot F, Consalez GG, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Center for Stem Cell Research,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Balzaretti 9, 20133, Milan, Italy.

Neural stem (NS) cells are a self-renewing population of symmetrically dividing
multipotent radial glia-like stem cells, characterized by homogeneous expansion
in monolayer. Here we report that fetal NS cells isolated from different regions 
of the developing mouse nervous system behave in a similar manner with respect to
self-renewal and neuropotency, but exhibit distinct positional identities. For
example, NS cells from the neocortex maintain the expression of anterior
transcription factors, including Otx2 and Foxg1, while Hoxb4 and Hoxb9 are
uniquely found in spinal cord-derived NS cells. This molecular signature was
stable for over 20 passages and was strictly linked to the developmental stage of
the donor, because only NS cells derived from E14.5 cortex, and not those derived
from E12.5 cortex, carried a consistent transcription factor profile. We also
showed that traits of this positional code are maintained during neuronal
differentiation, leading to the generation of electrophysiologically active
neurons, even if they do not acquire a complete neurochemical identity.

PMID: 20981563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):6-14. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.04.017.

Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis revealed four genomic prognostic
biomarkers for primary gastric cancers.

Tomioka N(1), Morita K, Kobayashi N, Tada M, Itoh T, Saitoh S, Kondo M, Takahashi
N, Kataoka A, Nakanishi K, Takahashi M, Kamiyama T, Ozaki M, Hirano T, Todo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, N-15 W-7 Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan. ntomioka@sapporo-shaho.jp

Unlike the case with some other solid tumors, whole genome array screening has
not revealed prognostic genetic aberrations in primary gastric cancer.
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) using bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) arrays for 56 primary gastric cancers resulted in identification of four
prognostic loci in this study: 6q21 (harboring FOXO3A; previously FKHRL1), 9q32
(UGCG), 17q21.1 approximately q21.2 (CASC3), and 17q21.32 (HOXB3 through HOXB9). 
If any one of these four loci was deleted, the prognosis of the patient was
significantly worse (P = 0.0019). This was true even for advanced tumors (stage
IIIA, IIB, or IV, n = 39) (P = 0.0113), whereas only 1 of the 17 patients with
less advanced tumors (stage IA, IB, or II; n = 17) died of disease after surgery.
Multivariate analysis according to the status of four BACs or pathological stage 
based on the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma (stages IA, IB, and II 
vs. stages IIIA, IIIB, and IV) demonstrated that the BAC clone status was also an
independent prognostic factor (P = 0.006). These findings may help predict which 
patients with malignant potential need more intensive therapy, or may point to
new therapeutic approaches especially for advanced tumors. The parameter here
termed the integrated genomic prognostic biomarker may therefore be of clinical
utility as a prognostic biomarker.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 13;107(15):6788-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1003108107. Epub 2010 Mar 29.

Regulation of the polycomb protein Ring1B by self-ubiquitination or by E6-AP may 
have implications to the pathogenesis of Angelman syndrome.

Zaaroor-Regev D(1), de Bie P, Scheffner M, Noy T, Shemer R, Heled M, Stein I,
Pikarsky E, Ciechanover A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Vascular Biology Research Center, The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine
and Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096,
Israel.

The polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 1 protein Ring1B is an ubiquitin ligase
that modifies nucleosomal histone H2A, a modification which plays a critical role
in regulation of gene expression. We have shown that self-ubiquitination of
Ring1B generates multiply branched, "noncanonical" polyubiquitin chains that do
not target the ligase for degradation, but rather stimulate its activity toward
histone H2A. This finding implies that Ring1B is targeted by a heterologous E3.
In this study, we identified E6-AP (E6-associated protein) as a ligase that
targets Ring1B for "canonical" ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. We
further demonstrated that both the self-ubiquitination of Ring1B and its
modification by E6-AP target the same lysines, suggesting that the fate of Ring1B
is tightly regulated (e.g., activation vs. degradation) by the type of chains and
the ligase that catalyzes their formation. As expected, inactivation of E6-AP
affects downstream effectors: Ring1B and ubiquitinated H2A levels are increased
accompanied by repressed expression of HoxB9, a PRC1 target gene. Consistent with
these findings, E6-AP knockout mice display an elevated level of Ring1B and
ubiquitinated histone H2A in various tissues, including cerebellar Purkinje
neurons, which may have implications to the pathogenesis of Angelman syndrome, a 
neurodevelopmental disorder caused by deficiency of E6-AP in the brain.

PMCID: PMC2872415
PMID: 20351251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 19;107(3):1100-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912710107. Epub 2009 Dec 28.

HOXB9, a gene overexpressed in breast cancer, promotes tumorigenicity and lung
metastasis.

Hayashida T(1), Takahashi F, Chiba N, Brachtel E, Takahashi M, Godin-Heymann N,
Gross KW, Vivanco Md, Wijendran V, Shioda T, Sgroi D, Donahoe PK, Maheswaran S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The mechanisms underlying tumoral secretion of signaling molecules into the
microenvironment, which modulates tumor cell fate, angiogenesis, invasion, and
metastasis, are not well understood. Aberrant expression of transcription
factors, which has been implicated in the tumorigenesis of several types of
cancers, may provide a mechanism that induces the expression of growth and
angiogenic factors in tumors, leading to their local increase in the tumor
microenvironment, favoring tumor progression. In this report, we demonstrate that
the transcription factor HOXB9 is overexpressed in breast carcinoma, where
elevated expression correlates with high tumor grade. HOXB9 induces the
expression of several angiogenic factors (VEGF, bFGF, IL-8, and ANGPTL-2), as
well as ErbB (amphiregulin, epiregulin, and neuregulins) and TGF-ss, which
activate their respective pathways, leading to increased cell motility and
acquisition of mesenchymal phenotypes. In vivo, HOXB9 promotes the formation of
large, well-vascularized tumors that metastasize to the lung. Thus, deregulated
expression of HOXB9 contributes to breast cancer progression and lung metastasis 
by inducing several growth factors that alter tumor-specific cell fates and the
tumor stromal microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC2824265
PMID: 20080567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Feb 15;19(4):573-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp524. Epub 2009 Nov
23.

Huntingtin facilitates polycomb repressive complex 2.

Seong IS(1), Woda JM, Song JJ, Lloret A, Abeyrathne PD, Woo CJ, Gregory G, Lee
JM, Wheeler VC, Walz T, Kingston RE, Gusella JF, Conlon RA, MacDonald ME.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 185
Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by expansion of the polymorphic polyglutamine
segment in the huntingtin protein. Full-length huntingtin is thought to be a
predominant HEAT repeat alpha-solenoid, implying a role as a facilitator of
macromolecular complexes. Here we have investigated huntingtin's domain structure
and potential intersection with epigenetic silencer polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), suggested by shared embryonic deficiency phenotypes. Analysis of a set of
full-length recombinant huntingtins, with different polyglutamine regions,
demonstrated dramatic conformational flexibility, with an accessible hinge
separating two large alpha-helical domains. Moreover, embryos lacking huntingtin 
exhibited impaired PRC2 regulation of Hox gene expression, trophoblast giant cell
differentiation, paternal X chromosome inactivation and histone H3K27
tri-methylation, while full-length endogenous nuclear huntingtin in wild-type
embryoid bodies (EBs) was associated with PRC2 subunits and was detected with
trimethylated histone H3K27 at Hoxb9. Supporting a direct stimulatory role,
full-length recombinant huntingtin significantly increased the histone H3K27
tri-methylase activity of reconstituted PRC2 in vitro, and structure-function
analysis demonstrated that the polyglutamine region augmented full-length
huntingtin PRC2 stimulation, both in Hdh(Q111) EBs and in vitro, with
reconstituted PRC2. Knowledge of full-length huntingtin's alpha-helical
organization and role as a facilitator of the multi-subunit PRC2 complex provides
a novel starting point for studying PRC2 regulation, implicates this chromatin
repressive complex in a neurodegenerative disorder and sets the stage for further
study of huntingtin's molecular function and the impact of its modulatory
polyglutamine region.

PMCID: PMC2807366
PMID: 19933700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010 Feb;468(2):337-44. doi: 10.1007/s11999-009-1073-6.
Epub 2009 Sep 11.

The Otto Aufranc Award: Identification of a 4 Mb region on chromosome 17q21
linked to developmental dysplasia of the hip in one 18-member, multigeneration
family.

Feldman G(1), Dalsey C, Fertala K, Azimi D, Fortina P, Devoto M, Pacifici M,
Parvizi J.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas Jefferson University and the Rothman Institute of Orthopaedics, 925
Chestnut Street, 5th Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is a disabling condition that, depending
on geography, can afflict between 20% and 80% of patients with end-stage
arthritis of the hip. Despite its prevalence, the etiology of this disease
remains unknown. DDH is a complex disorder with both environmental and genetic
causes. Based on the literature the candidate genes for the disease are HOXB9,
collagen type I alpha1, and DLX 3. The purpose of our study was to map and
characterize the gene or genes responsible for this disorder by family linkage
analysis. We recruited one 18-member, multigeneration affected family to provide 
cheek swabs and blood samples for isolation of DNA. Amplified DNA underwent a
total genome scan using GeneChip Mapping 250 K Assay (Affymetrix, Santa Clara,
CA). We observed only one region with a LOD score greater than 1.5: a 4 Mb region
on chromosome 17q21.32, yielding a LOD score of 1.82. While a LOD score of 1.82
does not meet the accepted standard for linkage we interpret these data as
suggesting the responsible gene could be linked to this region, which includes a 
cluster of homeobox genes (HOX genes) that are part of the developmental
regulatory system providing cells with specific positional identities along the
developing joint and spine. Discovering the genetic basis of the disease would be
an important step in understanding the etiology of this disabling condition.

PMCID: PMC2807013
PMID: 19756907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell. 2009 Jul 10;138(1):51-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.030. Epub 2009 Jul 2.

WNT/TCF signaling through LEF1 and HOXB9 mediates lung adenocarcinoma metastasis.

Nguyen DX(1), Chiang AC, Zhang XH, Kim JY, Kris MG, Ladanyi M, Gerald WL,
Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2009 Sep;9(9):610.

Metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma can occur swiftly to multiple organs within
months of diagnosis. The mechanisms that confer this rapid metastatic capacity to
lung tumors are unknown. Activation of the canonical WNT/TCF pathway is
identified here as a determinant of metastasis to brain and bone during lung
adenocarcinoma progression. Gene expression signatures denoting WNT/TCF
activation are associated with relapse to multiple organs in primary lung
adenocarcinoma. Metastatic subpopulations isolated from independent lymph
node-derived lung adenocarcinoma cell lines harbor a hyperactive WNT/TCF pathway.
Reduction of TCF activity in these cells attenuates their ability to form brain
and bone metastases in mice, independently of effects on tumor growth in the
lungs. The WNT/TCF target genes HOXB9 and LEF1 are identified as mediators of
chemotactic invasion and colony outgrowth. Thus, a distinct WNT/TCF signaling
program through LEF1 and HOXB9 enhances the competence of lung adenocarcinoma
cells to colonize the bones and the brain. For a video summary of this article,
see the PaperFlick file available with the online Supplemental Data.

PMCID: PMC2742946
PMID: 19576624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 30;4(6):e6086. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006086.

Transcription-independent heritability of induced histone modifications in the
mouse preimplantation embryo.

VerMilyea MD(1), O'Neill LP, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, UK.

Enzyme-catalyzed, post-translational modifications of core histones have been
implicated in the complex changes in gene expression that drive early mammalian
development. However, until recently the small number of cells available from the
preimplantation embryo itself has prevented quantitative analysis of histone
modifications at key regulator genes. The possible involvement of histone
modifications in the embryo's response to extracellular signals, or as
determinants of cell fate or lineage progression, remains unclear. Here we
describe the use of a recently-developed chromatin immunoprecipitation technique 
(CChIP) to assay histone modification levels at key regulator genes (Pou5f1,
Nanog, Cdx2, Hoxb1, Hoxb9) as mouse embryos progress from 8-cell to blastocyst in
culture. Only by the blastocyst stage, when the embryonic (Inner Cell Mass) and
extra-embryonic (Trophoblast) lineages are compared, do we see the expected
association between histone modifications previously linked to active and silent 
chromatin, and transcriptional state. To explore responses to an environmental
signal, we exposed embryos to the histone deacetylase inhibitor, anti-epileptic
and known teratogen valproic acid (VPA), during progression from 8-cell to morula
stage. Such treatment increased H4 acetylation and H3 lysine 4 methylation at the
promoters of Hoxb1 and Hoxb9, but not the promoters of Pou5f1, Nanog,Cdx2 or the 
housekeeping gene Gapdh. Despite the absence of detectable Hoxb transcription,
these VPA-induced changes were heritable, following removal of the inhibitor, at 
least until the blastocyst stage. The selective hyperacetylation of Hoxb
promoters in response to a histone deacetylase inhibitor, suggests that Hox genes
have a higher turnover of histone acetates than other genes in the
preimplantation embryo. To explain the heritability, through mitosis, of
VPA-induced changes in histone modification at Hoxb promoters, we describe how an
epigenetic feed-forward loop, based on cross-talk between H3 acetylation and H3K4
methylation, might generate a persistently increased steady-state level of
histone acetylation in response to a transient signal.

PMCID: PMC2698989
PMID: 19564914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 1;333(1):26-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.06.019. Epub 2009
Jun 22.

Dazap2 is required for FGF-mediated posterior neural patterning, independent of
Wnt and Cdx function.

Roche DD(1), Liu KJ, Harland RM, Monsoro-Burq AH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, CNRS, UMR146, Centre Universitaire, Batiment 110, 91405 Orsay 
Cedex, France.

The organization of the embryonic neural plate requires coordination of multiple 
signal transduction pathways, including fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), and WNTs. Many studies have suggested that a
critical component of this process is the patterning of posterior neural tissues 
by an FGF-caudal signaling cascade. Here, we have identified a novel player,
Dazap2, and show that it is required in vivo for posterior neural fate. Loss of
Dazap2 in embryos resulted in diminished expression of hoxb9 with a concurrent
increase in the anterior marker otx2. Furthermore, we found that Dazap2 is
required for FGF dependent posterior patterning; surprisingly, this is
independent of Cdx activity. Furthermore, in contrast to FGF activity, Dazap2
induction of hoxb9 is not blocked by loss of canonical Wnt signaling.
Functionally, we found that increasing Dazap2 levels alters neural patterning and
induces posterior neural markers. This activity overcomes the anteriorizing
effects of noggin, and is downstream of FGF receptor activation. Our results
strongly suggest that Dazap2 is a novel and essential branch of FGF-induced
neural patterning.

PMCID: PMC3769164
PMID: 19555680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2009 Aug;17(8):1099-105. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2008.12.012. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Do HOXB9 and COL1A1 genes play a role in congenital dislocation of the hip? Study
in a Caucasian population.

Rouault K(1), Scotet V, Autret S, Gaucher F, Dubrana F, Tanguy D, Yaacoub El
Rassi C, Fenoll B, Férec C.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U613, Univ Brest, UMR-S613, Brest F-29200, France.

OBJECTIVE: Congenital dislocation of the hip (CDH), which is one of the most
common congenital skeletal disorders, corresponds to an abnormal seating of the
femoral head in the acetabulum. It is commonly admitted that CDH presents a
genetic component. However, little is known about the genetic factors involved.
This study aimed to determine the role of two potential candidate genes on
chromosome 17 in CDH: HOXB9 (involved in limb embryonic development) and COL1A1
(involved in joint laxity).
METHOD: We set up a case-control association study (239 cases and 239 controls)
in western Brittany (France) where CDH is particularly frequent. The set of
informative single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in each gene was selected
using Tagger and genotyped using the SNaPshot method (n=2 and n=10,
respectively). The association was tested both through single-locus and
haplotype-based analyses, using SAS and Haploview softwares. In addition, we
carried out the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) with the same
polymorphisms from a sample of 81 trios (i.e., 81 patients included in the
case-control study and their both parents).
RESULTS: The case-control study revealed no significant association between CDH
and the tagSNPs selected in both HOXB9 and COL1A1. Moreover, the TDT did not
reveal distortion in allelic and haplotype transmission of the studied markers.
CONCLUSION: Our study did not support an association between HOXB9 and COL1A1 and
CDH in our population. These negative findings were obtained by population- and
family-based designs. Analysis of the genetic component of CDH should focus on
other candidate genes.

PMID: 19341834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Apr;36(6):1965-75. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm1079. Epub 2008
Feb 14.

Secondary DNA structure formation for Hoxb9 promoter and identification of its
specific binding protein.

Yamagishi T(1), Hirose S, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Kondo Research Unit, Brain Development Research Group, Brain Science
Institute, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Hox genes determine anterior-posterior specificity of an animal body. In mammals,
these genes map onto four chromosomal loci in a clustered manner, and their
expression is regulated in a coordinated manner according to their chromosomal
structure. In the present study, we analysed the Hoxb9 promoter and found that
promoter activity in cultured cells is linked to secondary structure formation of
promoter DNA. In nuclear extracts, we also detected binding activity specific for
secondary-structured DNA. We successfully isolated a candidate gene encoding this
specific DNA-binding protein, FBXL10, and demonstrated the effects of the gene
product on Hoxb9 promoter activity. Our results suggest that DNA can regulate
gene expression by other, non-sequence-specific modes of genetic coding.

PMCID: PMC2330229
PMID: 18276649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Cells. 2007 May;12(5):581-92.

Critical role of the p400/mDomino chromatin-remodeling ATPase in embryonic
hematopoiesis.

Ueda T(1), Watanabe-Fukunaga R, Ogawa H, Fukuyama H, Higashi Y, Nagata S,
Fukunaga R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics (B-3), Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences and
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Japan Science and Technology
Corporation, Osaka, Japan.

The SWI2/SNF2 family ATPase, p400/mDomino, is a core subunit of a large
chromatin-remodeling complex, and is currently suggested to play a unique
function in histone variant exchange, a process by which chromatin structure is
altered. Here, we investigated the role of p400/mDomino in mammalian development 
by generating mutant mice with a targeted deletion of the N-terminal domain of
p400/mDomino (referred to as mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN)). The mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice
died on embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), and displayed an anemic appearance and slight
deformity of the neural tube. DNA microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses
revealed that all of the embryonic globin genes and a globin chaperone gene were 
poorly expressed in the mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) embryo and yolk sac on E8.5,
indicating that primitive erythropoiesis was impaired. A hematopoietic colony
assay indicated that the hematopoietic activity of the yolk sac was significantly
blocked in the mutant mice. We also found that the expression of a limited set of
Hox genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9 and Hoxb9, was drastically enhanced in the
mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) yolk sacs. These results suggest that p400/mDomino plays a
critical role in embryonic hematopoiesis by regulating the expression of
developmentally essential genes such as those in the Hox gene cluster.

PMID: 17535249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2508-16.

Fine mapping and candidate gene analyses of pulmonary adenoma resistance 1, a
major genetic determinant of mouse lung adenoma resistance.

Wang M(1), Zhang Z, Zhang Z, Vikis H, Yan Y, Wang Y, You M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and The Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Pulmonary adenoma resistance 1 (Par1) is a major genetic determinant of mouse
lung adenoma resistance. Although Par1 was previously mapped to mouse chromosome 
11 by conventional linkage analyses, its candidate region was broad and
undefined. In our present study, we generated Par1 congenic mice using two mouse 
strains A/J (Par1/-) and Mus spretus (Par1/+). Analyzing these congenic mice
enabled us to fine map the Par1 quantitative trait loci (QTL) into a 2.0-cM (2.2 
Mb) chromosomal region between genetic marker D11Mit70 and the gene Hoxb9. We
then conducted systematic candidate gene screening through nucleotide
polymorphism and expression analyses. Genes showing differential lung tissue
expression or carrying nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms were
identified and discussed. In particular, we evaluated tumor suppressor gene Tob1 
for its Par1 candidacy. Our findings have narrowed the Par1 QTL region and will
greatly facilitate the identification of the major genetic determinant of mouse
lung adenoma resistance.

PMID: 17363568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Blood. 2007 Apr 1;109(7):3015-23.

Comprehensive analysis of homeobox genes in Hodgkin lymphoma cell lines
identifies dysregulated expression of HOXB9 mediated via ERK5 signaling and BMI1.

Nagel S(1), Burek C, Venturini L, Scherr M, Quentmeier H, Meyer C, Rosenwald A,
Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und
Zellkulturen (DSMZ), Braunschweig, Germany. sna@dsmz.de

Many members of the nearly 200-strong homeobox gene family have been implicated
in cancer, mostly following ectopic expression. In this study we analyzed
homeobox gene expression in Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cell lines. Both reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers and
microarray profiling identified consistently up-regulated HOXB9 expression.
Analysis of HOXB9 regulation in HL cells revealed E2F3A and BMI1 as activator and
repressor, respectively. Furthermore, a constitutively active ERK5 pathway was
identified in all HL cell lines analyzed as well as primary HL cells. Our data
show that ERK5 probably mediates HOXB9 expression by repressing BMI1. In
addition, expression analysis of the neighboring microRNA gene mir-196a1 revealed
coregulation with HOXB9. Functional analysis of HOXB9 by knockdown and
overexpression assays indicated their influence on both proliferation and
apoptosis in HL cells. In summary, we identified up-regulation of HOXB9 in HL
mediated by constitutively active ERK5 signaling which may represent novel
therapeutic targets in HL.

PMID: 17148583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1472-8. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

The histone methyltransferase MLL is an upstream regulator of endothelial-cell
sprout formation.

Diehl F(1), Rössig L, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S, Urbich C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Germany.

Posttranslational histone modification by acetylation or methylation regulates
gene expression. Here, we investigated the role of the histone lysine
methyltransferase MLL for angiogenic functions in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Suppression of MLL expression by siRNA or incubation with the 
pharmacologic methyltransferase inhibitor 5'-deoxy-5'-(methylthio)adenosine
significantly decreased endothelial-cell migration and capillary sprout
formation, indicating that methyltransferase activity is required for
proangiogenic endothelial-cell functions. Because the expression of homeodomain
transcription factors (Hox) is regulated by MLL, we elucidated the role of Hox
gene expression. MLL silencing was associated with reduced mRNA and protein
expression of HoxA9 and HoxD3, whereas HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxB5, and HoxB9 were not
altered. Overexpression of HoxA9 or HoxD3 partially compensated for impaired
migration in MLL siRNA-transfected endothelial cells, suggesting that HoxA9 and
HoxD3 both contribute to MLL-dependent migration. As a potential underlying
mechanism, MLL siRNA down-regulated mRNA and protein levels of the
HoxA9-dependent axon guidance factor EphB4. In contrast, MLL knockdown effects on
capillary sprouting were not rescued by HoxA9 or HoxD3 overexpression, indicating
that MLL affects additional targets required for 3-dimensional sprout formation. 
We conclude that MLL regulates endothelial-cell migration via HoxA9 and EphB4,
whereas sprout formation requires MLL-dependent signals beyond HoxA9 and HoxD3.

PMID: 17047146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Development. 2005 May;132(9):2215-23.

Nuclear re-organisation of the Hoxb complex during mouse embryonic development.

Chambeyron S(1), Da Silva NR, Lawson KA, Bickmore WA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

The spatial and temporal co-linear expression of Hox genes during development is 
an exquisite example of programmed gene expression. The precise mechanisms
underpinning this are not known. Analysis of Hoxb chromatin structure and nuclear
organisation, during the differentiation of murine ES cells, has lent support to 
the idea that there is a progressive 'opening' of chromatin structure propagated 
through Hox clusters from 3'to 5', which contributes to the sequential activation
of gene expression. Here, we show that similar events occur in vivo in at least
two stages of development. The first changes in chromatin structure and nuclear
organisation were detected during gastrulation in the Hoxb1-expressing posterior 
primitive streak region: Hoxb chromatin was decondensed and the Hoxb1 locus
looped out from its chromosome territory, in contrast to non-expressing Hoxb9,
which remained within the chromosome territory. At E9.5, when differential Hox
expression along the anteroposterior axis is being established, we found
concomitant changes in the organisation of Hoxb. Hoxb organisation differed
between regions of the neural tube that had never expressed Hoxb [rhombomeres (r)
1 and 2], strongly expressed Hoxb1 but not b9 (r4), had downregulated Hoxb1 (r5),
expressed Hoxb9 but not Hoxb1 (spinal cord), and expressed both genes (tail bud).
We conclude that Hoxb chromatin decondensation and nuclear re-organisation is
regulated in different parts of the developing embryo, and at different
developmental stages. The differential nuclear organisation of Hoxb along the
anteroposterior axis of the developing neural tube is coherent with co-linear Hox
gene expression. In early development nuclear re-organisation is coupled to Hoxb 
expression, but does not anticipate it.

PMID: 15829525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2005 Jan 1;154(1):63-70.

Distinct effects of caudalizing factors on regional specification of embryonic
stem cell-derived neural precursors.

Irioka T(1), Watanabe K, Mizusawa H, Mizuseki K, Sasai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Organogenesis and Neurogenesis Group, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Recent embryological studies have implicated several "caudalizing factors" in the
caudal specification of the central nervous system (CNS). In this study, we have 
examined the effects of three candidate caudalizing factors on neural precursors 
induced from embryonic stem (ES) cells by the stromal cell-derived inducing
activity (SDIA) method. Among retinoic acid (RA), Wnt and FGF signals, RA causes 
the strongest level of caudalization: inducing suppression of forebrain
differentiation and promotion of caudal CNS specification. Obvious suppression of
the telencephalic marker Bf1 and that of the forebrain marker Otx2 occur at
2x10(-8) and 2x10(-7) M, respectively. Activation of the caudal marker genes such
as Hoxb9 is observed in a dose-dependent manner over the range of
2x10(-9)-2x10(-6) M. Suppression of the forebrain genes has a narrow critical
period of RA response during the early culture phase. In contrast, significant
induction of the caudal genes is evoked by a 1-day exposure to RA at any time
between days 3 and 8. RA treatment not only induces caudal specification but also
inhibits differentiation of ventral CNS tissues, particularly of floor plate
cells. FGF4 induces partial caudalization while Wnt-3A exhibits weak caudalizing 
activities only in the presence of RA. These findings provide useful information 
on the proper selection of combination of signaling molecules, doses and timing
for steering ES cell differentiation by caudalizing factors into caudal neural
fates.

PMID: 15617756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genes Dev. 2004 May 15;18(10):1119-30.

Chromatin decondensation and nuclear reorganization of the HoxB locus upon
induction of transcription.

Chambeyron S(1), Bickmore WA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, United Kingdom.

The colinearity of genes in Hox clusters suggests a role for chromosome structure
in gene regulation. We reveal programmed changes in chromatin structure and
nuclear organization upon induction of Hoxb expression by retinoic acid. There is
an early increase in the histone modifications that are marks of active chromatin
at both the early expressed gene Hoxb1, and also at Hoxb9 that is not expressed
until much later. There is also a visible decondensation of the chromatin between
Hoxb1 and Hoxb9 at this early stage. However, a further change in higher-order
chromatin structure, looping out of genes from the chromosome territory, occurs
in synchrony with the execution of the gene expression program. We suggest that
higher-order chromatin structure regulates the expression of the HoxB cluster at 
several levels. Locus-wide changes in chromatin structure (histone modification
and chromatin decondensation) may establish a transcriptionally poised state but 
are not sufficient for the temporal program of gene expression. The choreographed
looping out of decondensed chromatin from chromosome territories may then allow
for activation of high levels of transcription from the sequence of genes along
the cluster.

PMCID: PMC415637
PMID: 15155579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Development. 2004 Jun;131(11):2653-67. Epub 2004 May 5.

Multiple points of interaction between retinoic acid and FGF signaling during
embryonic axis formation.

Shiotsugu J(1), Katsuyama Y, Arima K, Baxter A, Koide T, Song J, Chandraratna RA,
Blumberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA.

Anteroposterior (AP) patterning of the developing CNS is crucial for both
regional specification and the timing of neurogenesis. Several important factors 
are involved in AP patterning, including members of the WNT and FGF growth factor
families, retinoic acid receptors, and HOX genes. We have examined the
interactions between FGF and retinoic signaling pathways. Blockade of FGF
signaling downregulates the expression of members of the RAR signaling pathway,
RARalpha, RALDH2 and CYP26. Overexpression of a constitutively active RARalpha2
rescues the effects of FGF blockade on the expression of XCAD3 and HOXB9. This
suggests that RARalpha2 is required as a downstream target of FGF signaling for
the posterior expression of XCAD3 and HOXB9. Surprisingly, we found that
posterior expression of FGFR1 and FGFR4 was dependent on the expression of
RARalpha2. Anterior expression was also altered with FGFR1 expression being lost,
whereas FGFR4 expression was expanded beyond its normal expression domain.
RARalpha2 is required for the expression of XCAD3 and HOXB9, and for the ability 
of XCAD3 to induce HOXB9 expression. We conclude that RARalpha2 is required at
multiple points in the posteriorization pathway, suggesting that correct AP
neural patterning depends on a series of mutually interactive feedback loops
among FGFs, RARs and HOX genes.

PMID: 15128657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nature. 2004 Feb 19;427(6976):749-53.

The cell-cycle regulator geminin inhibits Hox function through direct and
polycomb-mediated interactions.

Luo L(1), Yang X, Takihara Y, Knoetgen H, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Biology, Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2004 Feb 19;427(6976):687-8.

Embryonic development is tightly controlled. The clustered genes of the Hox
family of homeobox proteins play an important part in regulating this development
and also proliferation. They specify embryonic structures along the body axis,
and are associated with normal and malignant cell growth. The cell-cycle
regulator geminin controls replication by binding to the licensing factor Cdt1,
and is involved in neural differentiation. Here, we show that murine geminin
associates transiently with members of the Hox-repressing polycomb complex, with 
the chromatin of Hox regulatory DNA elements and with Hox proteins. Gain- and
loss-of-function experiments in the chick neural tube demonstrate that geminin
modulates the anterior boundary of Hoxb9 transcription, which suggests a
polycomb-like activity for geminin. The interaction between geminin and Hox
proteins prevents Hox proteins from binding to DNA, inhibits Hox-dependent
transcriptional activation of reporter and endogenous downstream target genes,
and displaces Cdt1 from its complex with geminin. By establishing competitive
regulation, geminin functions as a coordinator of developmental and proliferative
control.

PMID: 14973489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 1;264(1):77-90.

In vivo mutagenesis of the Hoxb8 hexapeptide domain leads to dominant homeotic
transformations that mimic the loss-of-function mutations in genes of the Hoxb
cluster.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Extracellular Matrix, Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M University, Houston, TX 77030, USA.olgamm@bcm.tmc.edu

Hox proteins are transcription factors that control developmental pathways along 
the anteroposterior axis of vertebrates. On their own, Hox proteins bind DNA
weakly, but they gain specificity and affinity by interaction with members of the
PBC subfamily of homeobox proteins. In vitro studies indicate that most of these 
interactions are mediated by the conserved hexapeptide motif of the Hox proteins.
To study the significance of these interactions in vivo, we have generated mice
that carry mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif. Analysis of skeletal
features of these mice reveals the presence of a dominant phenotype consisting of
homeotic transformations, similar to those observed in mice with a
loss-of-function of Hox genes, such as Hoxa7, Hoxb7, and Hoxb9. Genetic tests
demonstrate that the mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif are affecting the
function of other genes located in the Hoxb cluster. The expression pattern of
these genes is not affected; rather it appears that the mutant Hoxb8 protein
interferes with the function of other Hox genes by binding to their targets. Our 
findings suggest that the homeotic transformations result from altered DNA
binding specificity of the mutant Hoxb8 protein, implicating the cooperative
binding between Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif and cofactors as a critical element in
the fine-tuning of Hoxb8 protein target specificity. This is the first time the
function of the hexapeptide domain has been evaluated in vivo in mouse
development.

PMID: 14623233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nature. 2003 Oct 30;425(6961):926-33.

Motor neuron columnar fate imposed by sequential phases of Hox-c activity.

Dasen JS(1), Liu JP, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, 701 West
168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA. jd2009@columbia.edu

The organization of neurons into columns is a prominent feature of central
nervous system structure and function. In many regions of the central nervous
system the grouping of neurons into columns links cell-body position to axonal
trajectory, thus contributing to the establishment of topographic neural maps.
This link is prominent in the developing spinal cord, where columnar sets of
motor neurons innervate distinct targets in the periphery. We show here that
sequential phases of Hox-c protein expression and activity control the columnar
differentiation of spinal motor neurons. Hox expression in neural progenitors is 
established by graded fibroblast growth factor signalling and translated into a
distinct motor neuron Hox pattern. Motor neuron columnar fate then emerges
through cell autonomous repressor and activator functions of Hox proteins. Hox
proteins also direct the expression of genes that establish motor topographic
projections, thus implicating Hox proteins as critical determinants of spinal
motor neuron identity and organization.

PMID: 14586461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 11;306(4):1008-13.

Yin Yang 1, a vertebrate polycomb group gene, regulates antero-posterior neural
patterning.

Kwon HJ(1), Chung HM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, San 56-1,
Shillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul 151-747, Republic of Korea.

Polycomb group (PcG) genes are required for the stable repression of the homeotic
genes and other developmentally regulated genes. Yin Yang 1 (YY1), a vertebrate
homolog of the Drosophila PcG pleiohomeotic (Pho), is a multifunctional protein
that can act as a repressor or activator of transcription. Xenopus YY1 (XYY1)
protein was localized in the central nervous system (CNS), particularly anterior 
neural tube of tailbud stage embryos. To elucidate the role of endogenous XYY1,
loss-of-function studies were performed using XYY1 antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide (XYY1 MO). Inhibition of XYY1 function resulted in embryos with
antero-posterior axial patterning defects and reduction of head structures. XYY1 
MO also reduced the expression of En2, a midbrain/hindbrain junction marker,
which was rescued by co-injection of XYY1 mRNA. However, XYY1 MO-injection did
not affect the expression of HoxB9, a spinal cord marker. These results suggest
that YY1 controls antero-posterior patterning of the CNS during Xenopus embryonic
development.

PMID: 12821143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Jun;20(3):193-5.

[Transmission disequilibrium test for congenital dislocation of the hip and HOXB9
gene or COL1AI gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang J(1), Ma HW, Lu Y, Wang YP, Wang Y, Li QW, Ji SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Laboratory, the Second Clinical College, China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning, 110004 PR China. jj816yy@etang.com

OBJECTIVE: To detect the correlation between the congenital dislocation of the
hip (CDH) and HOXB9 gene or COL1AI gene.
METHODS: A microsatellite DNA marker D17S1820 was chosen in the region of
chromosome 17q21 where exists the HOXB9 gene which regulates the embryonic limb
development and exists the COL1AI gene. The genotypes of 303 members in 101 CDH
nuclear family trios were analyzed by the techniques of polymerase chain
reaction(PCR) and denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Then
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) was used to test the data of genotypes.
RESULTS: There exist 12 alleles at this polymorphic locus. Transmission
disequilibrium was found between CDH and the fourth allele of D17S1820
(chi-square=6.025,P=0.014).
CONCLUSION: CDH is associated with the region of chromosome 17q21. HOXB9 gene
and/or COL1AI gene may be susceptibility genes of CDH.

PMID: 12778441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Jun 28;26(3):189-91.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in human embryo lung cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LY(1), Wu GJ, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in
human embryo lung (HEL) cells and influence of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection on the expressions of these genes.
METHOD: The expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes were detected
with semi-quantitative RT-PCR method.
RESULTS: 1. HEL cells expressed HOXB5 and HOXB6 genes, but they did not express
HOXB1 and HOXB9 genes. 2. After HCMV infection, HEL cell was induced to express
HOXB9 gene, as the expression of HOXB6 gene was elevated. The expression of HOXB5
gene had no significant change. HOXB1 was still not expressed. 3. Treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the expression of HOXB9 gene in HEL cells
infected by HCMV was significantly increased. But during the advanced infect
period, the expression of HOXB6 was significantly decreased.
CONCLUSION: HCMV can induce abnormal expressions of HOXB6 and HOXB9 genes, which 
may play an important role in HCMV-induced abnormal embryogenesis.

PMID: 12536675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2002 Sep;129(18):4171-83.

Involvement of the Polycomb-group gene Ring1B in the specification of the
anterior-posterior axis in mice.

Suzuki M(1), Mizutani-Koseki Y, Fujimura Y, Miyagishima H, Kaneko T, Takada Y,
Akasaka T, Tanzawa H, Takihara Y, Nakano M, Masumoto H, Vidal M, Isono K, Koseki 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The products of the Polycomb group of genes form complexes that maintain the
state of transcriptional repression of several genes with relevance to
development and in cell proliferation. We have identified Ring1B, the product of 
the Ring1B gene (Rnf2 - Mouse Genome Informatics), by means of its interaction
with the Polycomb group protein Mel18. We describe biochemical and genetic
studies directed to understand the biological role of Ring1B. Immunoprecipitation
studies indicate that Ring1B form part of protein complexes containing the
products of other Polycomb group genes, such as Rae28/Mph1 and M33, and that this
complexes associate to chromosomal DNA. We have generated a mouse line bearing a 
hypomorphic Ring1B allele, which shows posterior homeotic transformations of the 
axial skeleton and a mild derepression of some Hox genes (Hoxb4, Hoxb6 and Hoxb8)
in cells anterior to their normal boundaries of expression in the mesodermal
compartment. By contrast, the overexpression of Ring1B in chick embryos results
in the repression of Hoxb9 expression in the neural tube. These results, together
with the genetic interactions observed in compound Ring1B/Mel18 mutant mice, are 
consistent with a role for Ring1B in the regulation of Hox gene expression by
Polycomb group complexes.

PMID: 12183370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):297-301.

Expression of homeobox-containing genes in cDNA libraries derived from cattle
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo.

Ponsuksili S(1), Wimmers K, Adjaye J, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee,
53115 Bonn, Germany. spon@itz.uni-bonn.de

The homeobox-containing gene family plays a pivotal role in regulating,
patterning, and axial morphogenesis in the developing embryo. But there is still 
very little known about the expression and function of these genes in mammalian
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos. In this study we have used degenerate 
primers corresponding to the highly conserved regions of Antennapedia class
homeodomains as a rapid and an efficient method to survey bovine cDNA libraries
derived from unfertilised oocytes, single 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and
blastocyst stage embryos for the presence of homeobox sequences. Our results
provide, for the first time, evidence for the transcription of Hoxa3 and Hoxd1 in
oocytes; Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the 2-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, Hoxd1, and Hoxd4 in the
4-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, and Hoxc9 in the 8-cell; Cdx2, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in the
morula; Cdx2, Hoxb7, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in blastocyst stage cattle embryos. These
are candidate genes for the developmental capacity of in vivo and in vitro
produced bovine embryos.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Am J Pathol. 2001 Aug;159(2):753-64.

Clinical and experimental progression of a new model of human prostate cancer and
therapeutic approach.

de Pinieux G(1), Legrier ME, Poirson-Bichat F, Courty Y, Bras-Gonçalves R,
Dutrillaux AM, Némati F, Oudard S, Lidereau R, Broqua P, Junien JL, Dutrillaux B,
Poupon MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section de Recherche, Institut Curie, UMR-147-CNRS, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75231 Paris,
France.

We report the clinical evolution of a prostate cancer, metastasizing to lungs and
bones, recurring locally, and escaping from anti-androgen therapy. Key event of
biological progression of the patient's tumor was the coincidence of allelic
imbalance accumulation and of bone metastases occurrence. The recurrent tumor was
established as the transplantable xenograft PAC120 in nude mice, where it grew
locally. PAC120 displayed the same immunophenotype of the original tumor
(positive for keratin, vimentin, prostatic acid phosphatase, and Leu-7) and
expressed human HOXB9, HOXA4, HER-2/neu, and prostate-specific antigen genes, as 
detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. It formed lung
micrometastases detected by mRNA expression of human genes. Cytogenetic analysis 
demonstrated numerous alterations reflecting the tumor evolution. PAC120 was
still hormone-dependent; its growth was strongly inhibited by the new
gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist FE 200486 but weakly by
gonadotropin-releasing hormone superagonist D-Trp(6)-luteinizing-hormone
releasing hormone (decapeptyl). Tumor growth inhibition induced by anti-hormone
therapy was linked to the hormone deprivation degree, more important and more
stable with FE 200486 than with D-Trp(6)-luteinizing-hormone releasing hormone.
Surgical castration of mice led to tumor regressions but did not prevent late
recurrences. Transition to hormone-independent tumors was frequently associated
with a mucoid differentiation or with a neuroendocrine-like pattern. Independent 
variations of mRNA expression of HER-2/neu and prostate-specific antigen were
observed in hormone-independent tumors whereas HOXB9 gene expression was
constant. In conclusion, PAC120 xenograft, a new model of hormone-dependent
prostate cancer retained the progression potential of the original tumor, opening
the opportunity to study the hormone dependence escape mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1850557
PMID: 11485933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Genes Evol. 2001 Jun;211(6):309-14.

Xenopus Polycomblike 2 (XPcl2) controls anterior to posterior patterning of the
neural tissue.

Kitaguchi T(1), Nakata K, Nagai T, Aruga J, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Neurobiology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

A novel gene, Xenopus Polycomblike 2 (XPcl2), which encodes a protein similar to 
Drosophila Polycomblike was cloned and characterized. Polycomblike belongs to the
Polycomb group proteins, which maintain stable expression patterns for the
clustered homeotic genes in the Drosophila embryo by forming multimeric complexes
on chromatin. XPcl2 shows greater amino acid sequence homology to human and mouse
M96 (hPcl2, mPcl2) than Xenopus Pcl1 (XPcl1), mouse Tctex3 (mPcl1) and human PHF1
(hPcl1), indicating that at least two types of Polycomblike genes are conserved
between amphibians and mammals. XPcl2 mRNA is present both maternally and
zygotically, and the temporal expression profile is distinct from XPcl1, another 
member of the Polycomblike family in Xenopus. XPcl2 is highly expressed in the
anterior-dorsal region of Xenopus following the neurula stage in a manner similar
to XPcl1. Overexpression of XPcl2 disturbs the development of the anterior
central nervous system, eye and cement gland. In the XPcl2-overexpressing embryo,
a hindbrain marker, Krox20, and a spinal cord marker, HoxB9, are expressed more
posteriorly, suggesting an alteration in the anterior-posterior patterning of the
neural tissue. In addition, XPcl2 represses Zic3- and noggin-induced anterior
neural markers, but not neural crest markers in animal cap explants. These
results indicate that XPcl2 regulates anterior neural tissue development and the 
anterior-posterior patterning of the neural tissue.

PMID: 11466526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32489-94. Epub 2001 Jun 29.

An Abd-B class HOX.PBX recognition sequence is required for expression from the
mouse Ren-1c gene.

Pan L(1), Xie Y, Black TA, Jones CA, Pruitt SC, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Expression from the mouse Ren-1(c) gene in As4.1 cells is dependent on a proximal
promoter element (PPE) located at approximately -60 and a 241-base pair enhancer 
region located at -2625 relative to the transcription start site. The PPE
(TAATAAATCAA) is identical to a consensus HOX.PBX binding sequence. Further,
PBX1b has been shown to be a component of a PPE-specific binding complex present 
in nuclear extracts from As4.1 cells. The binding affinities of different paralog
HOX members to the PPE were examined in the absence or presence of PBX1b. HOXB6, 
-B7, and -C8 failed to bind the PPE alone but showed weak affinity in the
presence of PBX1b. In contrast, HOXD10 and to a lesser degree HOXB9 bound the PPE
with high affinities regardless of whether PBX1b was present. Abd-B HOX members, 
including HOXD10, -A10, -A9, -B9, and -C9, are expressed in As4.1 cells. The
ability of HOX and PBX1b to form a ternary complex with PREP1 on the PPE is also 
demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. Point mutations in either the HOX or PBX 
half-site of the PPE disrupted the formation of the HOX.PBX complex and
dramatically decreased transcriptional activity of the Ren-1(c) gene
demonstrating that both the HOX and PBX half-sites are critical for mouse renin
gene expression. These results strongly implicate Abd-B class Hox genes and their
cofactors as major determinants of the sites of renin expression.

PMID: 11432851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mech Dev. 2001 Jun;104(1-2):113-5.

Expression of zebrafish btg-b, an anti-proliferative cofactor, during early
embryogenesis.

Sakaguchi T(1), Kuroiwa A, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Early Embryogenesis, National Institute of Genetics and The
Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.

BTG/tob family proteins are thought to be a potential tumor suppressor due to
their anti-proliferative activity. We cloned zebrafish btg-b, a member of the
BTG1/2 subfamily, using in situ hybridization screening. The tissue-specific
expression of btg-b is first observed in the organizer region at the early
gastrula stage. Later in development, the forebrain, the hindbrain, the polster
and the paraxial mesoderm transiently express btg-b. Recently, mouse Btg1 and
Btg2 have been shown to be a cofactor for Hoxb9. Double in situ hybridization
with zebrafish btg-b and hoxb9a indicates that the expression domains of these
two genes overlap in the posterior paraxial mesoderm.

PMID: 11404086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Cell Physiol. 2001 May;187(2):155-65.

The gene PC3(TIS21/BTG2), prototype member of the PC3/BTG/TOB family: regulator
in control of cell growth, differentiation, and DNA repair?

Tirone F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Neurobiologia, Rome, Italy.
tirone@mercury.itbm.rm.cnr.it

PC3(TIS21/BTG2) is the founding member of a family of genes endowed with
antiproliferative properties, namely BTG1, ANA/BTG3, PC3B, TOB, and TOB2. PC3 was
originally isolated as a gene induced by nerve growth factor during neuronal
differentiation of rat PC12 cells, or by TPA in NIH3T3 cells (named TIS21), and
is a marker for neuronal birth in vivo. This and other findings suggested its
implication in the process of neurogenesis as mediator of the growth arrest
before differentiation. Remarkably, its human homolog, named BTG2, was shown to
be p53-inducible, in conditions of genotoxic damage. PC3(TIS21/BTG2) impairs
G(1)-S progression, either by a Rb-dependent pathway through inhibition of cyclin
D1 transcription, or in a Rb-independent fashion by cyclin E downregulation.
PC3(TIS21/BTG2) might also control the G(2) checkpoint. Furthermore,
PC3(TIS21/BTG2) interacts with carbon catabolite repressor protein-associated
factor 1 (CAF-1), a molecule that associates to the yeast transcriptional complex
CCR4 and might influence cell cycle, with the transcription factor Hoxb9, and
with the protein-arginine methyltransferase 1, that might control transcription
through histone methylation. Current evidence suggests a physiological role of
PC3(TIS21/BTG2) in the control of cell cycle arrest following DNA damage and
other types of cellular stress, or before differentiation of the neuron and other
cell types. The molecular function of PC3(TIS21/BTG2) is still unknown, but its
ability to modulate cyclin D1 transcription, or to synergize with the
transcription factor Hoxb9, suggests that it behaves as a transcriptional
co-regulator.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11267995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Biol. 2000 Dec 1;228(1):41-56.

Expression of activated MAP kinase in Xenopus laevis embryos: evaluating the
roles of FGF and other signaling pathways in early induction and patterning.

Curran KL(1), Grainger RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
22903, USA.

FGF signaling has been implicated in germ layer formation and axial
determination. An antibody specific for the activated form of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) was used to monitor FGF signaling in vivo during early
Xenopus development. Activation of MAPK in young embryos is abolished by
injection of a dominant negative FGF receptor (XFD) RNA, suggesting that MAPK is 
activated primarily by FGF in this context. A transition from cytoplasmic to
nuclear localization of activated MAPK occurs in morula/blastula stage embryo
animal and marginal zones coinciding with the proposed onset of mesodermal
competence. Activated MAPK delineates the region of the dorsal marginal zone
before blastopore formation and persists in this region during gastrulation,
indicating an early role for FGF signaling in dorsal mesoderm. Activated MAPK was
also found in posterior neural tissue from late gastrulation onward. Inhibition
of FGF signaling does not block posterior neural gene expression (HoxB9) or
activation of MAPK; however, inhibition of FGF signaling does cause a
statistically significant decrease in the level of activated MAPK. These results 
point toward the involvement of other receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways
in posterior neural patterning.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12776-81.

Altered HOX and WNT7A expression in human lung cancer.

Calvo R(1), West J, Franklin W, Erickson P, Bemis L, Li E, Helfrich B, Bunn P,
Roche J, Brambilla E, Rosell R, Gemmill RM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, and Department of Pathology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes encode transcription factors that control patterning and cell fates.
Alterations in HOX expression have been clearly implicated in leukemia, but their
role in most other malignant diseases remains unknown. By using degenerate
reverse transcription-PCR and subsequent real-time quantitative assays, we
examined HOX expression in lung cancer cell lines, direct tumor-control pairs,
and bronchial epithelial cultures. As in leukemia, genes of the HOX9 paralogous
group and HOXA10 were frequently overexpressed. For HOXB9, we confirmed that
elevated RNA was associated with protein overexpression. In some cases, marked
HOX overexpression was associated with elevated FGF10 and FGF17. During
development, the WNT pathway affects cell fate, polarity, and proliferation, and 
WNT7a has been implicated in the maintenance of HOX expression. In contrast to
normal lung and mortal short-term bronchial epithelial cultures, WNT7a was
frequently reduced or absent in lung cancers. In immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells, WNT7a was lost concomitantly with HOXA1, and a statistically
significant correlation between the expression of both genes was observed in lung
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we identified a homozygous deletion of
beta-catenin in the mesothelioma, NCI-H28, associated with reduced WNT7a and the 
lowest overall cell line expression of HOXA1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10, whereas
HOXB9 levels were unaffected. Of note, both WNT7a and beta-catenin are encoded on
chromosome 3p, which undergoes frequent loss of heterozygosity in these tumors.
Our results suggest that alterations in regulatory circuits involving HOX, WNT,
and possibly fibroblast growth factor pathways occur frequently in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC18840
PMID: 11070089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Growth Differ. 2000 Aug;42(4):307-16.

Involvement of BMP-4/msx-1 and FGF pathways in neural induction in the Xenopus
embryo.

Ishimura A(1), Maeda R, Takeda M, Kikkawa M, Daar IO, Maéno M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Niigata University, Japan.

The msx homeodomain protein is a downstream transcription factor of the bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 signal and a key regulator for neural tissue
differentiation. Xmsx-1 antagonizes the dorsal expression of noggin and cerberus,
as revealed by in situ hybridization and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction assays. In animal cap explants, Xmsx-1 and BMP-4 inhibit the neural
tissue differentiation induced by noggin or cerberus. A loss-of-function study
using the Xmsx-1/VP-16 fusion construct indicated that neural tissue formation
was directly induced by the injection of fusion ribonucleic acid, although the
expression of neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) in the cap was less than that
in the cap injected with tBR or noggin. In contrast to the single cap assay,
unexpectedly, both BMP-4 and Xmsx-1 failed to inhibit neurulation in the
ectodermal explants to which the organizer mesoderm was attached. The results of 
cell-lineage tracing experiments indicated that the neural cells were
differentiated from the animal pole tissue where the excess RNA of either BMP-4
or Xmsx-1 was injected, whereas notochord was differentiated from the organizer
mesoderm. Neural tissue differentiated from BMP-4-injected ectodermal cells
strongly expressed posterior neural markers, such as hoxB9 and krox20, suggesting
that the posterior neural cells differentiated regardless of the existence of the
BMP signal. The introduction of a dominant-negative form of the fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) receptor (XFD) into the ectodermal cells drastically reduced the
expression of pan and posterior neural markers (N-CAM and hoxB-9) if co-injected 
with BMP-4 RNA, although XFD alone at the same dose did not shut down the
expression of N-CAM in the combination explants. Therefore, it is proposed that
an FGF-related molecule was involved in the direct induction of posterior neural 
tissue in the inducing signals from the organizer mesoderm in vivo.

PMID: 10969730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Orthop Res. 2000 May;18(3):340-4.

Localization of dominantly inherited isolated triphalangeal thumb to chromosomal 
region 7q36.

Dobbs MB(1), Dietz FR, Gurnett CA, Morcuende JA, Steyers CM, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa
City 52242-1088, USA. matthew-dobbs@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    J Orthop Res. 2000 May;18(3):339.

Triphalangeal thumb is an autosomal dominantly inherited form of abnormal
preaxial skeletal development. In most families, however, the triphalangeal thumb
phenotype coexists with a spectrum of limb deformities, including polydactyly and
syndactyly. We describe two Iowa kindreds with triphalangeal thumb. In one
family, with nine affected members, triphalangeal thumb was the only
manifestation of limb deformity. We performed linkage analysis on both pedigrees,
demonstrating a maximum LOD score of 6.23 with marker D7S559 on chromosome 7q36. 
This corresponds to a previous study of a candidate region of 450 kb in which
data from several families with preaxial polydactyly were employed. Further
analysis of the unique family with isolated triphalangeal thumb in the current
study may demonstrate allelic variability of the gene involved in these
disorders.

PMID: 10937618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Cell Sci. 2000 Aug;113 ( Pt 16):2865-75.

Signaling specificities of fibroblast growth factor receptors in early Xenopus
embryo.

Umbhauer M(1), Penzo-Méndez A, Clavilier L, Boucaut J, Riou J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, groupe
Biologie Expérimentale, UMR CNRS 7622, Université Paris VI, 75005 Paris, France.

Formation of mesoderm and posterior structures in early Xenopus embryos is
dependent on fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling. Although several FGF
receptors (FGFRs) are expressed in the early embryo, their respective role in
these processes remains poorly understood. We provide evidence that FGFR-1 and
FGFR-4 signals elicit distinct responses both in naive and neuralized ectodermal 
cells. We show that naive ectodermal cells expressing a constitutively active
chimeric torso-FGFR-1 (t-R1) are converted into mesoderm in a Ras-dependent
manner, while those expressing torso-FGFR-4 (t-R4) differentiate into epidermis
without significant activation of Erk-1. In neuralized ectoderm, expression of
t-R4 causes the up-regulation of the midbrain markers En-2 and Wnt-1, but not of 
the hindbrain nor the spinal cord markers Krox20 and Hoxb9. Mutation of tyr(776) 
in the phospholipase C-(gamma) binding consensus sequence YLDL of t-R4 completely
abolishes En-2 and Wnt-1 induction. In contrast to t-R4, platelet derived growth 
factor (PDGF)-dependent FGFR-1 activation in neuralized ectodermal cells
expressing a chimeric PDGFR-FGFR-1 receptor results in the expression of Krox20
and Hoxb9. A similar effect is observed when an inducible form of oncogenic Raf
is expressed, therefore implicating FGFR-1 and Raf in the transduction of
FGF-caudalizing signals in neural tissue. Our results suggest that FGFR-1 and
FGFR-4 transduce distinct signals in embryonic cells, and mainly differ in their 
ability to activate the Ras/MAPK pathway.

PMID: 10910771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 1;222(1):71-83.

A large targeted deletion of Hoxb1-Hoxb9 produces a series of single-segment
anterior homeotic transformations.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Bradley A, Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University System Health
Sciences Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Hox genes regulate axial regional specification during animal embryonic
development and are grouped into four clusters. The mouse HoxB cluster contains
10 genes, Hoxb1 to Hoxb9 and Hoxb13, which are transcribed in the same direction.
We have generated a mouse strain with a targeted 90-kb deletion within the HoxB
cluster from Hoxb1 to Hoxb9. Surprisingly, heterozygous mice show no detectable
abnormalities. Homozygous mutant embryos survive to term and exhibit an ordered
series of one-segment anterior homeotic transformations along the cervical and
thoracic vertebral column and defects in sternum morphogenesis. Neurofilament
staining indicates abnormalities in the IXth cranial nerve. Notably, simultaneous
deletion of Hoxb1 to Hoxb9 resulted in the sum of phenotypes of single HoxB gene 
mutants. Although a higher penetrance is observed, no synergistic or new
phenotypes were observed, except for the loss of ventral curvature at the
cervicothoracic boundary of the vertebral column. Although Hoxb13, the most 5'
gene, is separated from the rest by 70 kb, it has been suggested to be expressed 
with temporal and spatial colinearity. Here, we show that the expression pattern 
of Hoxb13 is not affected by the targeted deletion of the other 9 genes. Thus,
Hoxb13 expression seems to be independent of the deleted region, suggesting that 
its expression pattern could be achieved independent of the colinear pattern of
the cluster or by a regulatory element located 5' of Hoxb9.

PMID: 10885747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 7;275(1):147-53.

The leukemia-associated protein Btg1 and the p53-regulated protein Btg2 interact 
with the homeoprotein Hoxb9 and enhance its transcriptional activation.

Prévôt D(1), Voeltzel T, Birot AM, Morel AP, Rostan MC, Magaud JP, Corbo L.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U453, Centre Léon Bérard, 69373 Lyon Cedex 08, France.

BTG1 and BTG2 belong to a family of functionally related genes involved in the
control of the cell cycle. As part of an ongoing attempt to understand their
biological functions, we used a yeast two-hybrid screening to look for possible
functional partners of Btg1 and Btg2. Here we report the physical and functional 
association between these proteins and the homeodomain protein Hoxb9. We further 
show that Btg1 and Btg2 enhance Hoxb9-mediated transcription in transfected
cells, and we report the formation of a Hoxb9.Btg2 complex on a Hoxb9-responsive 
target, and the fact that this interaction facilitates the binding of Hoxb9 to
DNA. The transcriptional activity of the Hoxb9.Btg complex is essentially
dependent on the activation domain of Hoxb9, located in the N-terminal portion of
the protein. Our data indicate that Btg1 and Btg2 act as transcriptional
cofactors of the Hoxb9 protein, and suggest that this interaction may mediate
their antiproliferative function.

PMID: 10617598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mech Dev. 1998 Dec;79(1-2):137-52.

Anteroposterior patterning and organogenesis of Xenopus laevis require a correct 
dose of germ cell nuclear factor (xGCNF).

David R(1), Joos TO, Dreyer C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Tübingen, Germany.

The germ cell nuclear factor of Xenopus laevis (xGCNF; NR6A1) is a nuclear orphan
receptor that is predominantly expressed during neurula and late tailbud stages. 
As a strategy to analyze the role of xGCNF in embryogenesis, we have induced a
gain of function by overexpression of full-length (fl) GCNF and a functional
inhibition by a dominant-negative (dn) GCNF. Early events of embryogenesis
including gastrulation and neurulation were not affected and the expression of
several early mesodermal markers was normal. Yet specific defects were observed
upon organogenesis. Ectopic posterior overexpression of the full-length xGCNF
caused posterior defects and disturbed somite formation. In contrast, expression 
of dnGCNF interfered with differentiation of the neural tube and affected the
differentiation of anterior structures, including the cement gland and the eyes. 
Embryos affected by dnGCNF were rescued by coexpression of flGCNF. After
expression of dnGCNF, mRNA encoding the the retinoic acid receptor xRAR gamma 2
was selectively suppressed anteriorly. From the distinct phenotypes obtained, we 
conclude that GCNF has an essential function in anteroposterior differentiation
during organogenesis.

PMID: 10349627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Leuk Lymphoma. 1998 Nov;31(5-6):599-608.

Modulation of homeobox B6 and B9 genes expression in human leukemia cell lines
during myelomonocytic differentiation.

Ohnishi K(1), Tobita T, Sinjo K, Takeshita A, Ohno R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

Homeobox genes (HOX) may have a regulatory function in the differentiation
process of hematopoiesis. We examined the change of HOX B6 and HOX B9 mRNA
expressions during the in vitro differentiation of four myeloid leukemia cell
lines because HOX B6 may be involved closely in myeloid differentiation. HL-60,
NB4, NKM-1 and NOMO-1 were established from acute leukemia of M2, M3, M2 and M5
subtype of the French-American-British classification, respectively. All-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA), TPA, and G-CSF were used as differentiation inducers. Each 
cell line was cultured with each inducer and total RNA was isolated on day 1, 2, 
3, or 5. HOX B mRNA was detected by Northern blotting and RT-PCR methods. HOX B6 
and HOX B9 mRNAs were constitutively expressed in NB4, NKM-1 and NOMO-1, but were
expressed at very low levels in HL-60. HOX B6 and HOX B9 mRNAs were also
expressed in fresh acute myelocytic leukemia blasts. HOX B6 mRNA expression in
HL-60, NB4, and NKM-1 cultured with ATRA increased on day 3 and decreased on day 
5. HOX B6 mRNA expression in NB4 and NKM-1 cultured with TPA decreased on day 3. 
HOX B9 mRNA expression displayed changes similar to those of HOX B6 mRNA in NB4
and NKM-1. These results indicate that myeloid leukemia cell lines express HOX B6
and HOX B9, and that their respective mRNA expressions in NB4 and HL-60 increase 
at a mid stage of myeloid differentiation by ATRA induction and then decrease
during a late stage. HOX B6 mRNA expression decreased in monocytoid
differentiation by TPA induction in NB4, HL-60 and NKM-1. HOX B6
antisense-oligonucleotide inhibited the proliferation of NB4 and NKM-1. These
results suggest that HOX B gene expression is related to simultaneous activation 
of cellular proliferation and differentiation in leukemic cells.

PMID: 9922051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Biol. 1999 Jan 15;205(2):296-308.

FGF is required for posterior neural patterning but not for neural induction.

Holowacz T(1), Sokol S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Harvard Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, 02215, USA.
tamara@bcmp.med.harvard.edu

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) has been implicated in a variety of developmental 
processes including posterior mesoderm and neural patterning. Previous work has
led to contradictory roles for FGF in neural induction and anteroposterior neural
patterning. Launay et al. (Development 122, 869-880, 1996) suggested a
requirement for FGF in anterior neural induction. In contrast, Kroll and Amaya
(Development 122, 3173-3183, 1996) and Bang et al. (Development 124, 2075-2085,
1997) proposed that FGF is not required for early neural patterning. Here we use 
a loss-of-function assay to examine whether FGF is required for neural patterning
in three experimental situations: (i) in Xenopus early embryos, (ii) in embryonic
explants consisting of presumptive dorsal mesoderm and neurectoderm (Keller
explants), and (iii) in explants of dorsal ectoderm and posterior mesoderm in
which FGF signaling is specifically blocked in the ectoderm. When cultured until 
tailbud stages, Keller explants develop neural tissue with normal anteroposterior
pattern. Overexpression of the dominant-negative FGF receptor (XFD) in Keller
explants inhibited the posterior neural markers En-2, Krox-20, and HoxB9, but not
the panneural marker nrp-1 and the anterior neurectodermal markers XAG-1 and
Xotx-2. Similar results were seen in whole embryos, but only when XFD RNA was
targeted to both the dorsal and lateral regions. In contrast, addition of FGF to 
Keller explants resulted in a shift of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary marker
En-2 to a more anterior position normally fated to become cement gland. We also
determined whether FGF is required specifically by the neurectoderm for
anteroposterior neural patterning. Recombinants of dorsal ectoderm and posterior 
mesoderm were made in which FGF was specifically blocked in the ectoderm. Spinal 
cord and hindbrain markers were inhibited in these recombinants, whereas anterior
markers and cement gland development were enhanced. Our results demonstrate that 
FGF is important for posterior development in both mesoderm and neurectoderm and 
that neural induction and posteriorization represent separable developmental
events.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9917365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dev Biol. 1999 Jan 15;205(2):224-32.

The neurotransmitter noradrenaline drives noggin-expressing ectoderm cells to
activate N-tubulin and become neurons.

Messenger NJ(1), Rowe SJ, Warner AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.

Neurotransmitters regulate neuronal function in the nervous system and modulation
of their synthesis, release, and binding by immature neurons and their targets is
a major part of nervous system development. We propose that the neurotransmitter 
noradrenaline regulates neuronal fate during neurulation, before neurons have
differentiated. The ability of noradrenaline to induce a neural fate was tested
in naive ectoderm caps cut from late blastula stage Xenopus embryos.
Noradrenaline (10(-6) M) did not switch on otx-2 or NCAM and did not induce the
formation of cement glands. We conclude that noradrenaline cannot induce a neural
fate. By contrast, 10(-8) M noradrenaline activated N-tubulin in ectoderm caps
expressing the neural inducing molecule noggin by the time intact siblings had
become mid-neurulae. Methoxamine, a specific alpha-adrenergic receptor agonist,
also activated N-tubulin in noggin-expressing caps. The alpha-adrenergic receptor
blocker prazosin inhibited both noradrenaline- and methoxamine-induced activation
of N-tubulin. The neurotransmitters dopamine and 5-HT did not activate expression
of N-tubulin. XA-1, Otx-2, X-Delta, and Xotch transcripts were not sensitive to
noradrenaline. HoxB9, which indicates posteriorization, was not activated by
noradrenaline. When intact siblings were at stage 27, many cells in
noggin-expressing, noradrenaline-treated caps were stained by the neuron-specific
mcAb3A10. We propose that noradrenaline is an important endogenous modulator of
neuronal fate, driving noggin-expressing cells to become neurons by binding to
alpha-adrenergic receptors and activating a cascade that culminates in the
expression of the neuronal markers N-tubulin and 3A10.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9917358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jan 19;96(2):541-6.

Paralogous mouse Hox genes, Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9, function together to control
development of the mammary gland in response to pregnancy.

Chen F(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Although the role of Hox genes in patterning the mammalian body plan has been
studied extensively during embryonic and fetal development, relatively little is 
known concerning Hox gene function in adult animals. Analysis of mice with mutant
Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9 genes shows that these paralogous genes are required for 
mediating the expansion and/or differentiation of the mammary epithelium ductal
system in response to pregnancy. Mothers with these three mutant genes cannot
raise their own pups, but the pups can be rescued by fostering by wild-type
mothers. Histologically, the mammary glands of the mutant mothers seem normal
before pregnancy but do not develop properly in response to pregnancy and
parturition. Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9 are expressed normally in adult mammary
glands, suggesting a direct role for these genes in the development of mammary
tissue after pregnancy. Because loss-of-function mutations in these Hox genes
cause hypoplasia of the mammary gland after pregnancy, it may be productive to
look for misexpression of these genes in mammary carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC15172
PMID: 9892669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mech Dev. 1998 Sep;77(1):49-57.

Analysis of Hoxa7/Hoxb7 mutants suggests periodicity in the generation of the
different sets of vertebrae.

Chen F(1), Greer J, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with targeted disruptions in Hoxa7 and Hoxb7, respectively.
Mice carrying the Hoxa7 mutation are healthy. No abnormalities in the formation
of the skeleton or other tissues were found in these mutants. Twelve percent of
Hoxb7-/- mutants show first and second rib defects similar to those observed in
mice homozygous for a Hoxb9 mutation (Chen, F., Capecchi, M.R., 1997. Dev. Biol. 
181, 186-196). Hoxb7-/- mice are also fertile and were used to generate double
mutants with Hoxa7 to reveal potential interactions between these two paralogous 
genes. Mice homozygous for both mutations have first and second rib defects with 
higher penetrance and increased expressivity, indicating a functional role for
Hoxa7 in the patterning of the upper thoracic region. Although Hoxb6, Hoxa7,
Hoxb7, and Hoxb9 have distinctive anterior expression limits in axial mesoderm,
the disruptions of these genes all yield first and second rib defects. A
hypothesis is suggested to explain the observation that axial defects in these
and other mouse Hox mutants appear to concentrate along the axial column at zones
of transition between vertebral types.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9784603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8198-206.

The Abd-B-like Hox homeodomain proteins can be subdivided by the ability to form 
complexes with Pbx1a on a novel DNA target.

Shen WF(1), Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

Previous studies showed that the Hox homeodomain proteins from paralog groups 1-8
display cooperative DNA binding with the non-Hox homeodomain protein Pbx,
mediated by a canonical YPWM. Although the Abd-B-like Hox proteins in paralogs
9-13 lack this sequence, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 were reported to bind with Pbx1a to
DNA. We show that these interactions require a tryptophan 6 amino acids
N-terminal to the homeodomain. Binding site selection for Hoxb-9 with Pbx1a
yielded ATGATTTACGAC, containing a novel TTAC Hox-binding site adjacent to a Pbx 
site. In the presence of Pbx1a, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 bound to targets containing
either TTAC or TTAT. These data extend previous findings that interactions with
Pbx define a Hox protein binding code for different DNA sequences across paralog 
groups 1 through 10. Members of the 11, 12, and 13 paralogs do not cooperatively 
bind DNA with Pbx1a, despite the presence of tryptophan residues N-terminal to
the homeodomain in Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-13. Hoxa-11, Hoxd-12, or Hoxd-13, in the
presence of Pbx1a, selected a TTAC Hox site but lacking a Pbx1a site. These data 
suggest that Abd-B-like Hox proteins bind to a novel TTAC site and can be divided
by their cooperative binding to DNA with Pbx1a.

PMID: 9079637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Biol. 1997 Jan 15;181(2):186-96.

Targeted mutations in hoxa-9 and hoxb-9 reveal synergistic interactions.

Chen F(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with a targeted disruption of the homeobox-containing gene
hoxb-9. Mice homozygous for this mutation show defects in the development of the 
first and second ribs. In most cases the first and second ribs are fused near the
point at which the first and second pairs of ribs normally attach to the sternum.
Abnormalities of the sternum accompany the rib fusions. These include abnormal
attachment of the ribs to the sternum, a reduction in the number of intercostal
segments of the sternum, and abnormal growth of the intercostal segments. Over
half of the homozygous mutants, as well as some heterozygotes, also have an
eighth rib attached to the sternum. These results show that hoxb-9 plays a
significant role in the specification of thoracic skeletal elements. To reveal
potential interactions between the paralogous Hox genes hoxa-9 and hoxb-9, mice
heterozygous for both mutations were intercrossed. Mice homozygous for both
mutations show more severe phenotypes than predicted by the addition of the
individual mutant phenotypes. Both the penetrance and the expressivity of the rib
and sternal defects are increased, suggesting synergistic interactions between
these genes. In particular, the sternum defects are greatly exacerbated.
Interestingly, the defects in hoxb-9 and hoxa-9/ hoxb-9 mutant mice are
concentrated along the axial column at points of transition between vertebral
types.

PMID: 9013929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mech Dev. 1997 Jan;61(1-2):113-25.

Graded amounts of Xenopus dishevelled specify discrete anteroposterior cell fates
in prospective ectoderm.

Itoh K(1), Sokol SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Signals emitted from the prospective dorsal marginal zone (the organizer) are
thought to specify neuroectodermal cell fates along the anteroposterior (AP)
axis, but the mechanisms underlying this signaling event remain to be elucidated.
To assess the effect of Xenopus Dishevelled (Xdsh), a proposed component of the
Wnt, Notch and Frizzled signal transduction pathways, on AP axis determination,
it was supplied in varying doses to presumptive ectodermal cells. Two-fold
increments in levels of microinjected Xdsh mRNA revealed a gradual shift in cell 
fates along the AP axis. Lower doses of Xdsh mRNA activated anterior
neuroectodermal markers, XAG1 and Xotx2, whereas the higher doses induced more
posterior neural tissue markers such as En2, Krox20 and HoxB9. At the highest
dose of Xdsh mRNA, explants contained maximal amount of HoxB9 transcripts and
developed notochord and somites. When compared with Xdsh, Xwnt8 mRNA also
activated anterior neuroectodermal markers, but failed to elicit mesoderm
formation. Analysis of explants overexpressing Xdsh at the gastrula stage
revealed activation of several organizer-specific genes which have been
implicated in determination of neural tissue (Xotx2, noggin, chordin and
follistatin). Whereas Goosecoid, Xlim1 and Xwnt8 were not induced in these
explants, another early marginal zone marker, Xbra, was activated at the highest 
level of Xdsh mRNA. These observations suggest that the effects of Xdsh on AP
axis specification may be mediated by combinatorial action of several early
patterning genes. Increasing levels of Xdsh mRNA activate posterior markers,
whereas increasing amounts of the organizer stimulate the extent of anterior
development (Stewart, R.M. and Gerhart, J.C. (1990) Development 109, 363-372).
These findings argue against induction of the entire organizer by Xdsh in
ectodermal cells and implicate signal transduction pathways involving Xdsh in AP 
axis determination. Thus, different levels of a single molecule, Xdsh, can
specify distinct cell states along the AP axis.

PMID: 9076682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 24;93(26):15352-7.

A novel modifier gene for plasma von Willebrand factor level maps to distal mouse
chromosome 11.

Mohlke KL(1), Nichols WC, Westrick RJ, Novak EK, Cooney KA, Swank RT, Ginsburg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109, USA.

Type 1 von Willebrand disease (VWD), characterized by reduced levels of plasma
von Willebrand factor (VWF), is the most common inherited bleeding disorder in
humans. Penetrance of VWD is incomplete, and expression of the bleeding phenotype
is highly variable. In addition, plasma VWF levels vary widely among normal
individuals. To identify genes that influence VWF level, we analyzed a genetic
cross between RIIIS/J and CASA/Rk, two strains of mice that exhibit a 20-fold
difference in plasma VWF level. DNA samples from F2 progeny demonstrating either 
extremely high or extremely low plasma VWF levels were pooled and genotyped for
41 markers spanning the autosomal genome. A novel locus accounting for 63% of the
total variance in VWF level was mapped to distal mouse chromosome 11, which is
distinct from the murine Vwf locus on chromosome 6. We designated this locus Mvwf
for "modifier of VWF." Additional genotyping of as many as 2407 meioses
established a high resolution genetic map with gene order
Cola1-Itg3a-Ngfr-Mvwf/Gip-Hoxb9-Hoxb1++ +-Cbx'rs2-Cox5a-Gfap. The Mvwf candidate 
interval between Ngfr and Hoxb9 is approximately 0.5 centimorgan (cM). These
results demonstrate that a single dominant gene accounts for the low VWF
phenotype of RIIIS/J mice in crosses with several other strains. The pattern of
inheritance suggests a gain-of-function mutation in a unique component of VWF
biosynthesis or processing. Characterization of the human homologue for Mvwf may 
have relevance for a subset of type 1 VWD cases and may define an important
genetic factor modifying penetrance and expression of mutations at the VWF locus.

PMCID: PMC26408
PMID: 8986815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 16;91(17):7985-9.

Regulation in vitro of an L-CAM enhancer by homeobox genes HoxD9 and HNF-1.

Goomer RS(1), Holst BD, Wood IC, Jones FS, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Previous studies have shown that in vitro expression of the neural cell adhesion 
molecule (N-CAM) can be regulated by the products of homeobox genes HoxB9, -B8,
and -C6. N-CAM is a Ca(2+)-independent immunoglobulin-related CAM that plays an
important role in neural development. In the present study, we investigated
whether the liver cell adhesion molecule (L-CAM) a member of the Ca(2+)-dependent
CAM family (cadherins) is also regulated by homeobox-containing genes. In
transient cotransfection experiments of NIH 3T3 cells, we observed that both
HoxD9 and liver-enriched POU-homeodomain transcription factor, HNF-1, activated
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene reporter constructs containing the L-CAM
promoter and an enhancer present in the second intron of the chicken L-CAM gene. 
Using electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, we found that components of cell
extracts from NIH 3T3 cells transfected with HoxD9 bound to a small region of the
L-CAM enhancer having a consensus sequence that is a putative binding site for
HNF-1. Components of extracts from the chicken hepatoma cell line LMH that had
been transfected with an HNF-1 expression vector also bound to this same site. In
nuclear run-on experiments with nuclei from LMH cells that were transfected with 
expression vectors for HoxD9 or HNF-1, L-CAM RNA levels were increased 33-fold
and 4-fold respectively. Using the same run-on procedure, it was confirmed that
nuclei prepared from normal embryonic chicken liver cells expressed the RNAs for 
HoxD9, HNF-1, and L-CAM. Taken together with previous observations, these data
raise the possibility that homeobox-containing genes will have a widespread role 
in the place-dependent expression of CAMs belonging both to
immunoglobulin-related and to cadherin families.

PMCID: PMC44529
PMID: 7914699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mech Dev. 1993 Aug;42(3):139-50.

Functional analysis of the mouse homeobox gene HoxB9 in Drosophila development.

Malicki J(1), Bogarad LD, Martin MM, Ruddle FH, McGinnis W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511.

Mammalian genomes contain clusters of homeobox genes (Hox-C, HOX-C) which are
structurally similar to the homeotic genes of the Drosophila HOM complex. One
method for assessing the functional similarity of particular Drosophila HOM and
mammalian Hox genes is to test the ability of Hox genes to induce homeotic
phenotypes when expressed in developing Drosophila. Here we describe such
functional tests using mouse HoxB9 (formerly Hox-2.5), whose closest structural
relative in Drosophila is Abdominal-B. When expressed from a heat shock promoter,
HoxB9 induces transformations of head towards more posterior identities in
Drosophila larvae and adults. These transformations share some similarities with 
the phenotypic effects produced by ectopically expressed Abdominal-B, but are
also similar to the transformations induced by Antennapedia and mouse HoxB6
(Hox-2.2), suggesting that HoxB9 specifies a positional identity that is
intermediate between Antennapedia and Abdominal-B.

PMID: 8105876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


