
1. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Feb 18;7:e2103. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.23.

The anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family protein A1/Bfl-1 regulates neutrophil survival
and homeostasis and is controlled via PI3K and JAK/STAT signaling.

Vier J(1), Groth M(1), Sochalska M(2), Kirschnek S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Department of Medical
Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Centre Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 
(2)Division of Developmental Immunology, Biocenter, Medical University Innsbruck,
Innsbruck, Austria.

Neutrophil granulocytes are innate effector cells of the first line of defense
against pyogenic bacteria. Neutrophil lifespan is short, is prolonged by
pro-inflammatory stimuli, controls functionality of the cells and can determine
tissue damage. Experimental analysis of primary neutrophils is difficult because 
of their short lifespan and lack of possibilities of genetic manipulation. The
Hoxb8 system of neutrophil differentiation from immortalized progenitor cells
offers the advantage of unlimited production of neutrophils in vitro as well as
easy genetic modification. We here use this system to analyze the role of the
poorly characterized anti-apoptotic B-cell lymphoma protein 2 (Bcl-2) family
member A1/Bfl-1 (Bcl-2-related protein A1) for survival and homeostasis of
neutrophils and of neutrophil progenitors. Low constitutive mRNA and protein
expression of A1 was detected, while A1 was transiently upregulated early during 
differentiation. Pro-inflammatory stimuli caused strong, mainly transcriptional, 
A1 upregulation, in contrast to posttranscriptional regulation of Mcl-1 (induced 
myeloid leukemia cell differentiation protein). Inhibitor studies showed that
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/Akt and Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) is required for A1 expression and survival of
progenitors and mature neutrophils. ShRNA-mediated constitutive A1 knockdown (KD)
impaired maintenance of progenitors. ShRNA experiments further showed that A1 was
required early during neutrophil differentiation as well as in mature neutrophils
upon pro-inflammatory stimulation. Our data further indicate differential
regulation of the two anti-apoptotic proteins A1 and Mcl-1. Relevant findings
were confirmed in primary human neutrophils. Our data indicate that A1, in
addition to the well-established Mcl-1, substantially contributes to neutrophil
survival and homeostasis. A1 may thus be a promising target for anti-inflammatory
therapy.

PMID: 26890142  [PubMed - in process]


2. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 3;10(11):e0142211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142211.
eCollection 2015.

Production and Functional Characterization of Murine Osteoclasts Differentiated
from ER-Hoxb8-Immortalized Myeloid Progenitor Cells.

Zach F(1), Mueller A(1), Gessner A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Hospital
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

In vitro differentiation into functional osteoclasts is routinely achieved by
incubation of embryonic stem cells, induced pluripotent stem cells, or primary as
well as cryopreserved spleen and bone marrow-derived cells with soluble receptor 
activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand and macrophage colony-stimulating
factor. Additionally, osteoclasts can be derived from co-cultures with
osteoblasts or by direct administration of soluble receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa-B ligand to RAW 264.7 macrophage lineage cells. However, despite
their benefits for osteoclast-associated research, these different methods have
several drawbacks with respect to differentiation yields, time and animal
consumption, storage life of progenitor cells or the limited potential for
genetic manipulation of osteoclast precursors. In the present study, we therefore
established a novel protocol for the differentiation of osteoclasts from murine
ER-Hoxb8-immortalized myeloid stem cells. We isolated and immortalized bone
marrow cells from wild type and genetically manipulated mouse lines, optimized
protocols for osteoclast differentiation and compared these cells to osteoclasts 
derived from conventional sources. In vitro generated ER-Hoxb8 osteoclasts
displayed typical osteoclast characteristics such as multi-nucleation,
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase staining of supernatants and cells, F-actin
ring formation and bone resorption activity. Furthermore, the osteoclast
differentiation time course was traced on a gene expression level. Increased
expression of osteoclast-specific genes and decreased expression of stem cell
marker genes during differentiation of osteoclasts from ER-Hoxb8-immortalized
myeloid progenitor cells were detected by gene array and confirmed by
semi-quantitative and quantitative RT-PCR approaches. In summary, we established 
a novel method for the quantitative production of murine bona fide osteoclasts
from ER-Hoxb8 stem cells generated from wild type or genetically manipulated
mouse lines. These cells represent a standardized and theoretically unlimited
source for osteoclast-associated research projects.

PMCID: PMC4631598
PMID: 26529319  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 May;72:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.10.032. Epub
2015 Feb 11.

The effect and mechanism of miR196a in HepG2 cell.

Hao Y(1), Wang J(2), Zhao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanxi Provincial People's Hospital, 030012 Shanxi, Taiyuan, China. (2)Shanxi 
Provincial People's Hospital, 030012 Shanxi, Taiyuan, China. Electronic address: 
Junpingwang@gmail.com.

AIM: To explore the role of miR-196a on the regulatory mechanism in hepatocelluar
carcinoma.
METHODS: The antisense RNA of microRNA-196a was synthesized and cloned into the
vector. HepG2 cells were infected by inhibiting miR196a vector. The HepG2 cells
were divided into miR196a lower expression group, NC group and N group in vitro. 
The expression of the targets of miR-196a was detected by qPCR. Cell growth was
analyzed by cck8 assay. The invasion was detected by transwell method. Apoptosis 
was detected by annexinV/PI. The P53, caspase-3, HOXB9, HOXB8 mRNA and their
protein was detected by qPCR and Western-blot.
RESULTS: (1) The expression level of miR-196a was less than normal (41%). (2) The
proliferation of HepG2 was also markedly suppressed in inhibiting miR196a at the 
24 h point than normal about 72.29±2.51% (P<0.01). (3) The number of cells that
migrated through the chamber of miR196a inhibiting group is less than normal and 
NC (P<0.01). (4) The cell apoptosis in miR196a inhibiting group is more than NC
and normal group (P<0.05). HOXB8 mRNA and protein expression, in HepG2 cell line 
miR196a inhibiting group is significantly less than normal, NC (P<0.05).
Caspase-3 mRNA and protein expression is maximum in three groups (P<0.05). In
three groups there was no significant difference in the expression of P53 mRNA
and protein and HOXB9mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that miR-196a can effect the proliferation, 
the apoptosis and migration of HepG2 cell lines by gene HOXB8, caspase-3
regulation. However, there is no correlation between miRNA196a and P53 and HOXB9.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26054667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015;19(6):1055-62.

ATRA and As2O3 regulate differentiation of human hematopoietic stem cells into
granulocyte progenitor via alteration of HoxB8 expression.

Liu WJ(1), Jiang NJ, Guo QL, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Luzhou Medical College,
Luzhou, Sichuan, China. lwjlyfy@qq.com.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the effect of all-trans retinoic acid 
(ATRA) and/or arsenic trioxide (As2O3) on homeobox B8 (HOXB8) mRNA and protein
expressions during the differentiation and proliferation of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) to colony forming unit-granulocyte (CFU-G) in order to explore the
pathogenesis of leukemia mediated by HOXB8 at mRNA and protein level.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve cord blood samples were collected from the fetal
placenta umbilical vein and cultured in vitro. The proliferation and
differentiation of cord blood HSCs into CFU-G was continuously disrupted with 10 
nmol/l of ATRA and/or 10 nmol/l of As2O3. The expression of HOXB8 mRNA and
protein were detected by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) and Western-blot, respectively.
RESULTS: HOXB8 mRNA/protein expression was detected in control, ATRA, As2O3 and
ATRA +As2O3 groups on days 3, 7, and 12 of culture. HOXB8 mRNA/protein expression
was detectable on day 3, reached its highest level on day 7 and decreased on day 
12. HOXB8 mRNA/protein expression in ATRA, As2O3 and ATRA+As2O3 was upregulated
compared with control group (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: There is a positive relationship between HOXB8 gene expression and
granulocyte progenitor hematopoiesis. ATRA/As2O3 up-regulate the expression of
HOXB8 mRNA/protein, and treatment of leukemia with ATRA/As2O3 may regulate HOX
gene expression.

PMID: 25855932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Neurosci. 2015 Apr 1;35(13):5233-46. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4690-14.2015.

Hoxb8 intersection defines a role for Lmx1b in excitatory dorsal horn neuron
development, spinofugal connectivity, and nociception.

Szabo NE(1), da Silva RV(2), Sotocinal SG(3), Zeilhofer HU(4), Mogil JS(3), Kania
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7,
Canada. (2)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec H2W
1R7, Canada, Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montréal,
Quebec H3A 2B2, Canada. (3)Department of Psychology and Alan Edwards Center for
Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1B1, Canada.
(4)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, and Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, 8092
Zurich, Switzerland, and. (5)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal,
Montréal, Quebec H2W 1R7, Canada, Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill
University, Montréal, Quebec H3A 2B2, Canada, Departments of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, and Biology, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University
Montréal, Quebec, H3A 2B2 and Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada artur.kania@ircm.qc.ca.

Spinal cord neurons respond to peripheral noxious stimuli and relay this
information to higher brain centers, but the molecules controlling the assembly
of such pathways are poorly known. In this study, we use the intersection of
Lmx1b and Hoxb8::Cre expression in the spinal cord to genetically define
nociceptive circuits. Specifically, we show that Lmx1b, previously shown to be
expressed in glutamatergic dorsal horn neurons and critical for dorsal horn
development, is expressed in nociceptive dorsal horn neurons and that its
deletion results in the specific loss of excitatory dorsal horn neurons by
apoptosis, without any effect on inhibitory neuron numbers. To assess the
behavioral consequences of Lmx1b deletion in the spinal cord, we used the
brain-sparing driver Hoxb8::Cre. We show that such a deletion of Lmxb1 leads to a
robust reduction in sensitivity to mechanical and thermal noxious stimulation.
Furthermore, such conditional mutant mice show a loss of a subpopulation of
glutamatergic dorsal horn neurons, abnormal sensory afferent innervations, and
reduced spinofugal innervation of the parabrachial nucleus and the periaqueductal
gray, important nociceptive structures. Together, our results demonstrate an
important role for the intersection of Lmx1b and Hoxb8::cre expression in the
development of nociceptive dorsal horn circuits critical for mechanical and
thermal pain processing.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/355233-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 25834049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1614-20. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545457. Epub 2015 Apr 
17.

A novel Cre recombinase reporter mouse strain facilitates selective and efficient
infection of primary immune cells with adenoviral vectors.

Heger K(1,)(2), Kober M(1,)(2), Rieß D(1,)(2), Drees C(1), de Vries I(3),
Bertossi A(2), Roers A(4), Sixt M(3), Schmidt-Supprian M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Oncology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. (2)Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried,
Germany. (3)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria.
(4)Institute for Immunology, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1596-9.

Replication-deficient recombinant adenoviruses are potent vectors for the
efficient transient expression of exogenous genes in resting immune cells.
However, most leukocytes are refractory to efficient adenoviral transduction as
they lack expression of the coxsackie/adenovirus receptor (CAR). To circumvent
this obstacle, we generated the R26/CAG-CAR<U+0394>1(StopF) (where R26 is ROSA26 and CAG
is CMV early enhancer/chicken ß actin promoter) knock-in mouse line. This strain 
allows monitoring of in situ Cre recombinase activity through expression of
CAR<U+0394>1. Simultaneously, CAR<U+0394>1 expression permits selective and highly efficient
adenoviral transduction of immune cell populations, such as mast cells or T
cells, directly ex vivo in bulk cultures without prior cell purification or
activation. Furthermore, we show that CAR<U+0394>1 expression dramatically improves
adenoviral infection of in vitro differentiated conventional and plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (DCs), basophils, mast cells, as well as Hoxb8-immortalized
hematopoietic progenitor cells. This novel dual function mouse strain will hence 
be a valuable tool to rapidly dissect the function of specific genes in leukocyte
physiology.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25787118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Br J Cancer. 2015 Feb 3;112(3):532-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.621. Epub 2015 Jan
13.

Identification of a bona fide microRNA biomarker in serum exosomes that predicts 
hepatocellular carcinoma recurrence after liver transplantation.

Sugimachi K(1), Matsumura T(1), Hirata H(1), Uchi R(1), Ueda M(1), Ueo H(1),
Shinden Y(1), Iguchi T(1), Eguchi H(1), Shirabe K(2), Ochiya T(3), Maehara Y(2), 
Mimori K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, 4546 Tsurumihara,
Beppu 874-0838, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan. (3)Group for Research of Molecular Functions and Targets,
Division of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Predictive biomarkers for the recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) have great benefit in the selection of treatment options, including liver
transplantation (LT), for HCC. The purpose of this study was to identify specific
microRNAs (miRs) in exosomes from the serum of patients with recurrent HCC and to
validate these molecules as novel biomarkers for HCC recurrence.
METHODS: We employed microarray-based expression profiling of miRs derived from
exosomes in the serum of HCC patients to identify a biomarker that distinguishes 
between patients with and without HCC recurrence after LT. This was followed by
the validation in a separate cohort of 59 HCC patients who underwent living
related LT. The functions and potential gene targets of the recurrence-specific
miRs were analysed using a database, clinical samples and HCC cell lines.
RESULTS: We found that miR-718 showed significantly different expression in the
serum exosomes of HCC cases with recurrence after LT compared with those without 
recurrence. Decreased expression of miR-718 was associated with HCC tumour
aggressiveness in the validated cohort series. We identified HOXB8 as a potential
target gene of miR-718, and its upregulation was associated with poor prognosis.
CONCLUSION: Circulating miRs in serum exosomes have potential as novel biomarkers
for predicting HCC recurrence.

PMCID: PMC4453648
PMID: 25584485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 7;5:7653. doi: 10.1038/srep07653.

HPV16 early gene E5 specifically reduces miRNA-196a in cervical cancer cells.

Liu C(1), Lin J(2), Li L(3), Zhang Y(4), Chen W(4), Cao Z(3), Zuo H(5), Chen
C(6), Kee K(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China [2] Department of Gynecological Oncology, Tumor
Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, China. (2)1] Department
of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China [2] College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China. (3)Obstetrics and Gynecology Center, Tsinghua University Second Hospital, 
Beijing 100049, China. (4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (5)1] Department of Basic
Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 
[2] Obstetrics and Gynecology Center, Tsinghua University Second Hospital,
Beijing 100049, China. (6)1] Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China [2] Obstetrics and
Gynecology Center, Beijing Henghe Hospital, Beijing 100005, China.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16, which is responsible for greater
than 50% of cervical cancer cases, is the most prevalent and lethal HPV type.
However, the molecular mechanisms of cervical carcinogenesis remain elusive,
particularly the early steps of HPV infection that may transform normal cervical 
epithelium into a pre-neoplastic state. Here, we report that a group of microRNAs
(microRNAs) were aberrantly decreased in HPV16-positive normal cervical tissues, 
and these groups of microRNAs are further reduced in cervical carcinoma. Among
these miRNAs, miR196a expression is the most reduced in HPV16-infected tissues.
Interestingly, miR196a expression is low in HPV16-positive cervical cancer cell
lines but high in HPV16-negative cervical cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we
found that only HPV16 early gene E5 specifically down-regulated miRNA196a in the 
cervical cancer cell lines. In addition, HoxB8, a known miR196a target gene, is
up-regulated in the HPV16 cervical carcinoma cell line but not in HPV18 cervical 
cancer cell lines. Various doses of miR196a affected cervical cancer cell
proliferation and apoptosis. Altogether, these results suggested that HPV16 E5
specifically down-regulates miR196a upon infection of the human cervix and
initiates the transformation of normal cervix cells to cervical carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4288222
PMID: 25563170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Neuroscience. 2014 Nov 7;280:328-39. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.09.004.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Characterization of spinal cord glial cells in a model of hindlimb unloading in
mice.

Chelyshev YA(1), Muhamedshina YO(2), Povysheva TV(3), Shaymardanova GF(4),
Rizvanov AA(3), Nigmetzyanova MV(5), Tiapkina OV(4), Bondarenko NI(3), Nikolskiy 
EE(6), Islamov RR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russia; Kazan (Volga Region) Federal
University, Kazan, Russia. (2)Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russia.
Electronic address: yanakazmedhist1@rambler.ru. (3)Kazan (Volga Region) Federal
University, Kazan, Russia. (4)Kazan Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Russian Academy of Sciences, Kazan, Russia. (5)Kazan State Medical University,
Kazan, Russia. (6)Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russia; Kazan Institute 
of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Kazan, Russia; Kazan
(Volga Region) Federal University, Kazan, Russia.

Exposure to microgravity has been shown to result in damaging alterations to
skeletal muscle, bones, and inner organs. In this study, we investigated the
effects of microgravity by using a hindlimb unloading model (HUM) in mice. The
characteristics of the lumbar spinal cords of HUM mice 30 days after hindlimb
unloading were examined. Morphometric analysis showed reductions of the total
area, gray matter, and white matter by 17%, 20%, and 12%, respectively.
Myelinated fibers in the white matter showed prominent myelin destruction.
Analysis of the number of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP+)/S100
calcium-binding protein B (S100B-), GFAP+/S100B+, and GFAP-/S100B+ astrocytes in 
the ventral horn (VH), central channel area (CC), dorsal root entry zone (DREZ), 
main corticospinal tract (CST), and ventral funiculi (VF) showed that the number 
of GFAP+/S100B- astrocytes was increased in the DREZ and CST of HUM mice.
Additionally, GFAP+/S100B+ cell numbers were significantly decreased in the VH
and CST but did not differ in the CC or DREZ of HUM mice, as compared with the
control. The numbers of GFAP-/S100B+ cells were significantly reduced only in the
VH of HUM mice. Moreover, the number of ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 
1 (Iba1+) microglia cells was significantly increased in the CC and DREZ of HUM
mice. In control mice, homeobox protein HoxB8 (HoxB8+) cells were found only in
the CC; in contrast, HoxB8+ cells were observed in all studied areas in HUM mice,
with the greatest number found in the CC. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis of
the lumbar spinal cords of HUM mice showed decreased expression of genes encoding
myelin, extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton, and cell adhesion proteins. Real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) confirmed reductions in the expression of mpz,
pmp2, pmp22, and prx genes, which are involved in myelination, as well as
decreases in the levels of genes encoding extracellular matrix molecules,
including glycoproteins (matrix gla protein (MGP), osteoglycin (OGN),
microfibrillar associated protein 5 (MFAP), and collagen, type IV, alpha 1
(COL4A)), proteoglycans (perlecan (heparan sulfate proteoglycan) (HSPG)), and
metalloproteinases (lysyl oxidase (LOX)). Thus, our results showed that hindlimb 
unloading caused decreases in gray and white matter areas, changes in gene
expression, alterations in myelination, and phenotypic modifications in glial
cells in the lumbar spinal cords of mice.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Jul;10(7):1757-64. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00066h. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

FMRP regulates miR196a-mediated repression of HOXB8 via interaction with the AGO2
MID domain.

Li Y(1), Tang W, Zhang LR, Zhang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Single-Molecule Detection and Imaging Laboratory, Shenzhen Institute of
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangdong, China.
zhangcy@siat.ac.cn.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by the loss of expression of fragile X mental 
retardation protein (FMRP), a selective RNA-binding protein that negatively
regulates mRNA substrates. FMRP can regulate the translation via the cross-talk
with the miRNA machinery, but the functional association among FMRP, miRNAs and
mutual target mRNAs has rarely been studied. In this research, we find that HOXB8
mRNA is a target of FMRP associated with miR-196a-induced silencing, and discover
that phosphorylation of FMRP promotes the miR-196a-mediated repression of HOXB8
without affecting the interaction between FMRP and mRNA. We further identify that
the FMRP-binding site involved in the miR-196a-mediated repression of HOXB8
locates in the downstream neighbourhood of the miR-196a recognition element in
the 3'UTR of HOXB8. Importantly, we reveal that FMRP faces toward the MID domain 
of AGO2 and interacts with a specific binding pocket (coordination with T544,
K533 and K570) in the domain. Our research might provide new insights into both
the cross-talk between FMRP and miRNA-mediated regulation of mRNA translation and
the molecular pathogenesis of FXS.

PMID: 24727796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jul;96(1):83-91. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2AB1013-559R. Epub 2014 Mar
5.

Interleukin-3-mediated regulation of ß-catenin in myeloid transformation and
acute myeloid leukemia.

Sadras T(1), Perugini M(2), Kok CH(2), Iarossi DG(3), Heatley SL(4), Brumatti
G(5), Samuel MS(6), To LB(7), Lewis ID(2), Lopez AF(8), Ekert PG(5), Ramshaw
HS(4), D'Andrea RJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of Molecular and Biomedical Science and
Centre for Stem Cell Research and Departments of Haematology and Department of
Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, The University of South Australia, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (2)Centre for Cancer Biology and Departments of Haematology
and School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia; (3)Centre for Cancer Biology and Departments of Haematology and
Department of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, The University of South Australia,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (4)Centre for Cancer Biology and
Immunology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (5)Division of
Cell Signalling and Cell Death, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia; and. (6)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of Molecular
and Biomedical Science and Centre for Stem Cell Research and Immunology, SA
Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (7)Departments of Haematology
and School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia; (8)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of Medicine, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Immunology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (9)Centre for Cancer Biology and School of 
Molecular and Biomedical Science and Centre for Stem Cell Research and
Departments of Haematology and Department of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, The
University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia School of
Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia;
richard.dandrea@unisa.edu.au.

Aberrant activation of ß-catenin is a common event in AML and is an independent
predictor of poor prognosis. Although increased ß-catenin signaling in AML has
been associated with oncogenic translocation products and activating mutations in
the FLT3R, the mechanisms that activate ß-catenin in AML more broadly are still
unclear. Here, we describe a novel link between IL-3 signaling and the regulation
of ß-catenin in myeloid transformation and AML. In a murine model of HoxB8 and
IL-3 cooperation, we show that ß-catenin protein levels are modulated by IL-3 and
that Cre-induced deletion of ß-catenin abolishes IL-3-dependent growth and colony
formation. In IL-3-dependent leukemic TF-1.8 cells, we observed increased
ß-catenin protein levels and nuclear localization in response to IL-3, and this
correlated with transcriptional induction of ß-catenin target genes. Furthermore,
IL-3 promoted ß-catenin accumulation in a subset of AML patient samples, and
gene-expression profiling of these cells revealed induction of WNT/ß-catenin and 
TCF4 gene signatures in an IL-3-dependent manner. This study is the first to link
ß-catenin activation to IL-3 and suggests that targeting IL-3 signaling may be an
effective approach for the inhibition of ß-catenin activity in some patients with
AML.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 24598054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Curr Protoc Immunol. 2014 Feb 4;104:Unit 22F.5.. doi:
10.1002/0471142735.im22f05s104.

Differentiation and characterization of myeloid cells.

Gupta D(1), Shah HP, Malu K, Berliner N, Gaines P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell,
Massachusetts.

Ex vivo differentiation of myeloid cells begins with an enriched population of
bone marrow-derived hematopoietic stem cells generated by lineage depletion
and/or positive selection for CD34(+) antigen (human) or Sca-1(+) (mouse) cells, 
which are then expanded and subsequently induced in vitro in a process that
recapitulates normal myeloid development. Myeloid cell lines include two human
leukemic cell lines, NB-4 and HL-60, which have been demonstrated to undergo
retinoic acid-induced myeloid development; however, both cell lines exhibit
defects in the up-regulation of late-expressed neutrophil-specific genes.
Multiple murine factor-dependent cell models of myelopoiesis are also available
that express the full range of neutrophil maturation markers, including: 32Dcl3
cells, which undergo G-CSF-induced myeloid maturation; EML/EPRO cells, which
develop into mature neutrophils in response to cytokines and retinoic acid; and
ER-Hoxb8 cells, which undergo myeloid maturation upon removal of estradiol in the
maintenance medium. In this unit, the induction of myeloid maturation in each of 
these model systems is described, including their differentiation to either
neutrophils or macrophages, if applicable. Commonly used techniques to test for
myeloid characteristics of developing cells are also described, including flow
cytometry and real time RT-PCR.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4539021
PMID: 24510620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 1;8(11):e79352. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079352. eCollection
2013.

Roscovitine-induced apoptosis in neutrophils and neutrophil progenitors is
regulated by the Bcl-2-family members Bim, Puma, Noxa and Mcl-1.

Gautam S(1), Kirschnek S, Wiesmeier M, Vier J, Häcker G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center,
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014; 9(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/5188aea6-9eb2-41e5-995b-86634bf3e0cf.

Neutrophil granulocyte (neutrophil) apoptosis plays a key role in determining
inflammation in infectious and non-infectious settings. Recent work has shown
that inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdk) such as roscovitine can
potently induce neutrophil apoptosis and reduce inflammation. Using a conditional
Hoxb8-expression system we tested the participation of Bcl-2-family proteins to
roscovitine-induced apoptosis in mouse neutrophils and in neutrophil progenitor
cells. Bcl-2 strongly protected against roscovitine-induced apoptosis in
neutrophils. The isolated loss of either Bim or noxa provided significant,
partial protection while protection through combined loss of Bim and noxa or Bim 
and Puma was only slightly greater than this individual loss. The only
substantial change in protein levels observed was the loss of Mcl-1, which was
not transcriptional and was inhibited by proteasome blockade. In progenitor cells
there was no protection by the loss of Bim alone but substantial protection by
the loss of both Bim and Puma; surprisingly, strongest protection was seen by the
isolated loss of noxa. The pattern of protein expression and Mcl-1-regulation in 
progenitor cells was very similar to the one observed in differentiated
neutrophils. In addition, roscovitine strongly inhibited proliferation in
progenitor cells, associated with an accumulation of cells in G2/M-phase.

PMCID: PMC3815126
PMID: 24223929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2013 Nov;142(5):231-5.

[Microglia and synaptic reorganization: focus on the movement and functions of
microglial processes].

[Article in Japanese]

Hayashi Y, Nakanishi H.

PMID: 24212592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. CNS Spectr. 2014 Feb;19(1):50-61. doi: 10.1017/S1092852913000618. Epub 2013 Nov
1.

Pharmacological, experimental therapeutic, and transcranial magnetic stimulation 
treatments for compulsivity and impulsivity.

Pallanti S(1), Hollander E(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 University of Florence, School of Medicine, Florence, Italy. (2)3 Albert
Einstein College of Medicine and Montefiore Medical Center, New York, New York,
USA.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) has been recently drawn apart from anxiety
disorder by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
edition (DSM-5) and clustered together with related disorders (eg, hoarding, hair
pulling disorder, skin picking), which with it seems to share clinical and
neurophysiological similarities. Recent literature has mainly explored brain
circuitries (eg, orbitofrontal cortex, striatum), molecular pathways, and genes
(eg, Hoxb8, Slitrk5, Sapap3) that represent the new target of the treatments;
they also lead the development of new probes and compounds. In the therapeutic
field, monotherapy with cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) or selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) is recommendable, but combination or augmentation
with a dopaminergic or glutamatergic agent is often adopted. A promising therapy 
for OCD is represented by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS),
which is suitable to treat compulsivity and impulsivity depending on the protocol
of stimulation and the brain circuitries targeted.

PMID: 24176028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 22;3:2178. doi: 10.1038/srep02178.

Hox genes are involved in vascular wall-resident multipotent stem cell
differentiation into smooth muscle cells.

Klein D(1), Benchellal M, Kleff V, Jakob HG, Ergün S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
University Hospital, 45122 Essen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

Human vascular wall-resident CD44+ multipotent stem cells (VW-MPSCs) within the
vascular adventitia are capable to differentiate into pericytes and smooth muscle
cells (SMC). This study demonstrates HOX-dependent differentiation of CD44(+)
VW-MPSCs into SMC that involves epigenetic modification of transgelin as a
down-stream regulated gene. First, HOXB7, HOXC6 and HOXC8 were identified to be
differentially expressed in VW-MPSCs as compared to terminal differentiated human
aortic SMC, endothelial cells and undifferentiated pluripotent embryonic stem
cells. Silencing these HOX genes in VW-MPSCs significantly reduced their
sprouting capacity and increased expression of the SMC markers transgelin and
calponin and the histone gene histone H1. Furthermore, the methylation pattern of
the TAGLN promoter was altered. In summary, our findings suggest a role for
certain HOX genes in regulating differentiation of human VW-MPSC into SMCs that
involves epigenetic mechanisms. This is critical for understanding
VW-MPSC-dependent vascular disease processes such as neointima formation and
tumor vascularization.

PMCID: PMC3804857
PMID: 24145756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):488-96. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.06.015. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Immature mouse granulocytic myeloid cells are characterized by production of
ficolin-B.

Weber-Steffens D(1), Hunold K, Kürschner J, Martinez SG, Elumalai P, Schmidt D,
Trevani A, Runza VL, Männel DN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Immunol. 2015 Jan;99(1):604.

Ficolins activate the lectin pathway of the complement system upon binding to
carbohydrate patterns on pathogens. To characterize the producer cells of
ficolin-B the expression of mouse ficolin-B, the orthologue of human M-ficolin,
was studied in macrophages and dendritic cells during differentiation from bone
marrow cells, in primary granulocytes, and during differentiation of granulocytes
derived from ER-Hoxb8 cells. Expression of ficolin-B mRNA declined in all myeloid
cell types to low levels during terminal differentiation. However, in contrast to
macrophages and dendritic cells, ficolin-B expression was enhanced upon
activation in granulocytes. High expression of ficolin-B was observed in primary 
immature neutrophilic CD11b(+) Ly-6C(int) Ly-6G(high) granulocytes when isolated 
from the bone marrow, in particular during sepsis. Ficolin-B was demonstrated in 
lysates of primary granulocytes, ER-Hoxb8-derived granulocytes, bone
marrow-derived macrophages, and dendritic cells. Native ficolin-B from cell
lysates and supernatants of granulocytes activated the lectin pathway as measured
by binding to MASP-2 and inducing C4 deposition. Specific staining demonstrated
intra-cellular or cell associated ficolin-B protein in activated immature
granulocytes deposited in a granular fashion. This study shows that ficolin-B is 
stored in and set free from immature granulocytic myeloid cells indicating a role
in the early infection-induced cellular response of these inflammatory cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Oct;20(10):1370-80. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.92. Epub 2013
Jul 19.

Hoxb8 regulates expression of microRNAs to control cell death and
differentiation.

Salmanidis M(1), Brumatti G, Narayan N, Green BD, van den Bergen JA, Sandow JJ,
Bert AG, Silke N, Sladic R, Puthalakath H, Rohrbeck L, Okamoto T, Bouillet P,
Herold MJ, Goodall GJ, Jabbour AM, Ekert PG.

Author information: 
(1)Cell signalling and Cell Death Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Hoxb8 overexpression immortalises haematopoietic progenitor cells in a
growth-factor-dependant manner and co-operates with interleukin-3 (IL-3) to cause
acute myeloid leukaemia. To further understand how Hoxb8 contributes to myeloid
cell immortalisation, we generated IL-3-dependant myeloid cells expressing Hoxb8 
under the control of an inducible promoter. Downregulation of Hoxb8, in the
presence of IL-3, caused cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in the majority of
cells. Apoptosis was dependant on Bax and Bak and, in part, on Bim, which was
repressed by Hoxb8. Deletion of the miR-17~92 seed sequences in the Bim 3'UTR
abolished Hoxb8-dependant regulation of Bim reporter constructs. Expression of
all six miRNAs from this cluster were elevated when Hoxb8 was overexpressed. The 
miR-17~92 cluster was required for repression of Bim in Hoxb8-immortalised cells 
and deletion of the miR-17~92 cluster substantially inhibited Hoxb8, but not
Hoxa9, mediated survival and proliferation. Hoxb8 appears to promote miR-17~92
expression through c-Myc, a known transcriptional regulator of the miR-17~92
cluster. We have uncovered a previously unrecognised link between Hoxb8
expression and microRNAs that provides a new insight into the oncogenic functions
of Hoxb8.

PMCID: PMC3770316
PMID: 23872792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nat Methods. 2013 Aug;10(8):795-803. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2510. Epub 2013 Jun 9.

Hematopoietic progenitor cell lines with myeloid and lymphoid potential.

Redecke V(1), Wu R, Zhou J, Finkelstein D, Chaturvedi V, High AA, Häcker H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Investigation of immune-cell differentiation and function is limited by
shortcomings of suitable and scalable experimental systems. Here we show that
retroviral delivery of an estrogen-regulated form of Hoxb8 into mouse bone marrow
cells can be used along with Flt3 ligand to conditionally immortalize early
hematopoietic progenitor cells (Hoxb8-FL cells). Hoxb8-FL cells have lost
self-renewal capacity and potential to differentiate into megakaryocytes and
erythrocytes but retain the potential to differentiate into myeloid and lymphoid 
cells. They differentiate in vitro and in vivo into macrophages, granulocytes,
dendritic cells, B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes that are phenotypically and
functionally indistinguishable from their primary counterparts. Quantitative in
vitro assays indicate that myeloid and B-cell potential of Hoxb8-FL cells is
comparable to that of primary lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitors, whereas
T-cell potential is diminished. The simplicity of this system and the unlimited
proliferative capacity of Hoxb8-FL cells will enable studies of immune-cell
differentiation and function.

PMCID: PMC4131762
PMID: 23749299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2013 Sep;28(7):552-8. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2012.1431. Epub
2013 May 30.

Establishment of a predictive genetic model for estimating chemotherapy
sensitivity of colorectal cancer with synchronous liver metastasis.

Lu X(1), Pan J, Li S, Shen S, Chi P, Lin H, Huang Y, Xu Z, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Union Hospital, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: We examined the whole genome expression profile in advanced colorectal
cancer (ACC) patients who had received FOLFOX4 chemotherapy to establish a
genetic biomarker model predicting chemotherapy sensitivity.
METHODS: Eligible ACC patients were divided into two groups, based on
postchemotherapy evaluation results: specifically, the sensitive group
(experimental group) and the resistant group (control group). The genome
expression profiles of colorectal cancer tissues were examined using DNA
microarray analysis, and differential gene expression was identified using a
significance analysis of the microarray. The probe signal log ratios were used to
produce the area-under-the-curve, sensitivity, and specificity for candidate
genes. Genes exhibiting differential expression and significant predictive power 
were used to simulate a genetic model for estimating chemotherapy sensitivity.
RESULTS: Totally, 30 ACC patients were eligible for the study, 13 assigned to the
experimental group and 17 to the control group. In total, 30 genes showing
significant differential expression were identified. Seven candidate genes
(NKX2-3, FXYD6, TGFB1I1, ACTG2, ANPEP, HOXB8, and KLK11), which exhibited
positive or negative correlations, were incorporated into a genetic model, with
an overall accurate predication rate of 93.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: The predictive model involving the seven genes listed had high
accuracy in estimating chemotherapy sensitivity to the FOLFOX4 regimen.

PMCID: PMC3741425
PMID: 23721165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Aug;20(8):1068-79. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.39. Epub 2013
May 17.

Survival and differentiation defects contribute to neutropenia in
glucose-6-phosphatase-ß (G6PC3) deficiency in a model of mouse neutrophil
granulocyte differentiation.

Gautam S(1), Kirschnek S, Gentle IE, Kopiniok C, Henneke P, Häcker H, Malleret L,
Belaaouaj A, Häcker G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center,
Freiburg, Germany.

Differentiation of neutrophil granulocytes (neutrophils) occurs through several
steps in the bone marrow and requires a coordinate regulation of factors
determining survival and lineage-specific development. A number of genes are
known whose deficiency disrupts neutrophil generation in humans and in mice. One 
of the proteins encoded by these genes, glucose-6-phosphatase-ß (G6PC3), is
involved in glucose metabolism. G6PC3 deficiency causes neutropenia in humans and
in mice, linked to enhanced apoptosis and ER stress. We used a model of
conditional Hoxb8 expression to test molecular and functional differentiation as 
well as survival defects in neutrophils from G6PC3(-/-) mice. Progenitor lines
were established and differentiated into neutrophils when Hoxb8 was turned off.
G6PC3(-/-) progenitor cells underwent substantial apoptosis when differentiation 
was started. Transgenic expression of Bcl-XL rescued survival; however,
Bcl-XL-protected differentiated cells showed reduced proliferation, immaturity
and functional deficiency such as altered MAP kinase signaling and reduced
cytokine secretion. Impaired glucose utilization was found and was associated
with ER stress and apoptosis, associated with the upregulation of Bim and Bax;
downregulation of Bim protected against apoptosis during differentiation.
ER-stress further caused a profound loss of expression and secretion of the main 
neutrophil product neutrophil elastase during differentiation. Transplantation of
wild-type Hoxb8-progenitor cells into irradiated mice allowed differentiation
into neutrophils in the bone marrow in vivo. Transplantation of G6PC3(-/-) cells 
yielded few mature neutrophils in bone marrow and peripheral blood. Transgenic
Bcl-XL permitted differentiation of G6PC3(-/-) cells in vivo. However, functional
deficiencies and differentiation abnormalities remained. Differentiation of
macrophages from Hoxb8-dependent progenitors was only slightly disturbed. A
combination of defects in differentiation and survival thus underlies neutropenia
in G6PC3(-/-) deficiency, both originating from a reduced ability to utilize
glucose. Hoxb8-dependent cells are a model to study differentiation and survival 
of the neutrophil lineage.

PMCID: PMC3705599
PMID: 23686134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Future Oncol. 2013 May;9(5):727-36. doi: 10.2217/fon.13.25.

Identification of HOXB8 and KLK11 expression levels as potential biomarkers to
predict the effects of FOLFOX4 chemotherapy.

Li S(1), Lu X, Chi P, Pan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal & Anal Surgery, Affiliated Union Hospital of Fujian
Medical University, 29 Xinquan Road, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.

AIM: To measure global gene expression in primary advanced colorectal cancer
patients who have undergone fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4)
chemotherapy and screen valuable biomarkers to predict the effects of
chemotherapy.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Samples from primary advanced colorectal cancer patients
were collected. The effects of chemotherapy were evaluated, and patients were
divided into an experimental group and a control group. Cancerous tissue gene
expression profiles were detected by chip technology. Valuable biomarkers were
screened by bioinformatic analysis. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to
characterize the pattern of HOXB8 and KLK11 expression. HOXB8 and KLK11 signal
probe values were analyzed using receiver operating characteristic analysis.
RESULTS: There were differentially expressed genes in the two groups. HOXB8 and
KLK11 proteins were observed in the nucleus and on the outside of the cancer
cells, respectively. Their prediction accuracies were 79.9 and 76.7%,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: HOXB8 and KLK11 may be classified as valuable biomarkers, as they can
predict the effects of FOLFOX4 chemotherapy in primary advanced colorectal cancer
patients.

PMID: 23647300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Allergy. 2013;68(5):604-13. doi: 10.1111/all.12140.

In vitro differentiation of near-unlimited numbers of functional mouse basophils 
using conditional Hoxb8.

Gurzeler U(1), Rabachini T, Dahinden CA, Salmanidis M, Brumatti G, Ekert PG,
Echeverry N, Bachmann D, Simon HU, Kaufmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Allergy. 2013;68(5):553-4.

BACKGROUND: Basophils constitute a rare leukocyte population known for their
effector functions in inflammation and allergy, as well as more recently
described immunoregulatory roles. Besides their low frequency, functional
analysis of basophils is hindered by a short life span, inefficient ex vivo
differentiation protocols, and lack of suitable cell models. A method to produce 
large quantities of basophils in vitro would facilitate basophil research and
constitute a sought-after tool for diagnostic and drug testing purposes.
METHODS: A method is described to massively expand bone marrow-derived basophils 
in vitro. Myeloid progenitors are conditionally immortalized using Hoxb8 in the
presence of interleukin-3 (IL-3) and outgrowing cell lines selected for their
potential to differentiate into basophils upon shutdown of Hoxb8 expression.
RESULTS: IL-3-dependent, conditional Hoxb8-immortalized progenitor cell lines can
be expanded and maintained in culture for prolonged periods. Upon shutdown of
Hoxb8 expression, near-unlimited numbers of mature functional basophils can be
differentiated in vitro within six days. The cells are end-differentiated and
short-lived and express basophil-specific surface markers and proteases. Upon
IgE- as well as C5a-mediated activation, differentiated basophils release granule
enzymes and histamine and secrete Th2-type cytokines (IL-4, IL-13) and
leukotriene C4. IL-3-deprivation induces apoptosis correlating with upregulation 
of the BH3-only proteins BCL-2-interacting mediator of cell death (BIM) and p53
upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA) and downregulation of proviral
integration site for Moloney murine leukemia virus 1 kinase (PIM-1).
CONCLUSION: A novel method is presented to generate quantitative amounts of mouse
basophils in vitro, which moreover allows genetic manipulation of conditionally
immortalized progenitors. This approach may represent a useful alternative method
to isolating primary basophils.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23590216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Allergy. 2013;68(5):553-4. doi: 10.1111/all.12170.

Basophils unlimited.

Gibbs BF, Nilsson GP.

Comment on
    Allergy. 2013;68(5):604-13.

PMID: 23590214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Eur Spine J. 2013 Jun;22(6):1300-11. doi: 10.1007/s00586-013-2728-2. Epub 2013
Mar 7.

Microarray expression profiling identifies genes with altered expression in
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis.

Fendri K(1), Patten SA, Kaufman GN, Zaouter C, Parent S, Grimard G, Edery P,
Moldovan F.

Author information: 
(1)Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center, 3175, Chemin de la Cote
Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1C5, Canada.

PURPOSE: Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) is considered a complex genetic
disease, in which malfunctioning or dysregulation of one or more genes has been
proposed to be responsible for the expressed phenotype. However, to date, no
disease causing genes has been identified and the pathogenesis of AIS remains
unknown. The aim of this study is, therefore, to identify specific molecules with
differing expression patterns in AIS compared to healthy individuals.
METHODS: Microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR have examined differences in
the gene transcription profile between primary osteoblasts derived from spinal
vertebrae of AIS patients and those of healthy individuals.
RESULTS: There are 145 genes differentially expressed in AIS osteoblasts. A
drastic and significant change has been noted particularly in the expression
levels of Homeobox genes (HOXB8, HOXB7, HOXA13, HOXA10), ZIC2, FAM101A, COMP and 
PITX1 in AIS compared to controls. Clustering analysis revealed the interaction
of these genes in biological pathways crucial for bone development, in particular
in the differentiation of skeletal elements and structural integrity of the
vertebrae.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports on the expression of molecules that have not been
described previously in AIS. We also provide for the first time gene interaction 
pathways in AIS pathogenesis. These genes are involved in various bone regulatory
and developmental pathways and many of them can be grouped into clusters to
participate in a particular biological pathway. Further studies can be built on
our findings to further elucidate the association between different biological
pathways and the pathogenesis of AIS.

PMCID: PMC3676547
PMID: 23467837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(5):505-18. doi: 10.1159/000346706. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Highly pathogenic influenza viruses inhibit inflammatory response in monocytes
via activation of rar-related orphan receptor RORa.

Friesenhagen J(1), Viemann D, Börgeling Y, Schmolke M, Spiekermann C, Kirschnek
S, Ludwig S, Roth J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
Friesenhagen.Judith @ mh-hannover.de

Infections with highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIV) in humans lead 
to systemic disease associated with cytokine storm and multiorgan failure. In
this study we aimed to identify the role of monocytes for the host response to
HPAIV infection. Using genome-wide microarray analysis, we surprisingly
demonstrate a reduced immune response of human monocytes to HPAIV H5N1 compared
to human influenza A viruses. In bioinformatic analyses we could reveal a
potential role of the Rar-related orphan receptor alpha (RORa) for the gene
expression pattern induced by H5N1. RORa is known as an inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling. We provide evidence that in monocytes RORa is activated by H5N1,
resulting in inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Using murine Hoxb8-immortalized RORa<U+207B>/<U+207B>, 
monocytes rescued NF-<U+03BA>B signaling upon H5N1 infection, confirming the biological 
relevance of RORa as an H5N1-induced mediator of monocytic immunosuppression. In 
summary, our study reveals a novel RORa-dependent escape mechanism by which H5N1 
prevents an effective inflammatory response of monocytes blocking NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
gene expression.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23445660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 May;129(2):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.02.021. Epub
2013 Feb 21.

HOXB8 expression in ovarian serous carcinoma effusions is associated with shorter
survival.

Stavnes HT(1), Holth A, Don T, Kærn J, Vaksman O, Reich R, Trope' CG, Davidson B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
N-0310 Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: HOX proteins are key transcription factors in embryogenesis. HOXB5 and
HOXB8 were previously shown to be overexpressed in ovarian/primary peritoneal
serous carcinoma compared to breast carcinoma using gene expression arrays. The
present study investigated the clinical role of HOXB5 and HOXB8 in advanced-stage
(FIGO III-IV) ovarian serous carcinoma.
METHODS: HOXB5 and HOXB8 protein expression was analyzed in 286 effusions and 76 
patient-matched solid lesions (27 primary carcinomas, 49 metastases) using
immunohistochemistry. Expression was analyzed for association with
clinicopathologic parameters, including survival.
RESULTS: Cytoplasmic HOXB5 protein was detected in 268/286 (94%) effusions. HOXB8
was expressed at both the cytoplasm (252/286; 88%) and nucleus (131/286; 46%) of 
carcinoma cells. Cytoplasmic HOXB5, cytoplasmic HOXB8 and nuclear HOXB8 were
found in 56/76 (74%), 76/76 (100%) and 30/76 (39%) solid lesions, respectively,
with significantly higher HOXB5 expression in effusions (p=0.002) and higher
cytoplasmic HOXB8 in solid lesions (p<0.001). HOXB5 expression was higher in
post-chemotherapy disease recurrence effusions compared to pre-chemotherapy
effusions tapped at diagnosis (p=0.04). In univariate survival analysis of the
effusion cohort, higher expression of cytoplasmic HOXB8 was associated with
significantly shorter progression-free survival (p=0.033), whereas higher nuclear
HOXB8 expression was associated with significantly shorter overall survival in
analysis limited to patients with post-chemotherapy effusions (p=0.036). Neither 
finding was independent prognostic factor in Cox multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB5 and HOXB8 are frequently expressed in ovarian serous
carcinoma, with anatomic site-related differences for cytoplasmic staining. HOXB5
may be affected by chemotherapy in effusions. HOXB8 expression is associated with
shorter survival in metastatic serous carcinoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23438671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;98(1):362-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2953. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

Distinct developmental signatures of human abdominal and gluteal subcutaneous
adipose tissue depots.

Karastergiou K(1), Fried SK, Xie H, Lee MJ, Divoux A, Rosencrantz MA, Chang RJ,
Smith SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

CONTEXT: Fat distribution differs in men and women, but in both sexes, a
predominantly gluteal-femoral compared with abdominal (central) fat distribution 
is associated with lower metabolic risk. Differences in cellular characteristics 
and metabolic functions of these depots have been described, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify depot- and sex-dependent differences in 
gene expression in human abdominal and gluteal sc adipose tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Abdominal and gluteal adipose tissue aspirates were obtained 
from 14 premenopausal women [age 27.5 ± 7.0 yr, body mass index (BMI) 27.3 ± 6.2 
kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.82 ± 0.04] and 21 men (age 29.7±7.4 yr, BMI
27.2 ± 4.5 kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.91 ± 0.07) and transcriptomes were
analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Expression of selected genes was determined 
in isolated adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions from each depot, and in in 
vitro cultures before and after adipogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: A total of 284 genes were differentially expressed between the abdominal
and gluteal depot, either specifically in males (n = 66) or females (n = 159) or 
in both sexes (n = 59). Most notably, gene ontology and pathway analysis
identified homeobox genes (HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXB8,
HOXC8, and IRX2) that were down-regulated in the gluteal depot in both sexes (P =
2 × 10(-10)). Conversely, HOXA10 was up-regulated in gluteal tissue and HOXC13
was detected exclusively in this depot. These differences were independent of
BMI, were present in both adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions of adipose
tissue, and were retained throughout in vitro differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that developmentally programmed differences may
contribute to the distinct phenotypic characteristics of peripheral fat.

PMCID: PMC3537084
PMID: 23150689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Blood. 2012 Dec 6;120(24):4712-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-414979. Epub 2012
Oct 18.

Identification of key regulatory pathways of myeloid differentiation using an
mESC-based karyotypically normal cell model.

Li D(1), Yang H, Nan H, Liu P, Pang S, Zhao Q, Karni R, Kamps MP, Xu Y, Zhou J,
Wiedmer T, Sims PJ, Wang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. dongly@uiuc.edu

Understanding the process of myeloid differentiation offers important insights
into both normal and abnormal developmental processes but is limited by the
dearth of experimental models. Here we show that myeloid progenitors can be
derived from embryonic stem cells, immortalized, and applied to the study of the 
mechanisms underlying myeloid differentiation. The embryonic stem cell-derived
myeloid progenitors, when immortalized with estrogen-regulated Hoxb8 protein,
demonstrate normal karyotyping, are genetically tractable, and can be
differentiated into functional neutrophils. Using this model, we identified
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 as a critical regulator of myeloid
differentiation. Together, our studies led to a convenient, karyotypically
normal, and genetically manipulatable cellular system, which can be used to shed 
new light on the mechanisms for myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3520617
PMID: 23086752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):219-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.026. Epub 2011
Dec 24.

HoxB8 in noradrenergic specification and differentiation of the autonomic nervous
system.

Huber L(1), Ferdin M, Holzmann J, Stubbusch J, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Different prespecification of mesencephalic and trunk neural crest cells
determines their response to environmental differentiation signals and
contributes to the generation of different autonomic neuron subtypes,
parasympathetic ciliary neurons in the head and trunk noradrenergic sympathetic
neurons. The differentiation of ciliary and sympathetic neurons shares many
features, including the initial BMP-induced expression of noradrenergic
characteristics that is, however, subsequently lost in ciliary but maintained in 
sympathetic neurons. The molecular basis of specific prespecification and
differentiation patterns has remained unclear. We show here that HoxB gene
expression in trunk neural crest is maintained in sympathetic neurons. Ectopic
expression of a single HoxB gene, HoxB8, in mesencephalic neural crest results in
a strongly increased expression of sympathetic neuron characteristics like the
transcription factor Hand2, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) in ciliary neurons. Other subtype-specific
properties like RGS4 and RCad are not induced. HoxB8 has only minor effects in
postmitotic ciliary neurons and is unable to induce TH and DBH in the enteric
nervous system. Thus, we conclude that HoxB8 acts by maintaining noradrenergic
properties transiently expressed in ciliary neuron progenitors during normal
development. HoxC8, HoxB9, HoxB1 and HoxD10 elicit either small and transient or 
no effects on noradrenergic differentiation, suggesting a selective effect of
HoxB8. These results implicate that Hox genes contribute to the differential
development of autonomic neuron precursors by maintaining noradrenergic
properties in the trunk sympathetic neuron lineage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22236961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Nov;18(11):1805-14. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.69. Epub 2011
Jun 10.

Molecular analysis of neutrophil spontaneous apoptosis reveals a strong role for 
the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Noxa.

Kirschnek S(1), Vier J, Gautam S, Frankenberg T, Rangelova S, Eitz-Ferrer P,
Grespi F, Ottina E, Villunger A, Häcker H, Häcker G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Universität Freiburg, Germany. 
susanne.kirschnek@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Neutrophils enter the peripheral blood from the bone marrow and die after a short
time. Molecular analysis of spontaneous neutrophil apoptosis is difficult as
these cells die rapidly and cannot be easily manipulated. We use conditional
Hoxb8 expression to generate mouse neutrophils and test the regulation of
apoptosis by extensive manipulation of B-cell lymphoma protein 2 (Bcl-2)-family
proteins. Spontaneous apoptosis was preceded by downregulation of anti-apoptotic 
Bcl-2 proteins. Loss of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 homology domain (BH3)-only
protein Bcl-2-interacting mediator of cell death (Bim) gave some protection, but 
only neutrophils deficient in both BH3-only proteins, Bim and Noxa, were strongly
protected against apoptosis. Function of Noxa was at least in part neutralization
of induced myeloid leukemia cell differentiation protein (Mcl-1) in neutrophils
and progenitors. Loss of Bim and Noxa preserved neutrophil function in culture,
and apoptosis-resistant cells remained in circulation in mice. Apoptosis
regulated by Bim- and Noxa-driven loss of Mcl-1 is thus the final step in
neutrophil differentiation, required for the termination of neutrophil function
and neutrophil-dependent inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3190116
PMID: 21660046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Leukoc Biol. 2011 Aug;90(2):221-33. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0111006. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Nuclear phospholipid scramblase 1 prolongs the mitotic expansion of granulocyte
precursors during G-CSF-induced granulopoiesis.

Chen CW(1), Sowden M, Zhao Q, Wiedmer T, Sims PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2011 Aug;90(2):215-6.

PLSCR1-/- mice exhibit normal, steady-state hematologic parameters but impaired
emergency granulopoiesis upon in vivo administration of G-CSF. The mechanism by
which PLSCR1 contributes to G-CSF-induced neutrophil production is largely
unknown. We now report that the expansion of bone marrow myelocytes upon in vivo 
G-CSF treatment is reduced in PLSCR1-/- mice relative to WT. Using
SCF-ER-Hoxb8-immortalized myeloid progenitors to examine the progression of
G-CSF-driven granulocytic differentiation in vitro, we found that PLSCR1 prolongs
the period of mitotic expansion of proliferative granulocyte precursors, thereby 
giving rise to increased neutrophil production from their progenitors. This
effect of PLSCR1 is blocked by a <U+0394>NLS-PLSCR1, which prevents its nuclear import. 
By contrast, mutation that prevents the membrane association of PLSCR1 has
minimal impact on the role of PLSCR1 in G-CSF-induced granulopoiesis. These data 
imply that the capacity of PLSCR1 to augment G-CSF-dependent production of mature
neutrophils from myeloid progenitors is unrelated to its reported activities at
the endofacial surface of the plasma membrane but does require entry of the
protein into the nucleus, suggesting that this response is mediated through the
observed effects of PLSCR1 on gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3133439
PMID: 21447647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011 Apr;24(2):114-8. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834451fb.

Molecular and cellular basis of obsessive-compulsive disorder-like behaviors:
emerging view from mouse models.

Yang XW(1), Lu XH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience & Human 
Behavior, Department of Psychiatry & Biobehavioral Sciences, Brain Research
Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. xwyang@mednet.ucla.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article reviews recent literature describing novel mouse 
genetic models of obsessive-compulsive disorder-like behaviors and
neurobiological insights gained from analyses of such models.
RECENT FINDINGS: Obsessive-compulsive disorder is a common neuropsychiatric
disorder characterized by recurrent intrusive thoughts (obsessions) and
ritualistic (compulsive) behaviors. Although the cause of this disorder remains
unclear, recent studies of novel mouse genetic models with excessive grooming
behaviors have begun to shed light on the molecular and cellular mechanisms
underlying the pathogenesis of 'obsessive-compulsive disorder-like' behaviors.
Genetic deletion of three genes in mice, Hoxb8, Sapap3, and Slitrk5, leads to
pathological behaviors including adult-onset excessive grooming with
mild-to-severe hair loss and self-injury. In two of the models, the
Sapap3-deficient and the Slitrk5-deficient mice, the abnormal grooming behaviors 
are associated with enhanced anxiety and these pathological behaviors can be
curtailed with subchronic administration of a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor, suggesting the predictive validity of such models. Molecular,
pathophysiological, and genetic analyses of these models reveal several insights 
on the etiological basis of abnormal behaviors in these mice, including abnormal 
cortico-striatal synapse formation and function in Sapap3 mice, impaired
development and function of bone marrow-derived microglia in Hoxb8 mice, and
abnormal striatal neuronal differentiation and neurotransmission in Slitrk5 mice.
SUMMARY: Novel animal models provide powerful tools to investigate the molecular,
cellular, and circuitry mechanisms of obsessive-compulsive disorder-like
behaviors. Detailed analyses of these models may provide candidate molecules and 
mechanisms for the investigation of cause and therapy of obsessive-compulsive
disorder.

PMID: 21386675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. FASEB J. 2011 Jun;25(6):1972-82. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-178517. Epub 2011 Mar 2.

In vivo functional analysis and genetic modification of in vitro-derived mouse
neutrophils.

McDonald JU(1), Cortini A, Rosas M, Fossati-Jimack L, Ling GS, Lewis KJ, Dewitt
S, Liddiard K, Brown GD, Jones SA, Hallett MB, Botto M, Taylor PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Biochemistry, Cardiff University School 
of Medicine, Tenovus Bldg., Heath Park, Cardiff, CF14 4XN, UK.

Mature neutrophils are notoriously short-lived immune cells that cannot be
genetically manipulated. Analysis of gene function therefore requires genetically
modified animals, which is expensive, time-consuming, and costly in animal life. 
Analysis of gene function in neutrophils in a physiologically relevant context
thus represents a significant problem in the field. We sought to overcome this
obstruction in the field by developing a strategy for the analysis of gene
function in neutrophils in a physiologically relevant context. Here, we
demonstrate the functional relevance of in vitro conditional-Hoxb8 immortalized
precursor-derived neutrophils. In vitro-derived neutrophils functionally
resembled primary neutrophils, but critically, neutrophils generated in this way 
can be adoptively transferred into live animals and tracked during inflammatory
responses using single-cell analysis to define functional attributes. We have
validated this approach using CD11b-deficient neutrophils and replicated the key 
findings observed in gene-targeted animals and in naturally CD11b-deficient
humans. Furthermore, we show that by retroviral transduction, one can generate
stable alterations in the precursor cell lines and thus a continuous supply of
functionally altered neutrophils. This novel technological advance offers for the
first time the possibility of applying higher-throughput genetic modification and
in vivo functional analysis to the neutrophil-lineage.

PMID: 21368104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Feb;41(2):356-65. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040962. Epub 2011 Jan
11.

Hoxb8 conditionally immortalised macrophage lines model inflammatory monocytic
cells with important similarity to dendritic cells.

Rosas M(1), Osorio F, Robinson MJ, Davies LC, Dierkes N, Jones SA, Reis e Sousa
C, Taylor PR.

Author information: 
(1)Infection, Immunity and Biochemistry, Cardiff University School of Medicine,
Heath Park, Cardiff, Wales, UK.

We have examined the potential to generate bona fide macrophages (MØ) from
conditionally immortalised murine bone marrow precursors. MØ can be derived from 
Hoxb8 conditionally immortalised macrophage precursor cell lines (MØP) using
either M-CSF or GM-CSF. When differentiated in GM-CSF (GM-MØP) the resultant
cells resemble GM-CSF bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDC) in morphological
phenotype, antigen phenotype and functional responses to microbial stimuli. In
spite of this high similarity between the two cell types and the ability of
GM-MØP to effectively present antigen to a T-cell hybridoma, these cells are
comparatively poor at priming the expansion of IFN-<U+03B3> responses from naïve CD4(+) 
T cells. The generation of MØP from transgenic or genetically aberrant mice
provides an excellent opportunity to study the inflammatory role of GM-MØP, and
reduces the need for mouse colonies in many studies. Hence differentiation of
conditionally immortalised MØPs in GM-CSF represents a unique in vitro model of
inflammatory monocyte-like cells, with important differences from bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells, which will facilitate functional studies relating
to the many 'sub-phenotypes' of inflammatory monocytes.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21268006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biol Reprod. 2011 Apr;84(4):765-74. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088344. Epub 2010
Dec 8.

Null mutation of the transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (id3)
affects spermatozoal motility parameters and epididymal gene expression in mice.

Carroll M(1), Luu T, Robaire B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

ID3 is a transcription factor that acts as a dominant-negative regulator of other
transcription factors by sequestering them, thus rendering them unable to bind
DNA. We have shown previously that ID3 is expressed in a unique, region-specific 
manner along the epididymis, a highly specialized tissue of the male reproductive
tract that functions in the transport and maturation of spermatozoa. The goal of 
these studies was to test the hypothesis that ID3 plays a role in the epididymis 
in the region-specific regulation of gene expression that is responsible for
establishing the microenvironment required to carry out sperm-related functions. 
The consequences of ID3 deficiency on epididymal histology and gene expression
profiles, as well as spermatozoal motility parameters, were determined. Although 
ID3 deficiency (Id3(-/-) mice) had no noticeable impact on epididymal histology, 
the targeted mutation adversely affected sperm motility parameters. Moreover,
principal component analysis of microarray data indicated that the gene
expression signatures for tissues obtained from Id3(-/-) mice and their genotypic
controls were distinct from each other in each epididymal region. The predominant
effect of the Id3 null mutation was in the cauda region where the expression of
many transcription factors, including Hoxb8 and Bclaf1, was markedly affected.
ID3 may play an important role in the molecular circuitry involved in the
establishment and maintenance of the region-specific differences in gene
expression that are characteristic of the epididymis.

PMCID: PMC4574637
PMID: 21148110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Sci Signal. 2010 Nov 9;3(147):jc8. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.3147jc8.

Grooming and growing with microglia.

Antony JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,
University of Toronto, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4N 3M5.
joseph.antony@utoronto.ca

Microglia mediate neuroprotection and neuropathogenesis but have not been
directly associated with behavior. As gatekeepers of the brain's immune system,
microglia protect the brain from pathogens but also contribute to inflammation,
which may negatively affect neurons. A recent study demonstrates a role for
Hoxb8-expressing microglia in modulating behavior, a finding that is interesting 
from both the pathology and developmental biology perspectives.

PMID: 21062990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genesis. 2010 Oct 1;48(10):596-602. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20656.

Hoxb8-Cre mice: A tool for brain-sparing conditional gene deletion.

Witschi R(1), Johansson T, Morscher G, Scheurer L, Deschamps J, Zeilhofer HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

The spinal cord is the first site of temporal and spatial integration of
nociceptive signals in the pain pathway. Neuroplastic changes occurring at this
site contribute critically to various chronic pain syndromes. Gene targeting in
mice has generated important insights into these processes. However, the analysis
of constitutive (global) gene-deficient mice is often hampered by confounding
effects arising from supraspinal sites. Here, we describe a novel Cre mouse line 
that expresses the Cre recombinase under the transcriptional control of the Hoxb8
gene. Within the neural axis of these mice, Hoxb8-Cre expression is found in
spinal cord neurons and glial cells, and in virtually all neurons of the dorsal
root ganglia, but spares the brain apart from a few cells in the spinal
trigeminal nucleus. The Hoxb8-Cre mouse line should be a valuable new tool for
the in vivo analysis of peripheral and spinal gene functions in pain pathways.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3566526
PMID: 20658520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 15;344(2):857-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.06.003. Epub 2010 
Jun 8.

Spatiotemporally restricted regulation of generic motor neuron programs by
miR-196-mediated repression of Hoxb8.

Asli NS(1), Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Biology, Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen 37077, Germany.

Hox transcription factors are key determinants of antero-posterior identity and
have been implicated in assigning positionally appropriate neuron subtypes in the
neural tube. These roles inherently necessitate stringent control mechanisms that
confine Hox protein activities to discrete spatiotemporal domains. Here, we
provide evidence that the timing and rostro-caudal extent of Hoxb8 activity in
the neural tube is tightly regulated by miR-196, a microRNA species encoded
within three Hox gene clusters. In vitro and in vivo sensor-tracer analysis and
transcription assays revealed that miR-196 activity restricts the caudal extent
of Hoxb8 expression to the thoracic-lumbar intersect via 3' UTR-dependent
negative regulation. Spatio-temporally inappropriate Hoxb8 activity, through
relief of miR-196-mediated repression or direct misexpression, affected normal
progression of motor neuron genesis by affecting generic motor neuron
differentiation programs. In addition to uncovering a role for microRNA-dependent
restriction of caudal Hox activities, these data thus indicate novel aspects of
Hox-dependent neural tube patterning by revealing a requirement of temporal
regulation of a generic neuronal specification program.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20553899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cell. 2010 May 28;141(5):775-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.055.

Hematopoietic origin of pathological grooming in Hoxb8 mutant mice.

Chen SK(1), Tvrdik P, Peden E, Cho S, Wu S, Spangrude G, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 May 28;141(5):752-4.

Mouse Hoxb8 mutants show unexpected behavior manifested by compulsive grooming
and hair removal, similar to behavior in humans with the obsessive-compulsive
disorder spectrum disorder trichotillomania. As Hox gene disruption often has
pleiotropic effects, the root cause of this behavioral deficit was unclear. Here 
we report that, in the brain, Hoxb8 cell lineage exclusively labels bone
marrow-derived microglia. Furthermore, transplantation of wild-type bone marrow
into Hoxb8 mutant mice rescues their pathological phenotype. It has been
suggested that the grooming dysfunction results from a nociceptive defect, also
exhibited by Hoxb8 mutant mice. However, bone marrow transplant experiments and
cell type-specific disruption of Hoxb8 reveal that these two phenotypes are
separable, with the grooming phenotype derived from the hematopoietic lineage and
the sensory defect derived from the spinal cord cells. Immunological dysfunctions
have been associated with neuropsychiatric disorders, but the causative
relationships are unclear. In this mouse, a distinct compulsive behavioral
disorder is associated with mutant microglia.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2894573
PMID: 20510925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cell. 2010 May 28;141(5):752-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.05.010.

A bone to pick with compulsive behavior.

Hyman SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Hall,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. seh@harvard.edu

Comment on
    Cell. 2010 May 28;141(5):775-85.

Mice with mutations in the Hoxb8 gene exhibit compulsive grooming behavior. Chen 
et al. (2010) now report that this behavior stems from Hoxb8 deficiency in
microglia, a type of immune cell in the brain derived from bone marrow. These
findings provide intriguing connections between immune dysfunction and
neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20510922  [PubMed]


42. Blood. 2010 Jan 14;115(2):344-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-230730. Epub 2009
Nov 17.

Myeloid progenitor cells lacking p53 exhibit delayed up-regulation of Puma and
prolonged survival after cytokine deprivation.

Jabbour AM(1), Daunt CP, Green BD, Vogel S, Gordon L, Lee RS, Silke N, Pearson
RB, Vandenberg CJ, Kelly PN, Nutt SL, Strasser A, Borner C, Ekert PG.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Centre, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia. anissa.jabbour@mcri.edu.au

Loss of p53-dependent apoptosis contributes to the development of hematologic
malignancies and failure to respond to treatment. Proapoptotic Bcl-2 family
member Puma is essential for apoptosis in HoxB8-immortalized interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent myeloid cell lines (FDM cells) provoked by IL-3 deprivation. p53
and FoxO3a can transcriptionally regulate Puma. To investigate which
transcriptional regulator is responsible for IL-3 deprivation-induced Puma
expression and apoptosis, we generated wild-type (WT), p53(-/-), and FoxO3a(-/-) 
FDM cells and found that p53(-/-) but not FoxO3a(-/-) cells were protected
against IL-3 withdrawal. Loss of p21(cip/waf), which is critical for p53-mediated
cell-cycle arrest, afforded no protection against IL-3 deprivation. A survival
advantage was also observed in untransformed p53(-/-) hematopoietic progenitor
cells cultured in the presence or absence of cytokines. In response to IL-3
deprivation, increased Puma protein levels in p53(-/-) cells were substantially
delayed compared with WT cells. Increased p53 transcriptional activity was
detected after cytokine deprivation. This was substantially less than that
induced by DNA damage and associated not with increased p53 protein levels but
with loss of the p53 regulator, MDM2. Thus, we conclude that p53 protein is
activated after IL-3 deprivation by loss of MDM2. Activated p53 transcriptionally
up-regulates Puma, which initiates apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2808157
PMID: 19965665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 3;106(44):18610-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910374106. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

In ovo application of antagomiRs indicates a role for miR-196 in patterning the
chick axial skeleton through Hox gene regulation.

McGlinn E(1), Yekta S, Mansfield JH, Soutschek J, Bartel DP, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Patterning of the vertebrate axial skeleton requires precise spatial and temporal
control of Hox gene expression during embryonic development. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are recently described modulators of gene activity, and members of the miR-196
and miR-10 families have been shown to target several Hox genes in vivo. Testing 
miRNA function in mice is complicated by potential redundancy between family
members. To circumvent this, we have developed protocols for introducing modified
antisense oligonucleotides (antagomiRs) in ovo during chick development. Using
this approach, we identify a layer of regulatory control provided by the miR-196 
family in defining the boundary of Hox gene expression along the
anterior-posterior (A-P) embryonic axis. Following knockdown of miR-196, we
observe a homeotic transformation of the last cervical vertebrae toward a
thoracic identity. This phenotypic alteration is, in part, due to an anterior
expansion of Hoxb8 gene expression and consolidates the in vivo relevance of
post-transcriptional Hox gene regulation provided by miRNAs in the complex
hierarchies governing axial pattering.

PMCID: PMC2773993
PMID: 19846767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Hum Mutat. 2009 Aug;30(8):1231-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.21044.

Functional variant in microRNA-196a2 contributes to the susceptibility of
congenital heart disease in a Chinese population.

Xu J(1), Hu Z, Xu Z, Gu H, Yi L, Cao H, Chen J, Tian T, Liang J, Lin Y, Qiu W, Ma
H, Shen H, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Comment in
    Hum Mutat. 2009 Aug;30(8):v.

Hox gene clusters play an important role during cardiac septation to valve
formation in different species, and the miR-196a-HOXB8-Sonic hedgehog signaling
pathway is of particular interest. Recently, we found that a genetic variant of
rs11614913 in the miR-196a2 sequence could alter mature miR-196a expression and
target mRNA binding; this observation led us to hypothesize that rs11614913 might
influence susceptibility to sporadic congenital heart disease (CHD). We conducted
a three-stage case-control study of CHD in Chinese to test our hypothesis by
genotyping miR-196a2 rs11614913 and three other pre-miRNA SNPs (miR-146a
rs2910164, miR-149 rs2292832, and miR-499 rs3746444) in 1,324 CHD cases and 1,783
non-CHD controls. We found that rs11614913 CC was associated with a significantly
increased risk of CHD in all three stages combined (P=6.81 x 10(-6)). In a
genotype-phenotype correlation analysis using 29 cardiac tissue samples of CHD,
rs11614913 CC was associated with significantly increased mature miR-196a
expression (P=0.001). In vitro binding assays further revealed that the
rs11614913 variant affects HOXB8 binding to mature miR-196a. This is the first
study to indicate that miR-196a2 rs11614913 plays a role in sporadic CHD
susceptibility.

PMID: 19514064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. FEBS J. 2009 Jun;276(11):3043-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07023.x. Epub
2009 Apr 22.

The endogenous retinoid metabolite S-4-oxo-9-cis-13,14-dihydro-retinoic acid
activates retinoic acid receptor signalling both in vitro and in vivo.

Schuchardt JP(1), Wahlström D, Rüegg J, Giese N, Stefan M, Hopf H, Pongratz I,
Håkansson H, Eichele G, Pettersson K, Nau H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Food Toxicology and Analytical Chemistry, University of
Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany. jan-philipp.schuchardt@lw.uni-hannover.de

Retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor are ligand-induced
transcription factors that belong to the nuclear receptor family. The receptors
are activated by small hydrophobic compounds, such as all-trans-retinoic acid and
9-cis-retinoic acid, respectively. Interestingly, these receptors are also
targets for a number of exogenous compounds. In this study, we characterized the 
biological activity of the 9-cis-substituted retinoic acid metabolite,
S-4-oxo-9-cis-13,14-dihydro-retinoic acid (S-4o9cDH-RA). The endogenous levels of
this metabolite in wild-type mice and rats were found to be higher than those of 
all-trans-retinoic acid, especially in the liver. Using cell-based luciferase
reporter systems, we showed that S-4o9cDH-RA activates the transcription of
retinoic acid response element-containing genes in several cell types, both from 
a simple 2xDR5 element and from the promoter of the natural retinoid target gene 
RARbeta2. In addition, quantitative RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that S-4o9cDH-RA
treatment significantly increases the endogenous mRNA levels of the RAR target
gene RARbeta2. Utilizing a limited proteolytic digestion assay, we showed that
S-4o9cDH-RA induces conformational changes to both RARalpha and RARbeta in the
same manner as does all-trans-retinoic acid, suggesting that S-4o9cDH-RA is
indeed an endogenous ligand for these receptors. These in vitro results were
corroborated in an in vivo system, where S-4o9cDH-RA induced morphological
changes similar to those of all-trans-retinoic acid in the developing chicken
wing bud. When locally applied to the wing bud, S-4o9cDH-RA induced digit pattern
duplications in a dose-dependent fashion. The results illustrate that S-4o9cDH-RA
closely mimics all-trans-retinoic acid with regard to pattern respecification.
Finally, using quantitative RT-PCR analysis, we showed that S-4o9cDH-RA induces
the transcription of several retinoic acid-regulated genes in chick wing buds,
including Hoxb8, RARbeta2, shh, Cyp26 and bmp2. Although S-4o9cDH-RA was less
potent when compared with all-trans-retinoic acid, the findings clearly
demonstrate that S-4o9cDH-RA has the capacity to bind and activate nuclear
retinoid receptors and regulate gene transcription both in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 19490107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 26;106(21):8585-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810952106. Epub 2009 May 11.

A distinct role for secreted fibroblast growth factor-binding proteins in
development.

Gibby KA(1), McDonnell K, Schmidt MO, Wellstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

FGFs modulate diverse biological processes including embryonic development.
Secreted FGF-binding proteins (BPs) can release FGFs from their local
extracellular matrix storage, chaperone them to their cognate receptors, and thus
modulate FGF signaling. Here we describe 2 chicken BP homologs (chBP) that show
distinct expression peaks at embryonic days E7.5 (chBP2) and E11.5 (chBP1),
although their tissue distribution is similar (skin = intestine>lung>heart,
liver). Embryos were grown ex ovo to monitor the phenotypic impact of a timed in 
vivo knockdown of expression peaks by microinjection of specific siRNAs targeted 
to either of the chBPs. Knockdown of peak expression of chBP2 caused embryonic
lethality within <5 days. Surviving embryos showed defective ventral wall closure
indicative of altered dorsoventral patterning. This defect coincided with reduced
expression of HoxB7 but not HoxB8 that are involved in the control of
thoracic/abdominal segment morphology. Also, MAPK phosphatase 3, a negative
regulator of FGF signaling, and sonic hedgehog that can participate in feedback
control of the FGF pathway were reduced, reflecting altered FGF signaling.
Knockdown of the chBP1 expression peak caused embryonic lethality within <3 days 
although no distinct morphologic phenotype or pathways alterations were apparent.
We conclude that BPs play a significant role in fine-tuning the complex FGF
signaling network during distinct phases of embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2689014
PMID: 19433791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. World J Gastroenterol. 2009 May 7;15(17):2089-96.

High miR-196a levels promote the oncogenic phenotype of colorectal cancer cells.

Schimanski CC(1), Frerichs K, Rahman F, Berger M, Lang H, Galle PR, Moehler M,
Gockel I.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz,
Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany. dr_schimanski@yahoo.de

AIM: To analyze the relevance of the microRNA miR-196a for colorectal
oncogenesis.
METHODS: The impact of miR-196a on the restriction targets HoxA7, HoxB8, HoxC8
and HoxD8 was analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) after transient transfection of SW480 cancer cells. The miR-196a
transcription profile in colorectal cancer samples, mucosa samples and diverse
cancer cell lines was quantified by RT-PCR. Transiently miR-196a-transfected
colorectal cancer cells were used for diverse functional assays in vitro and for 
a xenograft lung metastasis model in vivo.
RESULTS: HoxA7, HoxB8, HoxC8 and HoxD8 were restricted by miR-196a in a
dose-dependent and gene-specific manner. High levels of miR-196a activated the
AKT signaling pathway as indicated by increased phosphorylation of AKT. In
addition, high levels of miR-196a promoted cancer cell detachment, migration,
invasion and chemosensitivity towards platin derivatives but did not impact on
proliferation or apoptosis. Furthermore, miR-196a increased the development of
lung metastases in mice after tail vein injection.
CONCLUSION: miR-196a exerts a pro-oncogenic influence in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2678579
PMID: 19418581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neonatology. 2009;96(1):50-60. doi: 10.1159/000201739. Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Quantification of Hox and surfactant protein-B transcription during murine lung
development.

Grier DG(1), Thompson A, Lappin TR, Halliday HL.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Neonatal Unit, Royal Maternity Hospital, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12
6BB, UK. grier@doctors.org.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic processes underlying fetal lung development and maturation
are incompletely understood. Better knowledge of these processes would provide
insights into the causes of lung malformations and prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome and the potential adverse effects of glucocorticoids. Hox genes
are involved in the lung branching morphogenesis and maturation of respiratory
epithelium, but their expression pattern remains to be defined.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that genes involved in lung branching would be
downregulated during early development, whereas those involved in maturation
would be unchanged or upregulated.
METHODS: TaqMan real-time primers and probes were designed for all 39 murine Hox 
genes, and the murine SP-B gene and transcription profiles of these genes were
obtained from whole lungs isolated at e14.5, e16.5, e18.5, e19.5 and postnatal
days 1 and 20.
RESULTS: Hox genes in clusters A and B, specifically those between paralog groups
3 and 7, were the most represented, with Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 being the most highly
transcribed. A wave of reduced transcription in 16 Hox genes, coincident with
increased SP-B transcription, was observed with advancing gestation. Consistently
high transcription of Hoxa5 from e14.5 to postnatal day 20 may indicate that
sustained transcription is required for normal lung maturation. When e15.5 lungs 
were cultured with dexamethasone, Hoxb6, Hoxb7 and Hoxb8 levels were
significantly upregulated, creating the potential for modulation of diverse
downstream target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved understanding of the genetic processes underlying lung
development afforded by our Q-PCR platform may allow development of more specific
methods for inducing fetal lung maturation.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19204410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Sep 3;100(17):1247-59. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn253. Epub
2008 Aug 26.

Identification of chromatin remodeling genes Arid4a and Arid4b as leukemia
suppressor genes.

Wu MY(1), Eldin KW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia evolves through a multistep process from premalignancy to
malignancy. Epigenetic alterations, including histone modifications, have been
proposed to play an important role in tumorigenesis. The involvement of two
chromatin remodeling genes, retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (Rbbp1/Arid4a) and
Rbbp1-like 1 (Rbbp1l1/Arid4b), in leukemogenesis was not characterized.
METHODS: The leukemic phenotype of mice deficient for Arid4a with or without
haploinsufficiency for Arid4b was investigated by serially monitoring complete
blood counts together with microscopic histologic analysis and flow cytometric
analysis of bone marrow and spleen from the Arid4a(-/-) mice or
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice. Regulation in bone marrow cells of downstream genes 
important for normal hematopoiesis was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Genotypic effects on histone
modifications were examined by western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis. 
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Young (2-5 months old) Arid4a-deficient mice had ineffective blood cell 
production in all hematopoietic lineages. Beyond 5 months of age, the Arid4a(-/-)
mice manifested monocytosis, accompanied by severe anemia and thrombocytopenia.
These sick Arid4a(-/-) mice showed bone marrow failure with myelofibrosis
associated with splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Five of 42 Arid4a(-/-) mice and 10
of 12 Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice progressed to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 
had rapid further increases of leukocyte counts. Expression of Hox genes (Hoxb3, 
Hoxb5, Hoxb6, and Hoxb8) was decreased in Arid4a-deficient bone marrow cells with
or without Arid4b haploinsufficiency, and FoxP3 expression was reduced in
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) bone marrow. Increases of histone trimethylation of H3K4, 
H3K9, and H4K20 (fold increases in trimethylation = 32, 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 27 to 32; 45, 95% CI = 41 to 49; and 2.2, 95% CI = 1.7 to 2.7,
respectively) were observed in the bone marrow of Arid4a-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Arid4a-deficient mice initially display ineffective hematopoiesis,
followed by transition to chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)-like
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, and then transformation to AML. The 
disease processes in the Arid4a-deficient mice are very similar to the course of 
events in humans with CMML and AML. This mouse model has the potential to furnish
additional insights into the role of epigenetic alterations in leukemogenesis,
and it may be useful in developing novel pharmacological approaches to treatment 
of preleukemic and leukemic states.

PMCID: PMC2528019
PMID: 18728284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Toxicol In Vitro. 2008 Sep;22(6):1447-51. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2008.04.010. Epub
2008 Apr 22.

Cadmium exposure induces expression of the HOXB8 gene in COS-7 cells.

Nakagawa K(1), Lee MJ, Sasaki N, Hayashi C, Nishio H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Genetic Epidemiology, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

Cadmium (Cd) is a serious toxic metal, which is classified as a possible human
carcinogen. We assessed the effects of Cd on the expression levels of homeobox
genes, which are associated with carcinogenesis. Among 6 homeobox genes examined 
in this study, only HOXB8 exhibited increased mRNA expression in COS-7 cells
treated with 10 microM CdCl(2). Semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction analysis revealed that the HOXB8 mRNA level was increased by a
maximum of 5.4-fold after 6h of Cd exposure. The levels of HOXA7, A9, C4, C9 and 
C10 mRNAs decreased from 0.1 to 0.3-fold. Silencing of HOXB8 mRNA expression
using a siRNA increased HOXC9 and C10 mRNA expression levels by 6.6- and
1.9-fold, respectively. These results suggest that HOXB8 upregulation is
associated with suppression of HOXC9 and C10, and that decreased expression of
HOXC9 and C10 after Cd exposure is partly due to HOXB8 induction. In conclusion, 
Cd disrupts the HOX network. Comprehensive analyses of all the HOX gene
expression levels in the presence of Cd may afford clues toward understanding
Cd-induced carcinogenesis and teratogenesis.

PMID: 18534812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1553-64. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21568.

All-trans retinoic acid-induced ectopic limb and caudal structures: murine strain
sensitivities and pathogenesis.

Liao X(1), Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of California, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Treatment of pregnant mice at the egg cylinder stage with retinoic acid (RA) has 
caused ectopic hindlimbs in the offspring. Proposed causes of ectopic hindlimbs
include homeotic transformation or multiple axis formation. Two mouse strains
were determined to be divergent in susceptibility to this malformation (C57BL/6N,
highly sensitive; SWV/Fnn, less sensitive). Ectopic limbs were hindlimbs
(expressing Pitx1 and Tbx4 but not Tbx5), yet they also expressed the
predominantly forelimb Hoxb8. Ectopic body axis formation was indicated by gene
expression for ectopic primitive streaks, notochords, and nodes, as well as
inhibition of anterior visceral endoderm and mesodermal migration. The earlier in
development that embryos were examined, the higher the rate of ectopic hindlimb
development and axis formation. Ectopic axis formation and cell migration
inhibition had the same strain susceptibility as the dysmorphogenesis. We propose
that all extra hindlimbs were derived from ectopic axis formation, perturbation
of which is genetic background dependent.

PMID: 18498097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 29;105(17):6338-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0802176105. Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Loss of Hoxb8 alters spinal dorsal laminae and sensory responses in mice.

Holstege JC(1), de Graaff W, Hossaini M, Cardona Cano S, Jaarsma D, van den Akker
E, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Although Hox gene expression has been linked to motoneuron identity, a role of
these genes in development of the spinal sensory system remained undocumented.
Hoxb genes are expressed at high levels in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
Hoxb8 null mutants manifest a striking phenotype of excessive grooming and
hairless lesions on the lower back. Applying local anesthesia underneath the
hairless skin suppressed excessive grooming, indicating that this behavior
depends on peripheral nerve activity. Functional ablation of mouse Hoxb8 also
leads to attenuated response to nociceptive and thermal stimuli. Although spinal 
ganglia were normal, a lower postmitotic neural count was found in the dorsalmost
laminae at lumbar levels around birth, leading to a smaller dorsal horn and a
correspondingly narrowed projection field of nociceptive and thermoceptive
afferents. The distribution of the dorsal neuronal cell types that we assayed,
including neurons expressing the itch-specific gastrin-releasing peptide
receptor, was disorganized in the lumbar region of the mutant. BrdU labeling
experiments and gene-expression studies at stages around the birth of these
neurons suggest that loss of Hoxb8 starts impairing development of the upper
laminae of the lumbar spinal cord at approximately embryonic day (E)15.5. Because
none of the neuronal markers used was unexpressed in the adult dorsal horn,
absence of Hoxb8 does not impair neuronal differentiation. The data therefore
suggest that a lower number of neurons in the upper spinal laminae and neuronal
disorganization in the dorsal horn underlie the sensory defects including the
excessive grooming of the Hoxb8 mutant.

PMCID: PMC2359815
PMID: 18430798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):309-19. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Overexpression of CDX2 perturbs HOX gene expression in murine progenitors
depending on its N-terminal domain and is closely correlated with deregulated HOX
gene expression in human acute myeloid leukemia.

Rawat VP(1), Thoene S, Naidu VM, Arseni N, Heilmeier B, Metzeler K, Petropoulos
K, Deshpande A, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Bohlander SK, Spiekermann K, Hiddemann W,
Feuring-Buske M, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Germany.

The mechanisms underlying deregulation of HOX gene expression in AML are poorly
understood. The ParaHox gene CDX2 was shown to act as positive upstream regulator
of several HOX genes. In this study, constitutive expression of Cdx2 caused
perturbation of leukemogenic Hox genes such as Hoxa10 and Hoxb8 in murine
hematopoietic progenitors. Deletion of the N-terminal domain of Cdx2 abrogated
its ability to perturb Hox gene expression and to cause acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) in mice. In contrast inactivation of the putative Pbx interacting site of
Cdx2 did not change the leukemogenic potential of the gene. In an analysis of 115
patients with AML, expression levels of CDX2 were closely correlated with
deregulated HOX gene expression. Patients with normal karyotype showed a 14-fold 
higher expression of CDX2 and deregulated HOX gene expression compared with
patients with chromosomal translocations such as t(8:21) or t(15;17). All
patients with AML with normal karyotype tested were negative for CDX1 and CDX4
expression. These data link the leukemogenic potential of Cdx2 to its ability to 
dysregulate Hox genes. They furthermore correlate the level of CDX2 expression
with HOX gene expression in human AML and support a potential role of CDX2 in the
development of human AML with aberrant Hox gene expression.

PMID: 17855634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser (Oxf). 2004;(48):211-2.

MicroRNA-196 inhibits HOXB8 expression in myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells.

Kawasaki H(1), Taira K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, School of Engineering, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small RNAs (approximately 21-25 nts) that can
regulate gene expression at a post-transcriptional level. Recently a large number
of miRNAs have been identified from plants and animals. In addition, it has been 
reported that these small RNAs can participate in cell differentiation of
developmental timing. In this study, we show that microRNA-196 (miR-196) inhibits
HOXB8 expression in myeloid differentiation of HL 60 cells. MiR-196 has perfect
complementarity with target sequence of 3'-UTR in HOXB8 mRNA. Exogenous expressed
miR-196 repressed expression of HOXB8 via cleaving mRNAs. Moreover miR-196
enhanced myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. These results suggest that
miR-196 participates in myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells via regulation of
HOXB8 expression.

PMID: 17150553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2006 Jun;133(12):2371-81. Epub 2006 May 10.

Distinct roles of Polycomb group gene products in transcriptionally repressed and
active domains of Hoxb8.

Fujimura Y(1), Isono K, Vidal M, Endoh M, Kajita H, Mizutani-Koseki Y, Takihara
Y, van Lohuizen M, Otte A, Jenuwein T, Deschamps J, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Sep;141(17):3431-6.

To address the molecular mechanisms underlying Polycomb group (PcG)-mediated
repression of Hox gene expression, we have focused on the binding patterns of PcG
gene products to the flanking regions of the Hoxb8 gene in expressing and
non-expressing tissues. In parallel, we followed the distribution of histone
marks of transcriptionally active H3 acetylated on lysine 9 (H3-K9) and
methylated on lysine 4 (H3-K4), and of transcriptionally inactive chromatin
trimethylated on lysine 27 (H3-K27). Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that 
the association of PcG proteins, and H3-K9 acetylation and H3-K27 trimethylation 
around Hoxb8 were distinct in tissues expressing and not expressing the gene. We 
show that developmental changes of these epigenetic marks temporally coincide
with the misexpression of Hox genes in PcG mutants. Functional analyses, using
mutant alleles impairing the PcG class 2 component Rnf2 or the Suz12 mutation
decreasing H3-K27 trimethylation, revealed that interactions between class 1 and 
class 2 PcG complexes, mediated by trimethylated H3-K27, play decisive roles in
the maintenance of Hox gene repression outside their expression domain. Within
the expression domains, class 2 PcG complexes appeared to maintain the
transcriptionally active status via profound regulation of H3-K9 acetylation. The
present study indicates distinct roles for class 2 PcG complexes in
transcriptionally repressed and active domains of Hoxb8 gene.

PMID: 16687444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Bioessays. 2006 May;28(5):445-8.

"Mir"acles in hox gene regulation.

Chopra VS(1), Mishra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.
vivchopra@ccmb.res.in

Micro RNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to control many cellular processes including 
developmental timing in different organisms. The prediction that miRNAs are
involved in regulating hox genes of flies and mouse is quite a recent idea and is
supported by the finding that mir-196 represses Hoxb8 gene expression. The
non-coding regions that encode these miRNAs are also conserved across species in 
the same way as other mechanisms that regulate expression of hox genes. On the
contrary, until now no homeotic phenotype, a hallmark of any hox gene mutation,
had been associated with any hox miRNA. Recent work on bithorax complex miRNA
(miR-iab-4-5p) shows, for the first time, that miRNAs can lead to homeotic
transformation. This miRNA regulates Ultrabithorax (Ubx) and results in the
transformation of haltere to wing. This study unveils a new complexity and
finesse to the regulation of hox gene expression pattern that is needed for
determining the anteroposterior body axis in all bilaterians.

2006 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 16615131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nat Methods. 2006 Apr;3(4):287-93.

Quantitative production of macrophages or neutrophils ex vivo using conditional
Hoxb8.

Wang GG(1), Calvo KR, Pasillas MP, Sykes DB, Häcker H, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, School of
Medicine, University of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 
92093, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2006 Apr;3(4):248-9.

Differentiation mechanisms and inflammatory functions of neutrophils and
macrophages are usually studied by genetic and biochemical approaches that
require costly breeding and time-consuming purification to obtain phagocytes for 
functional analysis. Because Hox oncoproteins enforce self-renewal of
factor-dependent myeloid progenitors, we queried whether estrogen-regulated Hoxb8
(ER-Hoxb8) could immortalize macrophage or neutrophil progenitors that would
execute normal differentiation and normal innate immune function upon ER-Hoxb8
inactivation. Here we describe methods to derive unlimited quantities of mouse
macrophages or neutrophils by immortalizing their respective progenitors with
ER-Hoxb8 using different cytokines to target expansion of different committed
progenitors. ER-Hoxb8 neutrophils and macrophages are functionally superior to
those produced by many other ex vivo differentiation models, have strong
inflammatory responses and can be derived easily from embryonic day 13 (e13)
fetal liver of mice exhibiting embryonic-lethal phenotypes. Using knockout or
small interfering RNA (siRNA) technologies, this ER-Hoxb8 phagocyte maturation
system represents a rapid analytical tool for studying macrophage and neutrophil 
biology.

PMID: 16554834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Dev Biol. 2006 May 15;293(2):426-38. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Medaka unextended-fin mutants suggest a role for Hoxb8a in cell migration and
osteoblast differentiation during appendage formation.

Sakaguchi S(1), Nakatani Y, Takamatsu N, Hori H, Kawakami A, Inohaya K, Kudo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Information, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259
Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

Hoxb8 has been suggestively implicated in the formation of the zone of polarizing
activity (ZPA) in the limb bud. However, as hoxb8-/- mice did not show any
defects in their limb development, the role of Hoxb8 during limb development has 
not been fully elucidated. Here, we report the identification of the medaka
hoxb8a mutant, unextended-fin (ufi), in which all the fin tissues were malformed.
Since the abnormal phenotype was observed in the caudal fin, the ufi phenotype
suggests that the medaka Hoxb8a has a fundamental role in the formation of
appendages protruding from the trunk. Our analyses revealed that the expression
of wnt5a, a regulator of cell migration that signals through the non-canonical
Wnt/Ca2+ pathway, was down-regulated in the ufi fin-folds. In fact, we found that
the proximal-distal cell migration was impaired in ufi mutants and that the
defect could be reversed by the injection of a Wnt5a protein. Moreover, we show
herein that the numbers of proliferating cells and osteoblastic cells were
increased in the ufi mutants. According to these results, we propose that the
medaka Hoxb8a protein functions in the outgrowth of appendages through the
regulation of cell migration and osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 16546159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genes Dev. 2005 Dec 15;19(24):2947-52.

The Drosophila microRNA iab-4 causes a dominant homeotic transformation of
halteres to wings.

Ronshaugen M(1), Biemar F, Piel J, Levine M, Lai EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Division of Genetics, Center for
Integrative Genomics, University of California, Berkeley, 94720, USA.

The Drosophila Bithorax Complex encodes three well-characterized homeodomain
proteins that direct segment identity, as well as several noncoding RNAs of
unknown function. Here, we analyze the iab-4 locus, which produces the microRNAs 
iab-4-5p and iab-4-3p. iab-4 is analogous to miR-196 in vertebrate Hox clusters. 
Previous studies demonstrate that miR-196 interacts with the Hoxb8 3'
untranslated region. Evidence is presented that miR-iab-4-5p directly inhibits
Ubx activity in vivo. Ectopic expression of mir-iab-4-5p attenuates endogenous
Ubx protein accumulation and induces a classical homeotic mutant phenotype: the
transformation of halteres into wings. These findings provide the first evidence 
for a noncoding homeotic gene and raise the possibility that other such genes
occur within the Bithorax complex. We also discuss the regulation of mir-iab-4
expression during development.

PMCID: PMC1315399
PMID: 16357215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nature. 2005 Dec 1;438(7068):671-4.

The microRNA miR-196 acts upstream of Hoxb8 and Shh in limb development.

Hornstein E(1), Mansfield JH, Yekta S, Hu JK, Harfe BD, McManus MT, Baskerville
S, Bartel DP, Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an abundant class of gene regulatory molecules (reviewed
in refs 1, 2). Although computational work indicates that miRNAs repress more
than a third of human genes, their roles in vertebrate development are only now
beginning to be determined. Here we show that miR-196 acts upstream of Hoxb8 and 
Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in vivo in the context of limb development, thereby
identifying a previously observed but uncharacterized inhibitory activity that
operates specifically in the hindlimb. Our data indicate that miR-196 functions
in a fail-safe mechanism to assure the fidelity of expression domains that are
primarily regulated at the transcriptional level, supporting the idea that many
vertebrate miRNAs may function as a secondary level of gene regulation.

PMID: 16319892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nature. 2005 Nov 10;438(7065):151-2.

Psychiatric disease: all in the mind of a mouse.

Dennis C.

PMID: 16281003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(15):6694-706.

Mammalian polyhomeotic homologues Phc2 and Phc1 act in synergy to mediate
polycomb repression of Hox genes.

Isono K(1), Fujimura Y, Shinga J, Yamaki M, O-Wang J, Takihara Y, Murahashi Y,
Takada Y, Mizutani-Koseki Y, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;34(14):2771.

The Polycomb group (PcG) gene products form multimeric protein complexes and
contribute to anterior-posterior (A-P) specification via the transcriptional
regulation of Hox cluster genes. The Drosophila polyhomeotic genes and their
mammalian orthologues, Phc1, Phc2, and Phc3, encode nuclear proteins that are
constituents of evolutionarily conserved protein complexes designated class II
PcG complexes. In this study, we describe the generation and phenotypes of
Phc2-deficient mice. We show posterior transformations of the axial skeleton and 
premature senescence of mouse embryonic fibroblasts associated with derepression 
of Hox cluster genes and Cdkn2a genes, respectively. Synergistic actions of a
Phc2 mutation with Phc1 and Rnf110 mutations during A-P specification,
coimmunoprecipitation of their products from embryonic extracts, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation by anti-Phc2 monoclonal antibodies suggest that Hox
repression by Phc2 is mediated through the class II PcG complexes, probably via
direct binding to the Hox locus. The genetic interactions further reveal the
functional overlap between Phc2 and Phc1 and a strict dose-dependent requirement 
during A-P specification and embryonic survival. Functional redundancy between
Phc2 and Phc1 leads us to hypothesize that the overall level of polyhomeotic
orthologues in nuclei is a parameter that is critical in enabling the class II
PcG complexes to exert their molecular functions.

PMCID: PMC1190356
PMID: 16024804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25854-63. Epub 2005 May 9.

Regulation of smooth muscle-specific gene expression by homeodomain proteins,
Hoxa10 and Hoxb8.

El-Mounayri O(1), Triplett JW, Yates CW, Herring BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Smooth muscle cells arise from different populations of precursor cells during
embryonic development. The mechanisms that specify the smooth muscle cell
phenotype in each of these populations of cells are largely unknown. In many
tissues and organs, homeodomain transcription factors play a key role in
directing cell specification. However, little is known about how these proteins
regulate smooth muscle differentiation. Using degenerate reverse
transcription-PCR coupled to cDNA library screening we identified two homeodomain
proteins, Hoxa10 and Hoxb8, which are expressed in adult mouse smooth muscle
tissues. All three of the previously described transcripts of the Hoxa10 gene,
Hoxa10-1, Hoxa10-2, and Hoxa10-3, were identified. Hoxa10-1 directly activated
the smooth muscle-specific telokin promoter but did not activate the SM22alpha,
smooth muscle alpha-actin, or smooth muscle myosin heavy chain promoters. Small
interfering RNA-mediated knock-down of Hoxa10-1 demonstrated that Hoxa10-1 is
required for high levels of telokin expression in smooth muscle cells from uterus
and colon. On the other hand, Hoxb8 inhibited the activity of the telokin,
SM22alpha, and smooth muscle alpha-actin promoters. Cotransfection of Hoxa10-1
together with Hoxa10-2 or Hoxb8 suggested that Hoxa10-2 and Hoxb8 act as
competitive inhibitors of Hoxa10-1. Results from gel mobility shift assays
demonstrated that Hoxa10-1, Hoxa10-2, and Hoxb8 bind directly to multiple sites
in the telokin promoter. Mutational analysis of telokin promoter reporter genes
demonstrated that the three homeodomain protein binding sites located between -80
and -75, +2 and +6, and +14 and +17 were required for maximal promoter activation
by Hoxa10-1 and maximal inhibition by Hoxb8. Together these data demonstrate that
the genes encoding smooth muscle-restricted proteins are direct transcriptional
targets of clustered homeodomain proteins and that different homeodomain proteins
have distinct effects on the promoters of these genes.

PMID: 15886193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(19):8567-75.

Loss of function but no gain of function caused by amino acid substitutions in
the hexapeptide of Hoxa1 in vivo.

Remacle S(1), Abbas L, De Backer O, Pacico N, Gavalas A, Gofflot F, Picard JJ,
Rezsöhazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Homeodomain containing transcription factors of the Hox family play critical
roles in patterning the anteroposterior embryonic body axis, as well as in
controlling several steps of organogenesis. Several Hox proteins have been shown 
to cooperate with members of the Pbx family for the recognition and activation of
identified target enhancers. Hox proteins contact Pbx via a conserved hexapeptide
motif. Previous biochemical studies provided evidence that critical amino acid
substitutions in the hexapeptide sequence of Hoxa1 abolish its interaction with
Pbx. As a result, these substitutions also abolish Hoxa1 activity on known target
enhancers in cellular models, suggesting that Hoxa1 activity relies on its
capacity to interact with Pbx. Here, we show that mice with mutations in the
Hoxa1 hexapeptide display hindbrain, cranial nerve, and skeletal defects highly
reminiscent of those reported for the Hoxa1 loss of function. Since similar
hexapeptide mutations in the mouse Hoxb8 and the Drosophila AbdA proteins result 
in activity modulation and gain of function, our data demonstrate that the
functional importance of the hexapeptide in vivo differs according to the Hox
proteins.

PMCID: PMC516739
PMID: 15367676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nat Genet. 2004 Oct;36(10):1079-83. Epub 2004 Sep 12.

MicroRNA-responsive 'sensor' transgenes uncover Hox-like and other
developmentally regulated patterns of vertebrate microRNA expression.

Mansfield JH(1), Harfe BD, Nissen R, Obenauer J, Srineel J, Chaudhuri A,
Farzan-Kashani R, Zuker M, Pasquinelli AE, Ruvkun G, Sharp PA, Tabin CJ, McManus 
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1238.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Oct;36(10):1033-4.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of short ( approximately 22-nt) noncoding RNA
molecules that downregulate expression of their mRNA targets. Since their
discovery as regulators of developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans,
hundreds of miRNAs have been identified in both animals and plants. Here, we
report a technique for visualizing detailed miRNA expression patterns in mouse
embryos. We elucidate the tissue-specific expression of several miRNAs during
embryogenesis, including two encoded by genes embedded in homeobox (Hox)
clusters, miR-10a and miR-196a. These two miRNAs are expressed in patterns that
are markedly reminiscent of those of Hox genes. Furthermore, miR-196a negatively 
regulates Hoxb8, indicating that its restricted expression pattern probably
reflects a role in the patterning function of the Hox complex.

PMID: 15361871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Science. 2004 Apr 23;304(5670):594-6.

MicroRNA-directed cleavage of HOXB8 mRNA.

Yekta S(1), Shih IH, Bartel DP.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous approximately 22-nucleotide RNAs, some of which
are known to play important regulatory roles in animals by targeting the messages
of protein-coding genes for translational repression. We find that miR-196, a
miRNA encoded at three paralogous locations in the A, B, and C mammalian HOX
clusters, has extensive, evolutionarily conserved complementarity to messages of 
HOXB8, HOXC8, and HOXD8. RNA fragments diagnostic of miR-196-directed cleavage of
HOXB8 were detected in mouse embryos. Cell culture experiments demonstrated
down-regulation of HOXB8, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXA7 and supported the cleavage
mechanism for miR-196-directed repression of HOXB8. These results point to a
miRNA-mediated mechanism for the posttranscriptional restriction of HOX gene
expression during vertebrate development and demonstrate that metazoan miRNAs can
repress expression of their natural targets through mRNA cleavage in addition to 
inhibiting productive translation.

PMID: 15105502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Brain Dev. 2003 Dec;25 Suppl 1:S55-61.

Genetics of obsessive-compulsive disorders: new findings and challenges.

Grados MA(1), Walkup J, Walford S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21211, USA. mjgrados@jhmi.edu

A review of the current state of research in the genetics of obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD) is presented. OCD is a neuropsychiatric condition that affects
1-2% of the population and often has an early age at onset of symptoms. OCD has
been shown to be familial, and a major gene effect has been reported. However,
phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of OCD poses multiple challenges for
locating susceptibility genes. Strategies such as the use of phenotypic subtyping
(using tic disorders or other anxiety disorders) and endophenotyping based on
brain mechanisms underlying OCD (functional brain imaging and neuropsychological 
measures) may open ways to understand the genetic components of OCD. Using child 
probands and extended families for linkage an association studies is another
venue to obtain greater informative families for genetic studies. A better
understanding of environmental triggers, OCD subtypes and OCD pathophysiology
will lead to locating genes that confer risk to OCD.

PMID: 14980374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 1;264(1):77-90.

In vivo mutagenesis of the Hoxb8 hexapeptide domain leads to dominant homeotic
transformations that mimic the loss-of-function mutations in genes of the Hoxb
cluster.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Extracellular Matrix, Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M University, Houston, TX 77030, USA.olgamm@bcm.tmc.edu

Hox proteins are transcription factors that control developmental pathways along 
the anteroposterior axis of vertebrates. On their own, Hox proteins bind DNA
weakly, but they gain specificity and affinity by interaction with members of the
PBC subfamily of homeobox proteins. In vitro studies indicate that most of these 
interactions are mediated by the conserved hexapeptide motif of the Hox proteins.
To study the significance of these interactions in vivo, we have generated mice
that carry mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif. Analysis of skeletal
features of these mice reveals the presence of a dominant phenotype consisting of
homeotic transformations, similar to those observed in mice with a
loss-of-function of Hox genes, such as Hoxa7, Hoxb7, and Hoxb9. Genetic tests
demonstrate that the mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif are affecting the
function of other genes located in the Hoxb cluster. The expression pattern of
these genes is not affected; rather it appears that the mutant Hoxb8 protein
interferes with the function of other Hox genes by binding to their targets. Our 
findings suggest that the homeotic transformations result from altered DNA
binding specificity of the mutant Hoxb8 protein, implicating the cooperative
binding between Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif and cofactors as a critical element in
the fine-tuning of Hoxb8 protein target specificity. This is the first time the
function of the hexapeptide domain has been evaluated in vivo in mouse
development.

PMID: 14623233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):4823-34. Epub 2003 Aug 13.

Enhancer timing of Hox gene expression: deletion of the endogenous Hoxc8 early
enhancer.

Juan AH(1), Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The proper expression of Hox genes is necessary for the accurate patterning of
the body plan. The elucidation of the developmental genetic basis of
transcriptional regulation of Hox genes by the study of their cis-regulatory
elements provides crucial information regarding the establishment of axial
specification. In this report, we investigate the role of the early enhancer (EE)
of the murine Hoxc8 gene to better understand its role in pattern formation.
Previous reports show that knockouts of the endogenous Hoxc8 coding region result
in a combination of neural, behavioral and skeletal phenotypes. In this report,
we limit ourselves to a consideration of the skeletal abnormalities. Early
reports from our laboratory based on exogenous transgenic reporter constructs
implicate a 200 bp non-coding element 3 kb upstream of the Hoxc8 promoter as a
crucial enhancer that regulates the transcription of Hoxc8. In the present work, 
we have deleted this regulatory region from the endogenous genome using embryonic
stem cell technology. Our results show that the deletion of the EE results in a
significant delay in the temporal expression of Hoxc8. We also show that the
deletion of the EE does not eliminate the expression of the Hoxc8 protein, but
delays the attainment of control levels of expression and anterior and posterior 
boundaries of expression on the AP axis. The temporal delay in Hoxc8 expression
is sufficient to produce phenocopies of many of the axial skeletal defects
associated with the complete absence of Hoxc8 gene product as previously reported
for the Hoxc8-null mutation. Our results are consistent with emerging evidence
that the precise temporal expression of Hox genes is crucial for the
establishment of regional identities. The fact that the EE deletion does not
eliminate Hoxc8 expression indicates the existence of a Hoxc8 transcriptional
regulatory apparatus independent to some degree of the Hoxc8 EE. In a comparison 
of our results with those reported previously by others investigating temporal
control of Hox gene expression, we have discovered a structural similarity
between the Hoxc8 EE reported here and a transcriptional control element located 
in the Hoxd11 region. We speculate that a distributed system of expression timing
control may exist that is similar the one we propose for Hoxc8. Last, our data is
consistent with the position that disparate regulatory pathways are responsible
for the expression of Hoxc8 in the organogenesis of somites, neural tube and limb
bud.

PMID: 12917291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3807-19.

Acquisition of Hox codes during gastrulation and axial elongation in the mouse
embryo.

Forlani S(1), Lawson KA, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Early sequential expression of mouse Hox genes is essential for their later
function. Analysis of the relationship between early Hox gene expression and the 
laying down of anterior to posterior structures during and after gastrulation is 
therefore crucial for understanding the ontogenesis of Hox-mediated axial
patterning. Using explants from gastrulation stage embryos, we show that the
ability to express 3' and 5' Hox genes develops sequentially in the primitive
streak region, from posterior to anterior as the streak extends, about 12 hours
earlier than overt Hox expression. The ability to express autonomously the
earliest Hox gene, Hoxb1, is present in the posterior streak region at the onset 
of gastrulation, but not in the anterior region at this stage. However, the
posterior region can induce Hoxb1 expression in these anterior region cells. We
conclude that tissues are primed to express Hox genes early in gastrulation,
concomitant with primitive streak formation and extension, and that Hox gene
inducibility is transferred by cell to cell signalling. Axial structures that
will later express Hox genes are generated in the node region in the period that 
Hox expression domains arrive there and continue to spread rostrally. However,
lineage analysis showed that definitive Hox codes are not fixed at the node, but 
must be acquired later and anterior to the node in the neurectoderm, and
independently in the mesoderm. We conclude that the rostral progression of Hox
gene expression must be modulated by gene regulatory influences from early on in 
the posterior streak, until the time cells have acquired their stable positions
along the axis well anterior to the node.

PMID: 12835396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Oct 28;26(5):409-11.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of HOXB5, HOXB6, 
HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes in gliomaous cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu GJ(1), Chen LY, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: The expressions of HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes of U251 cell
infected by human cytomegalovirus and/or treated with all trans-retinoic
acid(ATRA) were detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The results were that U251 
cell did not express HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB8 but expressed HOXB7 without
infecting HCMV and/or being treated with ATRA. After infected with HCMV and/or
treated with ATRA, the expressions of HOXB7 and HOXB8 were up-regulated and the
expression of HOXB7 lasted the fourth generation, while HOXB8 was up-regulated
only in the second generation. These results indicate that the abnormal
expression of HOXB gene induced by HCMV may play an important role in the
maldevelopment.

PMID: 12536483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. EMBO J. 2003 Jan 15;22(2):262-9.

Retinoids regulate the anterior expression boundaries of 5' Hoxb genes in
posterior hindbrain.

Oosterveen T(1), Niederreither K, Dollé P, Chambon P, Meijlink F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute of Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We describe the regulatory interactions that cause anterior extension of the
mouse 5' Hoxb expression domains from spinal cord levels to their definitive
boundaries in the posterior hindbrain between embryonic day E10 and E11.5. This
anterior expansion is retinoid dependent since it does not occur in mouse embryos
deficient for the retinoic acid-synthesizing enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase
2. A retinoic acid response element (RARE) was identified downstream of Hoxb5 and
shown to be essential for expression of Hoxb5 and Hoxb8 reporter transgenes in
the anterior neural tube. The spatio-temporal activity of this element overlaps
with rostral extension of the expression domain of endogenous Hoxb5, Hoxb6 and
Hoxb8 into the posterior hindbrain. The RARE and surrounding sequences are found 
at homologous positions in the human, mouse and zebrafish genome, which supports 
an evolutionarily conserved regulatory function.

PMCID: PMC140104
PMID: 12514132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Development. 2002 Sep;129(18):4171-83.

Involvement of the Polycomb-group gene Ring1B in the specification of the
anterior-posterior axis in mice.

Suzuki M(1), Mizutani-Koseki Y, Fujimura Y, Miyagishima H, Kaneko T, Takada Y,
Akasaka T, Tanzawa H, Takihara Y, Nakano M, Masumoto H, Vidal M, Isono K, Koseki 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The products of the Polycomb group of genes form complexes that maintain the
state of transcriptional repression of several genes with relevance to
development and in cell proliferation. We have identified Ring1B, the product of 
the Ring1B gene (Rnf2 - Mouse Genome Informatics), by means of its interaction
with the Polycomb group protein Mel18. We describe biochemical and genetic
studies directed to understand the biological role of Ring1B. Immunoprecipitation
studies indicate that Ring1B form part of protein complexes containing the
products of other Polycomb group genes, such as Rae28/Mph1 and M33, and that this
complexes associate to chromosomal DNA. We have generated a mouse line bearing a 
hypomorphic Ring1B allele, which shows posterior homeotic transformations of the 
axial skeleton and a mild derepression of some Hox genes (Hoxb4, Hoxb6 and Hoxb8)
in cells anterior to their normal boundaries of expression in the mesodermal
compartment. By contrast, the overexpression of Ring1B in chick embryos results
in the repression of Hoxb9 expression in the neural tube. These results, together
with the genetic interactions observed in compound Ring1B/Mel18 mutant mice, are 
consistent with a role for Ring1B in the regulation of Hox gene expression by
Polycomb group complexes.

PMID: 12183370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Neurol. 2002 Apr;249(4):499-501.

Disruption of Hoxb8 gene leads to obsessive grooming behavior.

Reilly CE.

PMID: 11967666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Neuron. 2002 Jan 3;33(1):23-34.

Hoxb8 is required for normal grooming behavior in mice.

Greer JM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2002 Jan 3;33(1):1-2.

Repertoires of grooming behaviors critical to survival are exhibited by most
animal species, including humans. Genes that influence this complex behavior are 
unknown. We report that mice with disruptions of Hoxb8 show, with 100%
penetrance, excessive grooming leading to hair removal and lesions. Additionally,
these mice excessively groom normal cagemates. We have been unable to detect any 
skin or PNS abnormalities in Hoxb8 mutants. These observations suggest that the
excessive, pathological grooming exhibited by these mice results from CNS
abnormalities. Consistent with this interpretation, we demonstrate Hoxb8
expression in regions of the adult mouse CNS previously implicated in the control
of grooming. The aberrant behavior observed in Hoxb8 mutants is not unlike that
of humans suffering from the OC-spectrum disorder, trichotillomania.
Interestingly, Hoxb8 is expressed in regions of the CNS known as the
"OCD-circuit."

PMID: 11779477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Neuron. 2002 Jan 3;33(1):1-2.

A genetic basis for obsessive grooming.

Graybiel AM(1), Saka E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and the McGovern Institute for
Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2002 Jan 3;33(1):23-34.

Excessive grooming behaviors, cleansing rituals, and self-mutilation are
important features of a range of neuropsychiatric diseases including obsessive
compulsive (OC)-spectrum disorders. In this issue of Neuron, Greer and Capecchi
(2002) report that Hoxb8 mutant mice exhibit this behavioral phenotype. These
Hoxb8 mutants will be valuable in exploring the genetics and pathophysiology of
OC-spectrum disorders as well as strategies for their treatment.

PMID: 11779470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2001 Sep 6;20(39):5440-8.

HoxB8 requires its Pbx-interaction motif to block differentiation of primary
myeloid progenitors and of most cell line models of myeloid differentiation.

Knoepfler PS(1), Sykes DB, Pasillas M, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Ave N., Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

HoxB8 was the first homeobox gene identified as a cause of leukemia. In murine
WEHI3B acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells, proviral integration leads to the
expression of both HoxB8 and Interleukin (IL-3). Enforced expression of HoxB8
blocks differentiation of factor-dependent myeloid progenitors, while IL-3
co-expression induces autocrine proliferation and overt leukemogenicity.
Previously, we demonstrated that HoxB8 binds DNA cooperatively with members of
the Pbx family of transcription factors, and that HoxB8 makes contact with the
Pbx homeodomain through a hexameric sequence designated the Pbx-interaction motif
(PIM). E2a-Pbx1, an oncogenic derivative of Pbx1, both retains its ability to
heterodimerize with Hox proteins and arrest myeloid differentiation. This
observation prompts the question of whether E2a-Pbx1 and Hox oncoproteins use
endogenous Hox and Pbx proteins, respectively, to target a common set of cellular
genes. Here, we use four different models of neutrophil and macrophage
differentiation to determine whether HoxB8 needs to bind DNA or Pbx cofactors in 
order to arrest myeloid differentiation. The ability of HoxB8 to bind DNA or to
bind Pbx was essential (1) to block differentiation of factor-dependent myeloid
progenitors from primary marrow; (2) to block IL-6-induced monocytic
differentiation of M1-AML cells; and (3) to block granulocytic differentiation of
GM-CSF-dependent ECoM-G cells. However, while DNA-binding was required, the HoxB8
Pbx-interaction motif was unnecessary for preventing macrophage differentiation
of ECoM-M cells. We conclude that HoxB8 prevents differentiation by directly
influencing cellular gene expression, and that the genetic context within a cell 
dictates whether the effect of HoxB8 is dependent on a physical interaction with 
Pbx proteins.

PMID: 11571641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Exp Hematol. 2001 Jul;29(7):856-63.

Inhibition of myeloid differentiation by Hoxa9, Hoxb8, and Meis homeobox genes.

Fujino T(1), Yamazaki Y, Largaespada DA, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Hirokawa K,
Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The homeobox gene Hoxb8 is activated in the murine myelomonocytic cell
line WEHI-3B as a result of intracisternal A particle integration. Cooperative
activation between Hoxa9 and Meis1 is induced by retroviral integration in BXH2
murine myeloid leukemias and the myeloid leukemia cell line M1. The present study
was conducted to examine possible Meis gene activation and cooperative DNA
binding of homeobox proteins in WEHI-3B and to reveal the specific role of Hox
and Meis genes in myeloid differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Northern blot analysis and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction were performed to examine homeobox genes expression.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay was performed to evaluate DNA binding of
homeobox proteins. Myeloid differentiation of 32Dcl3 was induced by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor.
RESULTS: Meis2 was coactivated with Hoxb8 in WEHI-3B cells. DNA-protein complexes
including Hox, Meis, and Pbx were observed in WEHI-3B and 32Dcl3. Expression and 
the DNA-binding complex of Hoxa9, Hoxb8, Meis1, and Meis2 were down-regulated
during myeloid differentiation of 32Dcl3 cells. Enforced expression of Hox or
Meis genes inhibited myeloid differentiation of 32Dcl3.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that Meis2 is an important Meis gene for myeloid
leukemogenesis and that Hox and Meis are important genes for myeloid
leukemogenesis through differentiation block.

PMID: 11438208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 2001 May;128(10):1911-21.

Axial skeletal patterning in mice lacking all paralogous group 8 Hox genes.

van den Akker E(1), Fromental-Ramain C, de Graaff W, Le Mouellic H, Brûlet P,
Chambon P, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, The Netherlands. jacqueli@niob.knaw.nl

We present a detailed study of the genetic basis of mesodermal axial patterning
by paralogous group 8 Hox genes in the mouse. The phenotype of Hoxd8
loss-of-function mutants is presented, and compared with that of Hoxb8- and
Hoxc8-null mice. Our analysis of single mutants reveals common features for the
Hoxc8 and Hoxd8 genes in patterning lower thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. In the
Hoxb8 mutant, more anterior axial regions are affected. The three paralogous Hox 
genes are expressed up to similar rostral boundaries in the mesoderm, but at
levels that strongly vary with the axial position. We find that the axial region 
affected in each of the single mutants mostly corresponds to the area with the
highest level of gene expression. However, analysis of double and triple mutants 
reveals that lower expression of the other two paralogous genes also plays a
patterning role when the mainly expressed gene is defective. We therefore
conclude that paralogous group 8 Hox genes are involved in patterning quite an
extensive anteroposterior (AP) axial region. Phenotypes of double and triple
mutants reveal that Hoxb8, Hoxc8 and Hoxd8 have redundant functions at upper
thoracic and sacral levels, including positioning of the hindlimbs.
Interestingly, loss of functional Hoxb8 alleles partially rescues the phenotype
of Hoxc8- and Hoxc8/Hoxd8-null mutants at lower thoracic and lumbar levels. This 
suggests that Hoxb8 affects patterning at these axial positions differently from 
the other paralogous gene products. We conclude that paralogous Hox genes can
have a unique role in patterning specific axial regions in addition to their
redundant function at other AP levels.

PMID: 11311170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):233-6.

HoxA and HoxB cluster genes subdivide the digestive tract into morphological
domains during chick development.

Sakiyama J(1), Yokouchi Y, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602, Nagoya, Japan.

The digestive tract exhibits region-specific morphology and cytodifferentiation
along the anteroposterior axis. We analyzed the spatial expression patterns of
Hox genes belonging to the HoxA and HoxB cluster (Hoxa-4 approximately a-9,
Hoxb-5 approximately b-9) in the developing chick digestive tract. The expression
domains of these Hox genes correlated with morphological subdivision of the
digestive tract along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 11231082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2000 Dec;127(23):5093-100.

Loss- and gain-of-function mutations show a polycomb group function for Ring1A in
mice.

del Mar Lorente M(1), Marcos-Gutiérrez C, Pérez C, Schoorlemmer J, Ramírez A,
Magin T, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Cell Biology, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas,
Velázquez 144, Spain.

The products of the Polycomb group (PcG) of genes act as transcriptional
repressors involved in the maintenance of homeotic gene expression patterns
throughout development, from flies to mice. Biochemical and molecular evidence
suggests that the mouse Ring1A gene is a member of the PcG of genes. However,
genetic evidence is needed to establish PcG function for Ring1A, since contrary
to all other murine PcG genes, there is no known Drosophila PcG gene encoding a
homolog of the Ring1A protein. To study Ring1A function we have generated a mouse
line lacking Ring1A and mouse lines overexpressing Ring1A. Both Ring1A(-/-)and
Ring1A(+/-) mice show anterior transformations and other abnormalities of the
axial skeleton, which indicates an unusual sensitivity of axial skeleton
patterning to Ring1A gene dosage. Ectopic expression of Ring1A also results in
dose-dependent anterior transformations of vertebral identity, many of which,
interestingly, are shared by Ring1A(-/-) mice. In contrast, the alterations of
Hox gene expression observed in both type of mutant mice are subtle and involve a
reduced number of Hox genes. Taken together, these results provide genetic
evidence for a PcG function of the mouse Ring1A gene.

PMID: 11060235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):103-14.

Targeted inactivation of Hoxb8 affects survival of a spinal ganglion and causes
aberrant limb reflexes.

van den Akker E(1), Reijnen M, Korving J, Brouwer A, Meijlink F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Hoxb8 mutant mice were generated by inserting the lacZ coding sequence in frame
with the first exon of Hoxb8. These mice express a fusion protein with a
functional beta-galactosidase activity instead of Hoxb8. Mutant embryos were
analyzed for anatomical changes. The results indicate that Hoxb8 is not an
indispensable regulator of A-P patterning in the forelimb, unlike suggested by
our Hoxb8 gain of function experiments (Charité J, DeGraaff W, Shen S, Deschamps 
J. Cell 1994;78:589-601). The null mutant phenotypic traits include degeneration 
of the second spinal ganglion (C2), an abnormality opposite to the alteration in 
the gain of function transgenic mice. Subtle changes in the thoracic part of the 
vertebral column were observed as well. Adult homozygous mutants exhibit an
abnormal clasping reflex of the limbs.

PMID: 10559485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):115-25.

Abnormal anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning of the limb bud in the
absence of retinoids.

Stratford T(1), Logan C, Zile M, Maden M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Biomedical Sciences Division, King's
College London, London, UK.

We describe here how the early limb bud of the quail embryo develops in the
absence of retinoids, including retinoic acid. Retinoid-deficient embryos develop
to about stage 20/21, thus allowing patterns of early gene activity in the limb
bud to be readily examined. Genes representing different aspects of limb polarity
were analysed. Concerning the anteroposterior axis, Hoxb-8 was up-regulated and
its border was shifted anteriorly whereas shh and the mesodermal expression of
bmp-2 were down-regulated in the absence of retinoids. Concerning the apical
ectodermal genes, fgf-4 was down-regulated whereas fgf-8 and the ectodermal
domain of bmp-2 were unaffected. Genes involved in dorsoventral polarity were all
disrupted. Wnt-7a, normally confined to the dorsal ectoderm, was ectopically
expressed in the ventral ectoderm and the corresponding dorsal mesodermal gene
Lmx-1 spread into the ventral mesoderm. En-1 was partially or completely absent
from the ventral ectoderm. These dorsoventral patterns of expression resemble
those seen in En-1 knockout mouse limb buds. Overall, the patterns of gene
expression are also similar to the Japanese limbless mutant. These experiments
demonstrate that the retinoid-deficient embryo is a valuable tool for dissecting 
pathways of gene activity in the limb bud and reveal for the first time a role
for retinoic acid in the organisation of the dorsoventral axis.

PMID: 10330489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4349-58.

Transducing positional information to the Hox genes: critical interaction of cdx 
gene products with position-sensitive regulatory elements.

Charité J(1), de Graaff W, Consten D, Reijnen MJ, Korving J, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, The Netherlands.

Studies of pattern formation in the vertebrate central nervous system indicate
that anteroposterior positional information is generated in the embryo by
signalling gradients of an as yet unknown nature. We searched for transcription
factors that transduce this information to the Hox genes. Based on the assumption
that the activity levels of such factors might vary with position along the
anteroposterior axis, we devised an in vivo assay to detect responsiveness of
cis-acting sequences to such differentially active factors. We used this assay to
analyze a Hoxb8 regulatory element, and detected the most pronounced response in 
a short stretch of DNA containing a cluster of potential CDX binding sites. We
show that differentially expressed DNA binding proteins are present in
gastrulating embryos that bind to these sites in vitro, that cdx gene products
are among these, and that binding site mutations that abolish binding of these
proteins completely destroy the ability of the regulatory element to drive
regionally restricted expression in the embryo. Finally, we show that ectopic
expression of cdx gene products anteriorizes expression of reporter transgenes
driven by this regulatory element, as well as that of the endogenous Hoxb8 gene, 
in a manner that is consistent with them being essential transducers of
positional information. These data suggest that, in contrast to Drosophila
Caudal, vertebrate cdx gene products transduce positional information directly to
the Hox genes, acting through CDX binding sites in their enhancers. This may
represent the ancestral mode of action of caudal homologues, which are involved
in anteroposterior patterning in organisms with widely divergent body plans and
modes of development.

PMID: 9778495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Oct;41(5):705-14.

A 3' remote control region is a candidate to modulate Hoxb-8 expression
boundaries.

Valarché I(1), de Graaff W, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Utrecht.

Hox genes have been shown to play a key role in the acquisition of positional
identity by precursors of embryonic axial, paraxial and limb structures. This
function is thought to depend on the sequential, concerted expression of these
genes in time and space. However the underlying molecular mechanisms of this
collinear expression are still largely unknown. So far we had identified proximal
regulatory elements driving expression of Hoxb-8/LacZ transgenes in Hox-like
expression patterns with rostral boundaries more posterior than those of the
endogenous gene. In this work we have analyzed 30 kb of 3' genomic sequences for 
Hoxb-8 regulatory activity in transgenic mice. We have identified a control
region in the Hoxb-5/b-4 intergenic region that rostrally extends the Hoxb-8/LacZ
expression domain into the posterior hindbrain. In combination with the Hoxb-8
minimal promoter, the 3' control region drives transgene expression with
boundaries more anterior than those of Hoxb-8 in the neural tube. When combined
with a 4.5 kb Hoxb-8 upstream sequence, where essential proximal regulatory
sequences are located, the 3' control region drives transgene expression in a
domain which seems to correspond to that of the endogenous Hoxb-8. By deletion
analysis we have narrowed down to 550bp the regulatory activity interacting with 
the Hoxb-8 minimal promoter. We discuss the possibility that this remote 3'
enhancer, which is the closest regulatory region found in the cluster to
rostrally extend Hoxb-8/LacZ expression, could be involved in the regulation of
Hoxb-8 and interact with the proximal control elements.

PMID: 9415490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):3999-4008.

Polydactyly and ectopic ZPA formation in Alx-4 mutant mice.

Qu S(1), Niswender KD, Ji Q, van der Meer R, Keeney D, Magnuson MA, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Correct development of the limb is dependent on coordination between three
distinct signaling centers. Recently, fibroblast growth factor-4 has been
identified as a crucial determinant of AER function, which directs limb bud
outgrowth, and Sonic hedgehog has been identified as a signaling molecule that
mediates ZPA function, which specifies anterior-posterior patterning in the
developing limb bud. In addition, Shh and FGF-4 reciprocally reinforce each
other's expression via a positive feedback loop, providing a molecular basis for 
the coordination of limb bud outgrowth and anterior-posterior patterning. The
mechanisms by which these signaling centers come to occupy their normal positions
in the posterior limb bud during development are not understood. Here we identify
and characterize Alx-4, a gene that encodes a paired-type homeodomain protein.
Alx-4 is expressed in several populations of mesenchymal cells, including
mesenchymal cells in the anterior limb bud, and mice homozygous for targeted
disruption of the Alx-4 gene have multiple abnormalities, including preaxial
polydactyly. The polydactyly is associated with the formation of an ectopic
anterior ZPA, as indicated by anterior expression of Sonic hedgehog, HoxD13 and
fibroblast growth factor-4. The expression of other candidate regulators of
anterior-posterior positional information in the limb bud, including HoxB8 and
Gli3, is not altered in Alx-4 mutant embryos. By chromosomal mapping experiments,
Alx-4 is tightly linked to Strong's luxoid, a polydactylous mouse mutant. The
results identify Alx-4 as a determinant of anterior-posterior positional identity
in the limb and a component of a regulatory program that restricts ZPA formation 
to the posterior limb bud mesenchyme.

PMID: 9374397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Blood. 1997 Sep 1;90(5):1840-9.

Lineage-specific regulation of hematopoiesis by HOX-B8 (HOX-2.4): inhibition of
granulocytic differentiation and potentiation of monocytic differentiation.

Krishnaraju K(1), Hoffman B, Liebermann DA.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, and Department of
Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Homeobox proteins comprise a major class of transcription factors, which have
been implicated in normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. Notable in this
context is the homeobox gene HOX-B8 (formerly known as HOX-2.4), which was shown 
to cooperate with hematokines to induce leukemia, and to enhance self-renewal of 
immature myeloid progenitors when expressed alone. How HOX-B8 may affect lineage 
specific development of hematopoietic progenitor cells is unknown. Here it is
shown that ectopic expression of HOX-B8 specifically inhibited dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO)-induced granulocytic differentiation of autonomously proliferating HL-60
myeloid progenitor cells. HOX-B8 also inhibited the granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)-induced granulocytic developmental program of
factor dependent 32Dcl3 hematopoietic progenitors, including survival,
proliferation, and differentiation, as evident by rapid apoptosis of the cells
following removal of interleukin-3 (IL-3) and addition of G-CSF. In sharp
contrast, HOX-B8 had no effect on macrophage differentiation of M1 and HL-60
cells induced by IL-6 and phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate, respectively.
Moreover, HOX-B8 expression endowed the 32Dcl3 cells with the ability to be
induced by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) for terminal
differentiation exclusively along the macrophage lineage; this effect was at
least partially mediated via expression of the zinc finger transcription factor
Egr-1. Thus, ectopic expression of HOX-B8 in hematopoietic progenitor cells
appears to differentially affect lineage specific development, negatively
regulating granulocyte development and positively regulating macrophage
development.

PMID: 9292516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5369-76.

Conformational changes induced in Hoxb-8/Pbx-1 heterodimers in solution and upon 
interaction with specific DNA.

Sánchez M(1), Jennings PA, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA.

Two classes of homeodomain proteins, Hox and Pbx gene products, have the ability 
to bind cooperatively to DNA. In Hox proteins, the homeodomain and a highly
conserved hexapeptide are required for cooperative DNA binding. In Pbx, the
homeodomain and a region immediately C terminal of the homeodomain are essential 
for cooperativity. Using fluorescence and circular dichroism spectroscopy, we
demonstrated that Hox and Pbx proteins interact in the absence of DNA. The
interaction in solution is accompanied by conformational changes. Furthermore,
upon interaction with specific DNA, additional conformational changes are induced
in the Pbx-1/Hoxb-8 heterodimer. These data indicate that prior to DNA binding,
Hox-Pbx interaction in solution is accompanied by structural alterations. We
propose that these conformational changes modulate the DNA binding properties of 
these proteins, ultimately resulting in cooperative DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC232387
PMID: 9271414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Med Genet. 1997 Aug;34(8):701-2.

Mirror hands and feet.

van Steensel MA.

Comment on
    J Med Genet. 1996 May;33(5):426-8.

PMCID: PMC1051043
PMID: 9279770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Development. 1997 May;124(9):1643-51.

Retinoid signaling is required for the establishment of a ZPA and for the
expression of Hoxb-8, a mediator of ZPA formation.

Lu HC(1), Revelli JP, Goering L, Thaller C, Eichele G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, and V. and M. McLean Department of
Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We show that retinoid receptor antagonists applied to the presumptive wing region
block the formation of a zone of polarizing activity (ZPA). This suggests a
direct relationship between retinoid signaling and the establishment of the ZPA. 
We provide evidence that the Hox gene, Hoxb-8, is a direct target of retinoid
signaling since exogenously applied RA rapidly induces this gene in the absence
of protein synthesis and, moreover, retinoid receptor antagonists down-regulate
Hoxb-8 expression. In addition, we find that, in the lateral plate mesoderm, the 
domains of Hoxb-8 expression and of polarizing activity are coextensive. Taken
together, these findings support the hypothesis that retinoids are required for
the establishment of a ZPA, and that retinoids act, at least in part, through
Hoxb-8, a gene associated with ZPA formation (Charité et al., 1994).

PMID: 9165113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Blood. 1997 Apr 15;89(8):2723-35.

Mammalian homeobox B6 expression can be correlated with erythropoietin production
sites and erythropoiesis during development, but not with hematopoietic or
nonhematopoietic stem cell populations.

Zimmermann F(1), Rich IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.

There has been increasing interest in the involvement of mammalian homeobox (HOX)
genes in hematopoietic regulation. The HOX genes are clustered in 4 chromosomes
in mice and humans. In general, 5' end HOX gene expression is predominant in
hematopoietic stem cell populations, whereas 3' end HOX gene expression are
primarily found in committed progenitor cells. Furthermore, HOX genes of the A
cluster are generally found in myelomonocytic cells, B cluster genes in
erythropoietic cells, and C cluster genes in lymphoid cells. The results
presented here concentrate on a single gene, namely HOX B6. Preliminary
observations using whole mount in situ hybridization showed that both HOX B6 and 
erythropoietin (EPO) gene expression occurred in exactly the same areas of the
8.5-day mouse embryo. As a consequence, we studied the expression of HOX B6 and
EPO gene expression from 6.5 to 19.5 days of gestation, in the neonate, and in
the adult. It was found that the sequential transfer of erythropoiesis in
different organs during development was followed by a similar transfer of HOX B6 
and EPO gene expression. Between days 16.5 and 17.5, both HOX B6 and EPO gene
expression decrease in the fetal liver, even though hepatic erythropoiesis
continues to decline and is transferred to the fetal spleen. Precisely at this
time point, HOX B6 and EPO gene expression are transferred to both the fetal
spleen and fetal kidney. However, surprisingly, expression of both genes
increases again in the fetal liver just before birth. HOX B6 is expressed in
cells from in vitro erythropoietic colonies (colony-forming unit-erythroid and
burst-forming unit-erythroid) and TER-119+ erythroid cells but not in
hematopoietic or nonhematopoietic stem cell populations. When the latter two
populations are allowed to differentiate into erythropoietic cells, HOX B6 and
erythroid-relevant markers are expressed. The results indicate that HOX B6 is
intimately involved in the regulation of the erythropoietic system and could be a
marker for this lineage.

PMID: 9108390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 27;232(3):742-8.

Human colorectal carcinogenesis is associated with deregulation of homeobox gene 
expression.

Vider BZ(1), Zimber A, Hirsch D, Estlein D, Chastre E, Prevot S, Gespach C, Yaniv
A, Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.

In the present study, the possible involvement of homeobox-containing genes in
colorectal cancer (CRC) development was investigated. Using a stepwise screening 
approach and RT-PCR, we have demonstrated that the human HOXB6, B8, C8 and C9 are
overexpressed at various stages of CRC. In contrast, all CRC cases exhibited a
marked decrease in the homeodomain-containing Cdx1 gene expression. Recent data
which suggest a regulatory link between HOXB8 and several tumor suppressor genes,
such as DCC, APC, and TGF beta, sustain a possible implication of homeobox genes 
in colon carcinogenesis. Moreover, our data showing a decrease in Cdx1 expression
are consistent with the notion that genes functioning in the establishment and
maintenance of the intestinal epithelium might, upon deregulation, disturb the
normal control of cellular proliferation, differentiation, and death, thus
leading to cancer development.

PMID: 9126347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 9;14(1):75-83.

Heterodimerization of Hox proteins with Pbx1 and oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1 generates
unique DNA-binding specifities at nucleotides predicted to contact the N-terminal
arm of the Hox homeodomain--demonstration of Hox-dependent targeting of E2a-Pbx1 
in vivo.

Lu Q(1), Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Hox proteins control genetic programs that orchestrate development, and a large
subset of Hox proteins can bind DNA elements as heterodimers with the Pbx family 
of homeodomain proteins. A transcriptionally activated version of Pbx1, E2a-Pbx1,
is an oncoprotein in human pre-B cell leukemia that strongly suppresses
differentiation and retains its ability to heterodimerize with Hox proteins.
Because monomeric Hox proteins bind very similar DNA motifs, it is unclear how
they activate diverse developmental programs. Here we demonstrate that
heterodimers containing different Hox proteins and a common Pbx1 or E2a-Pbx1
partner bind different DNA motifs. Structural models suggest that the specificity
of the Hox protein is altered by a conformation change involving residues in the 
N-terminal arm of the Hox homeodomain. Mutational analysis also supported the
hypothesis that unique sequences in the N-terminal arm of the Hox homeodomain are
at least partially responsible for mediating this specificity. In vivo, Hox
proteins directed E2a-Pbx1-mediated transactivation with moderate specificity to 
cognate Hox-Pbx motifs. Thus, the development specificity of individual Hox
proteins may be mediated, in part, by differential targeting of cellular genes by
Pbx1-Hox complexes. Likewise, through its function as a common heterodimer
partner, oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1 may be able to interfere with multiple programs of 
development that are induced by the sequential or simultaneous expression of Hox 
proteins during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9010234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Neurosci Methods. 1997 Jan;71(1):11-8.

Hoxb-8 gain-of-function transgenic mice exhibit alterations in the peripheral
nervous system.

Fanarraga ML(1), Charité J, Hage WJ, De Graaff W, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, Utrecht.

To understand the developmental role of Hoxb-8, this relatively 5' Hoxb gene was 
ectopically expressed in embryonic regions where only more 3' Hox genes are
normally expressed. Hoxb-8 coding sequences driven by a retinoic acid receptor
beta2 promoter fragment were introduced in the mouse germ line by pronuclear
injection. The promoter was chosen with the aim to extend rostrally the
expression domain of the gene in neurectoderm and mesoderm at the time of
development when Hox gene expression domains are being established. Embryos
developing from DNA-injected zygotes, and from transgenic mouse lines were
analyzed. Pattern alterations were observed in transgenic embryos, some of which 
involved the peripheral nervous system. Spinal ganglia in the mouse are first
detectable around embryonic day 9.5. By day 11.5, the first of these ganglia (C1,
Froriep's ganglion) has degenerated in the mouse and other amniotes. In contrast,
this first ganglion did persist in the Hoxb-8 gain-of-function transgenic mice.
We have started to take advantage of the phenotype of transgenic versus wild-type
embryos to understand the mechanisms underlying the ontogeny and degeneration of 
Froriep's ganglion in wild-type mice, and the role of Hoxb-8 in C1 maintenance in
transgenic embryos. The present work describes a morphological, histological and 
immunocytological analysis of both the degenerating and the permanent C1, and a
preliminary characterization of the axonal extensions from the transgenic C1. We 
discuss the methodology of generating gain-of-function transgenic mice to study
the genetics of pattern formation along the antero-posterior axis, and the
usefulness of analyzing these particular Hoxb-8 transgenic embryos to understand 
some aspects of the ontogenesis and development of the upper cervical dorsal root
ganglia.

PMID: 9125371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Dev Biol. 1995 Oct;171(2):294-305.

Regulation of the Hoxb-8 gene: synergism between multimerized cis-acting elements
increases responsiveness to positional information.

Charité J(1), de Graaff W, Vogels R, Meijlink F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Utrecht.

Hox genes play a key role in the specification of regional development in the
vertebrate embryo. They are expressed in regionally restricted domains along the 
anterior-posterior axis, generally extending from a sharp rostral boundary toward
the posterior end. We have studied the regulation of the murine Hoxb-8 gene in
vivo using reporter constructs and found that 11 kb of genomic sequences upstream
of Hoxb-8 confer a Hox-like pattern of expression on a lacZ reporter gene fused
in-frame to the first exon of Hoxb-8. Reporter gene expression was detectable
from early stages onwards, but reached rostral expression boundaries in mesoderm 
and neurectoderm that were more posterior than those of the endogenous gene.
Within the upstream region, we have identified several cis-acting elements which 
are individually capable of driving regionally restricted expression in
combination with the Hoxb-8 promoter, and we have investigated their relative
contributions to the expression pattern. The results suggest that, in this
experimental context, these upstream elements, as well as previously identified
elements located within the Hoxb-8 gene, cooperate in setting the rostral
expression boundaries. Furthermore, we show that multiple identical copies of
cis-acting elements can cooperate, causing a pronounced anterior shift in the
expression boundaries. This indicates that the rostral extent of expression is
limited by the activity of a transcription factor binding to these elements and
that this activity was, at some point in development, higher in precursors of
more posterior structures than in precursors of anterior structures. This factor 
is thus very likely to be involved in the transduction of positional signals.

PMID: 7556914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 26;92(20):9166-70.

The hexapeptide LFPWMR in Hoxb-8 is required for cooperative DNA binding with
Pbx1 and Pbx2 proteins.

Neuteboom ST(1), Peltenburg LT, van Dijk MA, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla 92093, 
USA.

The Hox gene products are DNA-binding proteins, containing a homeodomain, which
function as a class of master control proteins establishing the body plan in
organisms as diverse as Drosophila and vertebrates. Hox proteins have recently
been shown to bind cooperatively to DNA with another class of homeodomain
proteins that include extradenticle, Pbx1, and Pbx2. Hox gene products contain a 
highly conserved hexapeptide connected by a linker of variable length to the
homeodomain. We show that the hexapeptide and the linker region are required for 
cooperativity with Pbx1 and Pbx2 proteins. Many of the conserved residues present
in the Hoxb-8 hexapeptide are required to modulate the DNA binding of the Pbx
proteins. Position of the hexapeptide relative to the homeodomain is important.
Although deletions of two and four residues of the linker peptide still show
cooperative DNA binding, removal of all six linker residues strongly reduces
cooperativity. In addition, an insertion of 10 residues within the linker peptide
significantly lowers cooperative DNA binding. These results show that the
hexapeptide and the position of the hexapeptide relative to the homeodomain are
important determinants to allow cooperative DNA binding involving Hox and Pbx
gene products.

PMCID: PMC40945
PMID: 7568094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Growth Factors. 1995;12(3):173-7.

The Hox-2.4 gene is not involved in the generation of IL-3 dependent multipotent 
FDCP-mix cell lines.

Just U(1), Kan O, Fennelly J, Dexter TM, Spooncer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Haematology, Paterson Institute for Cancer
Research, Manchester, UK.

The establishment of IL-3-dependent multipotent progenitor cell lines from
Hox-2.4-expressing bone marrow cells suggests that homeobox genes may contribute 
to immortalization of early myeloid cells. A survey of 20 independently derived
multipotent IL-3-dependent cell lines established from either src-virus-infected 
long-term bone marrow cultures (FDCP-mix) or Multi-CSF-virus (M3MuV)-infected
bone marrow revealed that Hox-2.4 was not expressed in any of these cell lines.
In addition DNA rearrangements were not observed. We conclude that activation of 
Hox-2.4 is not an obligatory event in the immortalization of early myeloid cells.

PMID: 8619923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. EMBO J. 1993 Oct;12(10):3835-46.

Conditional immortalization of mouse myelomonocytic, megakaryocytic and mast cell
progenitors by the Hox-2.4 homeobox gene.

Perkins AC(1), Cory S.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Australia.

The murine myelomonocytic cell line WEHI-3B exhibits ectopic expression of the
genes encoding the homeobox protein, Hox-2.4, and the myeloid growth factor,
interleukin-3 (IL-3). We showed previously that concomitant expression of IL-3
and Hox-2.4 in bone marrow cells induced the development of transplantable growth
factor-independent tumours resembling the WEHI-3B tumour. We have now
investigated the effect of enforced expression of Hox-2.4 alone. Bone marrow
cells were infected with Hox-2.4 retrovirus and then either cultured in agar or
transplanted into irradiated mice. In vitro, colonies derived from virus-infected
cells readily yielded IL-3-dependent, non-tumorigenic cell lines of the
myelomonocytic, megakaryocytic and mast cell lineages. Surprisingly, both the
establishment and maintenance of these lines required very high concentrations of
IL-3 and reduced levels promoted differentiation. Transplanted mice analysed
after 3 months appeared normal but their spleen and bone marrow contained
abundant provirus-bearing progenitor cells, from which IL-3-dependent long-term
cell lines could readily be established in vitro. Four of 18 animals monitored
for up to 12 months eventually developed clonal leukaemia, associated in three
cases with IL-3 production. Thus ectopic expression of Hox-2.4 enhances
self-renewal of immature myeloid progenitors and progression to a fully malignant
state is favoured by somatic mutations conferring autocrine production of IL-3.

PMCID: PMC413667
PMID: 8104786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell Growth Differ. 1992 Oct;3(10):671-6.

Inhibition of specific pathways of myeloid cell differentiation by an activated
Hox-2.4 homeobox gene.

Blatt C(1), Lotem J, Sachs L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

Abnormal expression of homeobox genes is one of the abnormalities associated with
the development of murine and human leukemia. Myeloid leukemic cells that can be 
induced to differentiate to mature cells by interleukin 6 were stably transfected
with an activated Hox-2.4 homeobox gene. Expression of the Hox-2.4 gene in the
transfected clones inhibited specific pathways of the myeloid differentiation
program induced by interleukin 6. The expression of some genes associated with
differentiation was almost completely blocked, and the expression of other genes 
was either partially inhibited or not affected. The results support the
hypothesis that abnormal expression of Hox-2.4 may contribute to the development 
of leukemia by interfering with the differentiation program.

PMID: 1359901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


