
1. Cell Rep. 2016 Jan 5;14(1):103-14. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.007. Epub 2015
Dec 24.

HoxBlinc RNA Recruits Set1/MLL Complexes to Activate Hox Gene Expression Patterns
and Mesoderm Lineage Development.

Deng C(1), Li Y(1), Zhou L(2), Cho J(3), Patel B(1), Terada N(3), Li Y(4),
Bungert J(5), Qiu Y(6), Huang S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (2)Department of Molecular
Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; The Genetics Institute, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; University of Florida Health
Cancer Center, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610,
USA. (3)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (4)Institute of Hematology, Jinan University Medical 
College, ShiPai, Guangzhou 510632, China. (5)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32610, USA; The Genetics Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; University of Florida Health Cancer Center, College
of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. (6)Department of 
Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; The Genetics Institute, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; University of Florida Health
Cancer Center, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610,
USA. Electronic address: qiuy@ufl.edu. (7)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
32610, USA; The Genetics Institute, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA; University of Florida Health Cancer Center, College
of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. Electronic
address: sumingh@ufl.edu.

Trithorax proteins and long-intergenic noncoding RNAs are critical regulators of 
embryonic stem cell pluripotency; however, how they cooperatively regulate germ
layer mesoderm specification remains elusive. We report here that HoxBlinc RNA
first specifies Flk1(+) mesoderm and then promotes hematopoietic differentiation 
through regulation of hoxb pathways. HoxBlinc binds to the hoxb genes, recruits
Setd1a/MLL1 complexes, and mediates long-range chromatin interactions to activate
transcription of the hoxb genes. Depletion of HoxBlinc by shRNA-mediated
knockdown or CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genetic deletion inhibits expression of hoxb
genes and other factors regulating cardiac/hematopoietic differentiation. Reduced
hoxb expression is accompanied by decreased recruitment of Set1/MLL1 and H3K4me3 
modification, as well as by reduced chromatin loop formation. Re-expression of
hoxb2-b4 genes in HoxBlinc-depleted embryoid bodies rescues Flk1(+) precursors
that undergo hematopoietic differentiation. Thus, HoxBlinc plays an important
role in controlling hoxb transcription networks that mediate specification of
mesoderm-derived Flk1(+) precursors and differentiation of Flk1(+) cells into
hematopoietic lineages.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4706800
PMID: 26725110  [PubMed - in process]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):742-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.071. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

The role of HOXB2 and HOXB3 in acute myeloid leukemia.

Lindblad O(1), Chougule RA(2), Moharram SA(2), Kabir NN(3), Sun J(2), Kazi JU(4),
Rönnstrand L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Department of Hematology and Vascular
Disorders, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (2)Division of Translational 
Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden; Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (3)Laboratory of Computational Biochemistry, KN
Biomedical Research Institute, Barisal, Bangladesh. (4)Division of Translational 
Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden; Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden; Laboratory of Computational Biochemistry, KN Biomedical
Research Institute, Barisal, Bangladesh. (5)Division of Translational Cancer
Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Lund 
Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden. Electronic address: lars.ronnstrand@med.lu.se.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous aggressive disease and the most
common form of adult leukemia. Mutations in the type III receptor tyrosine kinase
FLT3 are found in more than 30% of AML patients. Drugs against FLT3 have been
developed for the treatment of AML, but they lack specificity, show poor response
and lead to the development of a resistant phenotype upon treatment. Therefore, a
deeper understanding of FLT3 signaling will facilitate identification of
additional pharmacological targets in FLT3-driven AML. In this report, we
identify HOXB2 and HOXB3 as novel regulators of oncogenic FLT3-ITD-driven AML. We
show that HOXB2 and HOXB3 expression is upregulated in a group of AML patients
carrying FLT3-ITD. Overexpression of HOXB2 or HOXB3 in mouse pro-B cells resulted
in decreased FLT3-ITD-dependent cell proliferation as well as colony formation
and increased apoptosis. Expression of HOXB2 or HOXB3 resulted in a significant
decrease in FLT3-ITD-induced AKT, ERK, p38 and STAT5 phosphorylation. Our data
suggest that HOXB2 and HOXB3 act as tumor suppressors in FLT3-ITD driven AML.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482852  [PubMed - in process]


3. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2015;53 Suppl 2:S188-93.

[The role of developmental HOX genes in cervical cancer].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

López-Romero R(1), Marrero-Rodríguez D, Romero-Morelos P, Villegas V, Valdivia A,
Arreola H, Huerta-Padilla V, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de
Oncología, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal, México. rlopez_99@yahoo.com.

Cervical cancer (CC) is a multifactorial disease associated to genetic,
environmental and epigenetic factors, being the infection by human papillomavirus
the main etiologic agent. Additionally, the alteration in the expression of
transcription factors has been considered of importance for the development of
this tumor. HOX genes encode a group of transcription factors involved in
cellular proliferation and differentiation processes during the development of
embryonic structures in vertebrates; their aberrant expression is associated with
tumorigenesis and metastasis. A range of evidence suggests a role for HOX genes
in the development of cervical neoplastic cell. Studies in CC cell lines, primary
tumors and premalignant lesions have suggested the involvement of HOXA1, HOXC5,
C6, C8 and C10, HOXD9 and HOXD13 in the process of cervical carcinogenesis. Also,
the de novo expression of genes HOXB2, B4, B13 and HOXC11-C13 appears to be
involved in the process of malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cell. 
These data would allow to open a field in search of new molecular markers in
cervical cancer and the development of new therapeutic strategies for this
malignancy.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26462515  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Oct;24(10):1574-84. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1270. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Network-Based Integration of GWAS and Gene Expression Identifies a HOX-Centric
Network Associated with Serous Ovarian Cancer Risk.

Kar SP, Tyrer JP, Li Q, Lawrenson K, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N,
Chenevix-Trench G; Australian Cancer Study; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study
Group, Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean YT, Beckmann MW, Berchuck A, Bisogna M, Bjørge
L, Bogdanova N, Brinton L, Brooks-Wilson A, Butzow R, Campbell I, Carty K,
Chang-Claude J, Chen YA, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer D, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C,
Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Dürst
M, Eccles D, Easton DF, Edwards RP, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT,
Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J,
Harrington P, Harter P, Hein A, Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E,
Hogdall CK, Hosono S, Iversen ES, Jakubowska A, Paul J, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan
BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley J, Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C,
Kupryjanczyk J, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Lele S, Leminen A,
Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall L, Massuger
L, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, McNeish IA, Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich
KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Nevanlinna H, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I,
Orsulic S, Weber RP, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM,
Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph
A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Shu XO,
Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston-Campbell LE,
Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tsai YY, Tworoger SS, van
Altena AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C,
Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu A, Yang H,
Zheng W, Ziogas A, Sellers TA, Monteiro AN, Freedman ML, Gayther SA, Pharoah PD.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have so far reported 12 loci
associated with serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. We hypothesized that
some of these loci function through nearby transcription factor (TF) genes and
that putative target genes of these TFs as identified by coexpression may also be
enriched for additional EOC risk associations.
METHODS: We selected TF genes within 1 Mb of the top signal at the 12 genome-wide
significant risk loci. Mutual information, a form of correlation, was used to
build networks of genes strongly coexpressed with each selected TF gene in the
unified microarray dataset of 489 serous EOC tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Genes represented in this dataset were subsequently ranked using a gene-level
test based on results for germline SNPs from a serous EOC GWAS meta-analysis
(2,196 cases/4,396 controls).
RESULTS: Gene set enrichment analysis identified six networks centered on TF
genes (HOXB2, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7 at 17q21.32 and HOXD1, HOXD3 at 2q31) that were
significantly enriched for genes from the risk-associated end of the ranked list 
(P < 0.05 and FDR < 0.05). These results were replicated (P < 0.05) using an
independent association study (7,035 cases/21,693 controls). Genes underlying
enrichment in the six networks were pooled into a combined network.
CONCLUSION: We identified a HOX-centric network associated with serous EOC risk
containing several genes with known or emerging roles in serous EOC development.
IMPACT: Network analysis integrating large, context-specific datasets has the
potential to offer mechanistic insights into cancer susceptibility and prioritize
genes for experimental characterization.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592449
PMID: 26209509  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10840-52.

The long non-coding RNA HOTTIP enhances pancreatic cancer cell proliferation,
survival and migration.

Cheng Y(1), Jutooru I(1,)(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Corton JC(3), Safe S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Covance, Inc., Madison, WI 53704, USA.
(3)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
(4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

HOTTIP is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcribed from the 5' tip of the HOXA 
locus and is associated with the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) and WD
repeat containing protein 5 (WDR5)/mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) chromatin
modifying complexes. HOTTIP is expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and
knockdown of HOTTIP by RNA interference (siHOTTIP) in Panc1 pancreatic cancer
cells decreased proliferation, induced apoptosis and decreased migration. In
Panc1 cells transfected with siHOTTIP, there was a decrease in expression of 757 
genes and increased expression of 514 genes, and a limited gene analysis
indicated that HOTTIP regulation of genes is complex. For example, Aurora kinase 
A, an important regulator of cell growth, is coregulated by MLL and not WDR5 and,
in contrast to previous studies in liver cancer cells, HOTTIP does not regulate
HOXA13 but plays a role in regulation of several other HOX genes including
HOXA10, HOXB2, HOXA11, HOXA9 and HOXA1. Although HOTTIP and the HOX-associated
lncRNA HOTAIR have similar pro-oncogenic functions, they regulate strikingly
different sets of genes in Panc1 cells and in pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4484423
PMID: 25912306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(4):1349-53.

Increased expression of HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins is associated with HPV
infection and cervical cancer progression.

Gonzalez-Herrera A(1), Salgado-Bernabe M, Velazquez-Velazquez C, Salcedo-Vargas
M, Andrade-Manzano A, Avila-Moreno F, Pina-Sanchez P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Oncologia Molecular, Unidad de Investigacion Medica en
Enfermedades Oncologicas CMN S XXI IMSS, Mexico E-mail : 1307patricia@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer (CeCa) is the second most common cancer in women in
developing countries, and human papilloma virus (HPV) is the primary etiological 
factor. Aberrant expression of HOX transcription factors has been observed in
several types of cancer. To date, however, no reports exist on the expression of 
HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins during neoplastic progression in CeCa and its
correlation with HPV infection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins was assessed in
tissue microarrays from normal cervical epithelium, cervical intraepithelial
neoplasias grade 1-3, and CeCa. HPV was detected by PCR and sequencing.
Expression of HOX-positive cells was determined in each diagnostic group.
RESULTS: Percentage of HOXB2- and HOXB13-positive cells gradually increased from 
means of 10.9% and 16.7%, respectively, in samples from healthy women, to 75.2%
and 88.6% in those from CeCa patients. Frequency of HPV infection also increased 
from 13% in healthy tissue samples to 92.3% in CeCa. Both HOXB2 and HOXB13
proteins were preferentially expressed in HPV+ samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study represents the first report on the expression of
both HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins through cervix tumorigenesis, providing evidence
that increased expression of such proteins is a common event during progression
to CeCa.

PMID: 25743797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(1):135-45. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.972868.

Patterning in time and space: HoxB cluster gene expression in the developing
chick embryo.

Gouveia A(1), Marcelino HM, Gonçalves L, Palmeirim I, Andrade RP.

Author information: 
(1)a Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS); School of Health
Sciences , University of Minho ; Braga , Portugal.

The developing embryo is a paradigmatic model to study molecular mechanisms of
time control in Biology. Hox genes are key players in the specification of tissue
identity during embryo development and their expression is under strict temporal 
regulation. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying timely Hox activation in
the early embryo remain unknown. This is hindered by the lack of a rigorous
temporal framework of sequential Hox expression within a single cluster. Herein, 
a thorough characterization of HoxB cluster gene expression was performed over
time and space in the early chick embryo. Clear temporal collinearity of HoxB
cluster gene expression activation was observed. Spatial collinearity of HoxB
expression was evidenced in different stages of development and in multiple
tissues. Using embryo explant cultures we showed that HoxB2 is cyclically
expressed in the rostral presomitic mesoderm with the same periodicity as somite 
formation, suggesting a link between timely tissue specification and somite
formation. We foresee that the molecular framework herein provided will
facilitate experimental approaches aimed at identifying the regulatory mechanisms
underlying Hox expression in Time and Space.

PMCID: PMC4614886
PMID: 25602523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Transl Psychiatry. 2014 Oct 21;4:e471. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.111.

Identifying rare variants for genetic risk through a combined pedigree and
phenotype approach: application to suicide and asthma.

Darlington TM(1), Pimentel R(2), Smith K(3), Bakian AV(1), Jerominski L(1),
Cardon J(1), Camp NJ(4), Callor WB(5), Grey T(5), Singleton M(6), Yandell M(6),
Renshaw PF(7), Yurgelun-Todd DA(7), Gray D(1), Coon H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Pedigree and Population Resource, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (3)1] Pedigree and Population Resource, Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA [2] Department of
Family and Consumer Studies, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (5)Office of the Medical Examiner, Utah State
Department of Health, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (6)Department of Human Genetics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (7)1] Department of Psychiatry,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA [2] Brain Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Suicidal behavior is a complex disorder, with evidence for genetic risk
independent of other genetic risk factors including psychiatric disorders. Since 
1996, over 3000 DNA samples from Utah suicide decedents have been collected and
banked for research use through the Utah Medical Examiner. In addition, over
12,000 Utah suicides were identified through examination of death certificates
back to 1904. By linking this data with the Utah Population Database, we have
identified multiple extended pedigrees with increased risk for suicide
completion. A number of medical conditions co-occur with suicide, including
asthma, and this study was undertaken to identify genetic risk common to asthma
and suicide. This study tests the hypothesis that a particular comorbid condition
may identify a more homogeneous genetic subgroup, facilitating the identification
of specific genetic risk factors in that group. From pedigrees at increased risk 
for suicide, we identified three pedigrees also at significantly increased
familial risk for asthma. Five suicide decedents from each of these pedigrees,
plus an additional three decedents not from these pedigrees with diagnosed
asthma, and 10 decedents with close relatives with asthma were genotyped. Results
were compared with 183 publicly available unaffected control exomes from 1000
Genomes and CEPH (Centre d'etude du polymorphisme humain) samples genotyped on
the same platform. A further 432 suicide decedents were also genotyped as
non-asthma suicide controls. Genotyping was done using the Infinium HumanExome
BeadChip. For analysis, we used the pedigree extension of Variant Annotation,
Analysis and Search Tool (pVAAST) to calculate the disease burden of each gene.
The Phenotype Driven Variant Ontological Re-ranking tool (Phevor) then re-ranked 
our pVAAST results in context of the phenotype. Using asthma as a seed phenotype,
Phevor traversed biomedical ontologies and identified genes with similar
biological properties to those known to result in asthma. Our top associated
genes included those related to neurodevelopment or neural signaling
(brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neutral sphingomyelinase 2 (SMPD2),
homeobox b2 (HOXB2), neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM2), heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein A0 (HNRNPA0)), inflammation (free fatty acid receptor 2
(FFAR2)) and inflammation with additional evidence of neuronal involvement
(oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor 1 (OLR1), toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3)). Of particular interest, BDNF has been previously implicated in both
psychiatric disorders and asthma. Our results demonstrate the utility of
combining pedigree and co-occurring phenotypes to identify rare variants
associated with suicide risk in conjunction with specific co-occurring
conditions.

PMCID: PMC4350517
PMID: 25335167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e91010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091010. eCollection 
2014.

Gene expression profile of patients with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome:
new insights into the potential role of developmental pathways.

Nodale C(1), Ceccarelli S(1), Giuliano M(2), Cammarota M(2), D'Amici S(1),
Vescarelli E(1), Maffucci D(3), Bellati F(3), Panici PB(3), Romano F(4), Angeloni
A(5), Marchese C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Biotechnology and Molecular Biology
Section, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy. (3)Department of
Gynecologic-Obstetrical and Urologic Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome,
Italy. (4)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome (MRKHS) is a rare disease characterized
by congenital aplasia of uterus and vagina. Although many studies have
investigated several candidate genes, up to now none of them seem to be
responsible for the aetiology of the syndrome. In our study, we identified
differences in gene expression profile of in vitro cultured vaginal tissue of
MRHKS patients using whole-genome microarray analysis. A group of eight out of
sixteen MRKHS patients that underwent reconstruction of neovagina with an
autologous in vitro cultured vaginal tissue were subjected to microarray analysis
and compared with five healthy controls. Results obtained by array were confirmed
by qRT-PCR and further extended to other eight MRKHS patients. Gene profiling of 
MRKHS patients delineated 275 differentially expressed genes, of which 133
downregulated and 142 upregulated. We selected six deregulated genes (MUC1,
HOXC8, HOXB2, HOXB5, JAG1 and DLL1) on the basis of their fold change, their
differential expression in most patients and their relevant role in embryological
development. All patients showed upregulation of MUC1, while HOXB2 and HOXB5 were
downregulated, as well as Notch ligands JAG1 and DLL1 in the majority of them.
Interestingly, HOXC8 was significantly upregulated in 47% of patients, with a
differential expression only in MRKHS type I patients. Taken together, our
results highlighted the dysregulation of developmental genes, thus suggesting a
potential alteration of networks involved in the formation of the female
reproductive tract and providing a useful clue for understanding the
pathophysiology of MRKHS.

PMCID: PMC3946625
PMID: 24608967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Regen Med. 2014 Jan;9(1):53-66. doi: 10.2217/rme.13.86.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived neural crest cells capable of expressing
markers of osteochondral or meningeal-choroid plexus differentiation.

Sternberg H(1), Jiang J, Sim P, Kidd J, Janus J, Rinon A, Edgar R, Shitrit A,
Larocca D, Chapman KB, Binette F, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., 1301 Harbor Bay, Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIMS: The transcriptome and fate potential of three diverse human embryonic stem 
cell-derived clonal embryonic progenitor cell lines with markers of cephalic
neural crest are compared when differentiated in the presence of combinations of 
TGFß3, BMP4, SCF and HyStem-C matrices.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The cell lines E69 and T42 were compared with MEL2, using
gene expression microarrays, immunocytochemistry and ELISA.
RESULTS: In the undifferentiated progenitor state, each line displayed unique
markers of cranial neural crest including TFAP2A and CD24; however, none
expressed distal HOX genes including HOXA2 or HOXB2, or the mesenchymal stem cell
marker CD74. The lines also showed diverse responses when differentiated in the
presence of exogenous BMP4, BMP4 and TGFß3, SCF, and SCF and TGFß3. The clones
E69 and T42 showed a profound capacity for expression of endochondral
ossification markers when differentiated in the presence of BMP4 and TGFß3,
choroid plexus markers in the presence of BMP4 alone, and leptomeningeal markers 
when differentiated in SCF without TGFß3.
CONCLUSION: The clones E69 and T42 may represent a scalable source of primitive
cranial neural crest cells useful in the study of cranial embryology, and
potentially cell-based therapy.

PMID: 24351006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 25;8(6):e65944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065944. Print 2013.

Adaptive evolution of the Hox gene family for development in bats and dolphins.

Liang L(1), Shen YY, Pan XW, Zhou TC, Yang C, Irwin DM, Zhang YP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

Bats and cetaceans (i.e., whales, dolphins, porpoises) are two kinds of mammals
with unique locomotive styles and occupy novel niches. Bats are the only mammals 
capable of sustained flight in the sky, while cetaceans have returned to the
aquatic environment and are specialized for swimming. Associated with these novel
adaptations to their environment, various development changes have occurred to
their body plans and associated structures. Given the importance of Hox genes in 
many aspects of embryonic development, we conducted an analysis of the coding
regions of all Hox gene family members from bats (represented by Pteropus
vampyrus, Pteropus alecto, Myotis lucifugus and Myotis davidii) and cetaceans
(represented by Tursiops truncatus) for adaptive evolution using the available
draft genome sequences. Differences in the selective pressures acting on many Hox
genes in bats and cetaceans were found compared to other mammals. Positive
selection, however, was not found to act on any of the Hox genes in the common
ancestor of bats and only upon Hoxb9 in cetaceans. PCR amplification data from
additional bat and cetacean species, and application of the branch-site test 2,
showed that the Hoxb2 gene within bats had significant evidence of positive
selection. Thus, our study, with genomic and newly sequenced Hox genes,
identifies two candidate Hox genes that may be closely linked with developmental 
changes in bats and cetaceans, such as those associated with the pancreatic,
neuronal, thymus shape and forelimb. In addition, the difference in our results
from the genome-wide scan and newly sequenced data reveals that great care must
be taken in interpreting results from draft genome data from a limited number of 
species, and deep genetic sampling of a particular clade is a powerful tool for
generating complementary data to address this limitation.

PMCID: PMC3692524
PMID: 23825528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003249. Epub 2013 Feb 
7.

Assembly of the auditory circuitry by a Hox genetic network in the mouse
brainstem.

Di Bonito M(1), Narita Y, Avallone B, Sequino L, Mancuso M, Andolfi G, Franzè AM,
Puelles L, Rijli FM, Studer M.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy.

Rhombomeres (r) contribute to brainstem auditory nuclei during development. Hox
genes are determinants of rhombomere-derived fate and neuronal connectivity.
Little is known about the contribution of individual rhombomeres and their
associated Hox codes to auditory sensorimotor circuitry. Here, we show that r4
contributes to functionally linked sensory and motor components, including the
ventral nucleus of lateral lemniscus, posterior ventral cochlear nuclei (VCN),
and motor olivocochlear neurons. Assembly of the r4-derived auditory components
is involved in sound perception and depends on regulatory interactions between
Hoxb1 and Hoxb2. Indeed, in Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutant mice the transmission of
low-level auditory stimuli is lost, resulting in hearing impairments. On the
other hand, Hoxa2 regulates the Rig1 axon guidance receptor and controls
contralateral projections from the anterior VCN to the medial nucleus of the
trapezoid body, a circuit involved in sound localization. Thus, individual
rhombomeres and their associated Hox codes control the assembly of distinct
functionally segregated sub-circuits in the developing auditory brainstem.

PMCID: PMC3567144
PMID: 23408898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Regen Med. 2013 Mar;8(2):125-44. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.117. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Seven diverse human embryonic stem cell-derived chondrogenic clonal embryonic
progenitor cell lines display site-specific cell fates.

Sternberg H(1), Kidd J, Murai JT, Jiang J, Rinon A, Erickson IE, Funk WD, Wang Q,
Chapman KB, Vangsness CT Jr, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., 1301 Harbor Bay Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIM: The transcriptomes of seven diverse clonal human embryonic progenitor cell
lines with chondrogenic potential were compared with that of bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
MATERIALS & METHODS: The cell lines 4D20.8, 7PEND24, 7SMOO32, E15, MEL2, SK11 and
SM30 were compared with MSCs using immunohistochemical methods, gene expression
microarrays and quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In the undifferentiated progenitor state, each line displayed unique
combinations of site-specific markers, including AJAP1, ALDH1A2, BMP5, BARX1,
HAND2, HOXB2, LHX1, LHX8, PITX1, TBX15 and ZIC2, but none of the lines expressed 
the MSC marker CD74. The lines showed diverse responses when differentiated in
the presence of combinations of TGF-ß3, BMP2, 4, 6 and 7 and GDF5, with the lines
4D20.8, SK11, SM30 and MEL2 showing osteogenic markers in some differentiation
conditions. The line 7PEND24 showed evidence of regenerating articular cartilage 
and, in some conditions, markers of tendon differentiation.
CONCLUSION: The scalability of site-specific clonal human embryonic stem
cell-derived embryonic progenitor cell lines may provide novel models for the
study of differentiation and methods for preparing purified and identified cells 
types for use in therapy.

PMID: 23249126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Neurosci. 2012 Nov 28;32(48):17172-85. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0885-12.2012.

Opposing roles for Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 in hindbrain oligodendrocyte patterning.

Miguez A(1), Ducret S, Di Meglio T, Parras C, Hmidan H, Haton C, Sekizar S,
Mannioui A, Vidal M, Kerever A, Nyabi O, Haigh J, Zalc B, Rijli FM, Thomas JL.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre and Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut
du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, 75013 Paris, France.

Oligodendrocytes are the myelin-forming cells of the vertebrate CNS. Little is
known about the molecular control of region-specific oligodendrocyte development.
Here, we show that oligodendrogenesis in the mouse rostral hindbrain, which is
organized in a metameric series of rhombomere-derived (rd) territories, follows a
rhombomere-specific pattern, with extensive production of oligodendrocytes in the
pontine territory (r4d) and delayed and reduced oligodendrocyte production in the
prepontine region (r2d, r3d). We demonstrate that segmental organization of
oligodendrocytes is controlled by Hox genes, namely Hoxa2 and Hoxb2.
Specifically, Hoxa2 loss of function induced a dorsoventral enlargement of the
Olig2/Nkx2.2-expressing oligodendrocyte progenitor domain, whereas conditional
Hoxa2 overexpression in the Olig2(+) domain inhibited oligodendrogenesis
throughout the brain. In contrast, Hoxb2 deletion resulted in a reduction of the 
pontine oligodendrogenic domain. Compound Hoxa2(-/-)/Hoxb2(-/-) mutant mice
displayed the phenotype of Hoxb2(-/-) mutants in territories coexpressing Hoxa2
and Hoxb2 (rd3, rd4), indicating that Hoxb2 antagonizes Hoxa2 during rostral
hindbrain oligodendrogenesis. This study provides the first in vivo evidence that
Hox genes determine oligodendrocyte regional identity in the mammalian brain.

PMID: 23197710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Nov-Dec;4(6):1307-11. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.576. Epub 2011 Aug 
30.

Effect of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of Hoxb2 and Hoxb4
genes in the developmental process of cord blood erythroid progenitors.

Liu WJ(1), Huang MX, Guo QL, Chen JH, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Affiliated to Luzhou Medical College,
Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, PR China. wenjunliucn@126.com

The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 gene 
expression induced by human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and/or all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) on the proliferation and committed differentiation process of human cord
blood hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to colony-forming erythroid progenitor
cells (CFU-Es) in vitro. Cord blood was collected from the fetal placenta
umbilical vein in 12 cases and cultured using hematopoietic stem cell culture
technique in vitro. The proliferation and differentiation of cord blood HSCs to
CFU-Es were continuously disrupted with HCMV-AD169 and/or 6 x 10<U+207B>8 mol/l of ATRA.
Expression levels of the Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 genes in the blank, ATRA, HCMV-AD169 and
ATRA + HCMV treatment groups of CFU-Es were detected on day 3, 7 and 10 of
culture by fluorescent quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction method. Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 gene expression in each group began on day 3,
obviously increased on day 7 and reached a peak on day 10. The expression levels 
of the Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 genes in the HCMV group were obviously down-regulated
compared with the level in the blank group. However, expression levels of the
Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 genes were significantly up-regulated in the HCMV + ATRA group
compared with the HCMV group (P<0.05). Abnormal expression of the Hoxb2 and Hoxb4
genes induced by HCMV may play important roles in abnormal hematopoietic damage. 
They were also correlated with the process of erythroid hematopoiesis. ATRA (6 x 
10<U+207B>8 mol/l) significantly up-regulated expression of the Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 genes in
the normal erythroid progenitor cells and in those cells infected with HCMV as
well.

PMID: 21879259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21250. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021250. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

Transformation of human mesenchymal cells and skin fibroblasts into hematopoietic
cells.

Harris DM(1), Hazan-Haley I, Coombes K, Bueso-Ramos C, Liu J, Liu Z, Li P,
Ravoori M, Abruzzo L, Han L, Singh S, Sun M, Kundra V, Kurzrock R, Estrov Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Patients with prolonged myelosuppression require frequent platelet and occasional
granulocyte transfusions. Multi-donor transfusions induce alloimmunization,
thereby increasing morbidity and mortality. Therefore, an autologous or
HLA-matched allogeneic source of platelets and granulocytes is needed. To
determine whether nonhematopoietic cells can be reprogrammed into hematopoietic
cells, human mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) and skin fibroblasts were incubated
with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine (Aza) and the growth factors (GF)
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and stem cell factor. This
treatment transformed MSCs to round, non-adherent cells expressing T-, B-,
myeloid-, or stem/progenitor-cell markers. The transformed cells engrafted as
hematopoietic cells in bone marrow of immunodeficient mice. DNA methylation and
mRNA array analysis suggested that Aza and GF treatment demethylated and
activated HOXB genes. Indeed, transfection of MSCs or skin fibroblasts with
HOXB4, HOXB5, and HOXB2 genes transformed them into hematopoietic cells. Further 
studies are needed to determine whether transformed MSCs or skin fibroblasts are 
suitable for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3120836
PMID: 21731684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genomics. 2011 Sep;98(3):164-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2011.05.011. Epub 2011 Jun 
13.

A functional in vivo screen for regulators of tumor progression identifies HOXB2 
as a regulator of tumor growth in breast cancer.

Boimel PJ(1), Cruz C, Segall JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine of Yeshiva University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Microarray profiling in breast cancer patients has identified genes correlated
with prognosis whose functions are unknown. The purpose of this study was to
develop an in vivo assay for functionally screening regulators of tumor
progression using a mouse model. Transductant shRNA cell lines were made in the
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer line. A pooled population of 25 transductants was
injected into the mammary fat pads and tail veins of mice to evaluate tumor
growth, and experimental metastasis. The proportions of transductants were
evaluated in the tumor and metastases using barcodes specific to each shRNA
transductant. We characterized the homeobox 2 transcription factor as a negative 
regulator, decreasing tumor growth in MDA-MB-231, T47D, and MTLn3 mammary
adenocarcinoma cell lines. Homeobox genes have been correlated with cancer
patient prognosis and tumorigenesis. Here we use a novel in vivo shRNA screen to 
identify a new role for a homeobox gene in human mammary adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3165059
PMID: 21672623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Genet. 2011 May;204(5):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.02.003.

Expression of HOXB genes is significantly different in acute myeloid leukemia
with a partial tandem duplication of MLL vs. a MLL translocation: a
cross-laboratory study.

Liu HC(1), Shih LY, May Chen MJ, Wang CC, Yeh TC, Lin TH, Chen CY, Lin CJ, Liang 
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene may be
rearranged to generate a partial tandem duplication (PTD), or fused to partner
genes through a chromosomal translocation (tMLL). In this study, we first
explored the differentially expressed genes between MLL-PTD and tMLL using gene
expression profiling of our cohort (15 MLL-PTD and 10 tMLL) and one published
data set. The top 250 probes were chosen from each set, resulting in 29 common
probes (21 unique genes) to both sets. The selected genes include four HOXB
genes, HOXB2, B3, B5, and B6. The expression values of these HOXB genes
significantly differ between MLL-PTD and tMLL cases. Clustering and
classification analyses were thoroughly conducted to support our gene selection
results. Second, as MLL-PTD, FLT3-ITD, and NPM1 mutations are identified in AML
with normal karyotypes, we briefly studied their impact on the HOXB genes.
Another contribution of this study is to demonstrate that using public data from 
other studies enriches samples for analysis and yields more conclusive results.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21665178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 15;352(2):382-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.003. Epub 2011 
Feb 12.

Hoxb3 negatively regulates Hoxb1 expression in mouse hindbrain patterning.

Wong EY(1), Wang XA, Mak SS, Sae-Pang JJ, Ling KW, Fritzsch B, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The spatial regulation of combinatorial expression of Hox genes is critical for
determining hindbrain rhombomere (r) identities. To address the cross-regulatory 
relationship between Hox genes in hindbrain neuronal specification, we have
generated a gain-of-function transgenic mouse mutant Hoxb3(Tg) using the Hoxb2
r4-specific enhancer element. Interestingly, in r4 of the Hoxb3(Tg) mutant where 
Hoxb3 was ectopically expressed, the expression of Hoxb1 was specifically
abolished. The hindbrain neuronal defects of the Hoxb3(Tg) mutant mice were
similar to those of Hoxb1(-/-) mutants. Therefore, we hypothesized that Hoxb3
could directly suppress Hoxb1 expression. We first identified a novel Hoxb3
binding site S3 on the Hoxb1 locus and confirmed protein binding to this site by 
EMSA, and by in vivo ChIP analysis using P19 cells and hindbrain tissues from the
Hoxb3(Tg) mutant. We further showed that Hoxb3 could suppress Hoxb1
transcriptional activity by chick in ovo luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, in 
E10.5 wildtype caudal hindbrain, where Hoxb1 is not expressed, we showed by in
vivo ChIP that Hoxb3 was consistently bound to the S3 site on the Hoxb1 gene.
This study reveals a novel negative regulatory mechanism by which Hoxb3 as a
posterior gene serves to restrict Hoxb1 expression in r4 by direct
transcriptional repression to maintain the rhombomere identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21320481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Arch Dermatol Res. 2011 Mar;303(2):125-33. doi: 10.1007/s00403-011-1123-2. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

A preliminary study of differentially expressed genes in expanded skin and normal
skin: implications for adult skin regeneration.

Yang M(1), Liang Y, Sheng L, Shen G, Liu K, Gu B, Meng F, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, USA.

In adults, severely damaged skin heals by scar formation and cannot regenerate to
the original skin structure. However, tissue expansion is an exception, as normal
skin regenerates under the mechanical stretch resulting from tissue expansion.
This technique has been used clinically for defect repair and organ
reconstruction for decades. However, the phenomenon of adult skin regeneration
during tissue expansion has caused little attention, and the mechanism of skin
regeneration during tissue expansion has not been fully understood. In this
study, microarray analysis was performed on expanded human skin and normal human 
skin. Significant difference was observed in 77 genes, which suggest a network of
several integrated cascades, including cytokines, extracellular, cytoskeletal,
transmembrane molecular systems, ion or ion channels, protein kinases and
transcriptional systems, is involved in the skin regeneration during expansion.
Among these, the significant expression of some regeneration related genes, such 
as HOXA5, HOXB2 and AP1, was the first report in tissue expansion. Data in this
study suggest a list of candidate genes, which may help to elucidate the
fundamental mechanism of skin regeneration during tissue expansion and which may 
have implications for postnatal skin regeneration and therapeutic interventions
in wound healing.

PMID: 21286735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Apr;17(4):243-54. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gaq100. Epub 2010 Dec 
14.

Transcriptional expression of type-I interferon response genes and stability of
housekeeping genes in the human endometrium and endometriosis.

Vestergaard AL(1), Knudsen UB, Munk T, Rosbach H, Martensen PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

Endometriosis is a painful chronic female disease defined by the presence of
endometrial tissue implants in ectopic (Ec) locations. The pathogenesis is much
debated, and type-I interferons (IFNs) could be involved. The expression of genes
of the type-I IFN response were profiled by a specific PCR array of RNA obtained 
from Ec and eutopic (Eu) endometrium collected from nine endometriosis patients
and nine healthy control women. Transcriptional expression levels of selected
IFN-regulated and housekeeping genes (HKGs) were investigated by real-time
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR). Stably expressed HKGs for valid
normalization of transcriptional studies of endometrium and endometriosis have
not yet been published. Here, seven HKGs were evaluated for stability using the
GeNorm and NormFinder software. A normalization factor based on HMBS, TBP and
YWHAZ expression was suitable for normalization of qRT-PCR studies of Eu versus
Ec endometrium. In the endometrial cell lines HEC1A, HEC1B, Ishikawa and RL95-2, 
HMBS and HPRT1 were the most stably expressed. The IFN-specific PCR array
indicated significantly different expression of the genes BST2, COL16A1, HOXB2
and ISG20 between the endometrial tissue types. However, by correctly normalized 
qRT-PCR, levels of BST2, COL16A1 and the highly type-I IFN-stimulated genes
ISG12A and 6-16 displayed insignificant variations. Conversely, HOXB2 and ISG20
transcriptions were significantly reduced in endometriosis lesions compared with 
endometrium from endometriosis patients and healthy controls. In conclusion,
appropriate HKGs for normalization of qRT-PCR studies of endometrium and
endometriosis have been identified here. Abolished expression of ISG20 and HOX
genes could be important in endometriosis.

PMID: 21156832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 23;5(8):e12334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012334.

Identification of methylated genes associated with aggressive bladder cancer.

Marsit CJ(1), Houseman EA, Christensen BC, Gagne L, Wrensch MR, Nelson HH,
Wiemels J, Zheng S, Wiencke JK, Andrew AS, Schned AR, Karagas MR, Kelsey KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island, United States of America.

Approximately 500,000 individuals diagnosed with bladder cancer in the U.S.
require routine cystoscopic follow-up to monitor for disease recurrences or
progression, resulting in over $2 billion in annual expenditures. Identification 
of new diagnostic and monitoring strategies are clearly needed, and markers
related to DNA methylation alterations hold great promise due to their stability,
objective measurement, and known associations with the disease and with its
clinical features. To identify novel epigenetic markers of aggressive bladder
cancer, we utilized a high-throughput DNA methylation bead-array in two distinct 
population-based series of incident bladder cancer (n = 73 and n = 264,
respectively). We then validated the association between methylation of these
candidate loci with tumor grade in a third population (n = 245) through bisulfite
pyrosequencing of candidate loci. Array based analyses identified 5 loci for
further confirmation with bisulfite pyrosequencing. We identified and confirmed
that increased promoter methylation of HOXB2 is significantly and independently
associated with invasive bladder cancer and methylation of HOXB2, KRT13 and FRZB 
together significantly predict high-grade non-invasive disease. Methylation of
these genes may be useful as clinical markers of the disease and may point to
genes and pathways worthy of additional examination as novel targets for
therapeutic treatment.

PMCID: PMC2925945
PMID: 20808801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Exp Ther Med. 2010 Sep;1(5):905-910. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Analysis of differential gene expression by bead-based fiber-optic array in
growth-hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas.

Jiang Z(1), Gui S, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Capital Medical University, 100069 Beijing;

Growth-hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas (GHomas) account for approximately
20% of all pituitary neoplasms. However, the pathogenesis of GHomas remains to be
elucidated. To explore the possible pathogenesis of GHomas, we used bead-based
fiber-optic arrays to examine the gene expression in five GHomas and compared
them to three healthy pituitaries. Four differentially expressed genes were
chosen randomly for validation by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. We then performed pathway analysis on
the identified differentially expressed genes using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes. Array analysis showed significant increases in the expression 
of 353 genes and 206 expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and decreases in 565 genes
and 29 ESTs. Bioinformatic analysis showed that the genes HIGD1B, HOXB2, ANGPT2, 
HPGD and BTG2 may play an important role in the tumorigenesis and progression of 
GHomas. Pathway analysis showed that the wingless-type signaling pathway and
extracellular-matrix receptor interactions may play a key role in the
tumorigenesis and progression of GHomas. Our data suggested that there are
numerous aberrantly expressed genes and pathways involved in the pathogenesis of 
GHomas. Bead-based fiber-optic arrays combined with pathway analysis of
differentially expressed genes appear to be a valid method for investigating the 
pathogenesis of tumors.

PMCID: PMC3445959
PMID: 22993617  [PubMed]


25. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Pediatr Surg Int. 2010 Oct;26(10):1017-23. doi: 10.1007/s00383-010-2658-6.

HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 genes are downregulated in the cadmium-induced omphalocele 
in the chick model.

Doi T(1), Puri P, Bannigan J, Thompson J.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin 12,
Ireland.

PURPOSE: In the chick embryo, administration of cadmium (Cd) induces omphalocele 
phenotype. HoxB2 and HoxB4, expressed in cell types that contribute to ventral
body wall (VBW) formation, act together to mediate proper closure of the VBW,
involving a key downstream transcription factor, Alx4. HoxB2 and HoxB4 knockout
mice display VBW defects with specific downregulation of Alx4 gene expression,
while homozygous Alx4 knockouts show omphalocele phenotype. Although the earliest
histological changes in the Cd chick model occur commencing at 4H post treatment,
the exact timing and molecular mechanism by which Cd acts is still unclear. We
hypothesized that HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 genes are downregulated during the
critical timing of very early embryogenesis in the Cd-induced omphalocele chick
model.
METHODS: After 60H incubation, chick embryos were harvested at 1H, 4H and 8H
after treatment with saline or Cd and divided into controls and Cd group (n = 24 
for each group). RT-PCR was performed to investigate the gene expression of
HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 and statistically analyzed (significance was accepted at p 
< 0.05). Immunohistochemical staining was also performed to evaluate the protein 
expression/distribution of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 in the chick embryo.
RESULTS: The expression levels of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 gene at 4H were
significantly downregulated in the Cd group as compared to controls, whereas
there were no significant differences at the other time points. Immunoreactivity 
of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 at 4H is also markedly decreased in the ectoderm and the
dermomyotome in the Cd chick model as compared to controls.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 expression during the narrow 
window of early embryogenesis may cause omphalocele in the Cd chick model by
interfering with molecular signaling required for proper VBW formation.
Furthermore, these results support the concept that HoxB2, HoxB4 and Alx4 genes
work together to mediate proper VBW formation.

PMID: 20625746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2010 Aug;27(6):389-97. doi: 10.1007/s10585-010-9313-4. Epub 
2010 Mar 12.

Lung cancer progression and metastasis from the prognostic point of view.

Inamura K(1), Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer 
Research (JFCR), 135-8550 Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women worldwide.
Since the occurrence of metastases in distant organs is the major reason for
mortality of cancer patients, we need to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.
Many studies featuring analysis of gene expression, comparative genomic
hybridization and loss of heterozygosity analysis have been performed and
generated support for the hypothesis that metastatic potential is acquired early 
in tumorigenesis. Furthermore, it is now clear that the majority of tumor cells
have the potential to metastasize. Although many changes in gene expression
profiles have been established retrospectively, translational research is now a
high priority to enable clinical application and treatment based on laboratory
findings.

PMID: 20225084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS Genet. 2010 Feb 26;6(2):e1000856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000856.

Genome-wide association study reveals multiple loci associated with primary tooth
development during infancy.

Pillas D(1), Hoggart CJ, Evans DM, O'Reilly PF, Sipilä K, Lähdesmäki R, Millwood 
IY, Kaakinen M, Netuveli G, Blane D, Charoen P, Sovio U, Pouta A, Freimer N,
Hartikainen AL, Laitinen J, Vaara S, Glaser B, Crawford P, Timpson NJ, Ring SM,
Deng G, Zhang W, McCarthy MI, Deloukas P, Peltonen L, Elliott P, Coin LJ, Smith
GD, Jarvelin MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom.

Tooth development is a highly heritable process which relates to other growth and
developmental processes, and which interacts with the development of the entire
craniofacial complex. Abnormalities of tooth development are common, with tooth
agenesis being the most common developmental anomaly in humans. We performed a
genome-wide association study of time to first tooth eruption and number of teeth
at one year in 4,564 individuals from the 1966 Northern Finland Birth Cohort
(NFBC1966) and 1,518 individuals from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and 
Children (ALSPAC). We identified 5 loci at P<5x10(-8), and 5 with suggestive
association (P<5x10(-6)). The loci included several genes with links to tooth and
other organ development (KCNJ2, EDA, HOXB2, RAD51L1, IGF2BP1, HMGA2, MSRB3).
Genes at four of the identified loci are implicated in the development of cancer.
A variant within the HOXB gene cluster associated with occlusion defects
requiring orthodontic treatment by age 31 years.

PMCID: PMC2829062
PMID: 20195514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Dec;17(6):1516-21.

[Effect of ATRA on the expression of genes Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 in cord blood
erythroid progenitors].

[Article in Chinese]

DU CQ(1), Huang MX, Liu WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Quanzhou Medical College, Quanzhou 362000, Fujian
Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the expressions of genes hoxb2 and hoxb4
after interference of the proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSC) to the erythroid progenitors (CFU-E) in vitro by using all-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA). The cord blood was collected from 12 cases of fetal
placenta umbilical vein and cultured by using culture technique of HSC in vitro. 
The proliferation and differentiation of HSC to CFU-E were interfered with 6 x
10(-8) mol/L of ATRA. The expression levels of genes hoxb2 and hoxb4 in blank
control and ATRA groups were detected by FQ-RT-PCR on day 3, 7 and 10 of culture.
The results showed that the expressions of genes Hoxb2 and hoxb4 were a little on
day 3, obviously increased on day 7 and reached highest level on day 10 in 2
groups. The expression level of hoxb4 on day 3, 7 and 10 in blank control group
was obviously higher than expression level of hoxb2. As compared with blank
control group, the expressions of genes hoxb2 and hoxb4 in the ATRA group were
significantly up-regulated. It is concluded that the genes hoxb2 and hoxb4 all
expressed in process of proliferation and differentiation to erythroid
progenitors, which suggests that hoxb2 and hoxb4 relate to erythroid
hematopoiesis, and the hoxb4 has more great relevance to erythroid hematopoiesis 
as compared with hoxb2. The ATRA (6 x 10(-8) mol/L) can up-regulate the
expression of hoxb2 and hoxb4 significantly.

PMID: 20030938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Oncol. 2010 Jan;36(1):141-9.

Overexpression of HOXB7 homeobox gene in oral cancer induces cellular
proliferation and is associated with poor prognosis.

De Souza Setubal Destro MF(1), Bitu CC, Zecchin KG, Graner E, Lopes MA, Kowalski 
LP, Coletta RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.

A growing body of evidence has confirmed the involvement of dysregulated
expression of HOX genes in cancer. HOX genes are a family of 39 transcription
factors, divided in 4 clusters (HOXA to HOXD), that during normal development
regulate cell proliferation and specific cell fate. In the present study it was
investigated whether genes of the HOXB cluster play a role in oral cancer. We
showed that most of the genes in the HOXB network are inactive in oral tissues,
with exception of HOXB2, HOXB7 and HOXB13. Expression of HOXB7 was significantly 
higher in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) compared to normal oral mucosas.
We further demonstrated that HOXB7 overexpression in HaCAT human epithelial cell 
line promoted proliferation, whereas downregulation of HOXB7 endogenous levels in
human oral carcinoma cells (SCC9 cells) decreased proliferation. In OSCCs,
expression of HOXB7 and Ki67, a marker of proliferation, correlate strongly with 
each other (rs=0.79, p<0.006). High immunohistochemical expression of HOXB7 was
correlated with T stage (p=0.06), N stage (p=0.07), disease stage (p=0.09) and
Ki67 expression (p=0.01), and patients with tumors showing high number of
HOXB7-positive cells had shorter overall survival (p=0.08) and shorter
disease-free survival after treatment (p=0.10) compared with patients with tumors
exhibiting low amount of HOXB7-positive cells. Our data suggest that HOXB7 may
contribute to oral carcinogenesis by increasing tumor cell proliferation, and
imply that HOXB7 may be an important determinant of OSCC patient prognosis.

PMID: 19956843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2009 Dec 15;312(8):827-40. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21298.

Forkhead transcription factor foxe1 regulates chondrogenesis in zebrafish.

Nakada C(1), Iida A, Tabata Y, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Forkhead transcription factor (Fox) e1 is a causative gene for Bamforth-Lazarus
syndrome, which is characterized by hypothyroidism and cleft palate. Applying
degenerate polymerase chain reaction using primers specific for the conserved
forkhead domain, we identified zebrafish foxe1 (foxe1). Foxe1 is expressed in the
thyroid, pharynx, and pharyngeal skeleton during development; strongly expressed 
in the gill and weakly expressed in the brain, eye, and heart in adult zebrafish.
A loss of function of foxe1 by morpholino antisense oligo (MO) exhibited abnormal
craniofacial development, shortening of Meckel's cartilage and the ceratohyals,
and suppressed chondrycytic proliferation. However, at 27 hr post fertilization, 
the foxe1 MO-injected embryos showed normal dlx2, hoxa2, and hoxb2 expression,
suggesting that the initial steps of pharyngeal skeletal development, including
neural crest migration and specification of the pharyngeal arch occurred
normally. In contrast, at 2 dpf, a severe reduction in the expression of sox9a,
colIIaI, and runx2b, which play roles in chondrocytic proliferation and
differentiation, was observed. Interestingly, fgfr2 was strongly upregulated in
the branchial arches of the foxe1 MO-injected embryos. Unlike Foxe1-null mice,
normal thyroid development in terms of morphology and thyroid-specific marker
expression was observed in foxe1 MO-injected zebrafish embryos. Taken together,
our results indicate that Foxe1 plays an important role in chondrogenesis during 
development of the pharyngeal skeleton in zebrafish, probably through regulation 
of fgfr2 expression. Furthermore, the roles reported for FOXE1 in mammalian
thyroid development may have been acquired during evolution.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19488987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Aug;20(15):3543-51. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-02-0114. Epub 2009
May 28.

Induction of HoxB transcription by retinoic acid requires actin polymerization.

Ferrai C(1), Naum-Onganía G, Longobardi E, Palazzolo M, Disanza A, Diaz VM,
Crippa MP, Scita G, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute and University Vita Salute San Raffaele,
20132 Milan, Italy.

We have analyzed the role of actin polymerization in retinoic acid (RA)-induced
HoxB transcription, which is mediated by the HoxB regulator Prep1. RA induction
of the HoxB genes can be prevented by the inhibition of actin polymerization.
Importantly, inhibition of actin polymerization specifically affects the
transcription of inducible Hox genes, but not that of their transcriptional
regulators, the RARs, nor of constitutively expressed, nor of actively
transcribed Hox genes. RA treatment induces the recruitment to the HoxB2 gene
enhancer of a complex composed of "elongating" RNAPII, Prep1, beta-actin, and
N-WASP as well as the accessory splicing components p54Nrb and PSF. We show that 
inhibition of actin polymerization prevents such recruitment. We conclude that
inducible Hox genes are selectively sensitive to the inhibition of actin
polymerization and that actin polymerization is required for the assembly of a
transcription complex on the regulatory region of the Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC2719572
PMID: 19477923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):18904-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.005090. Epub
2009 May 27.

Transcriptional activation by MEIS1A in response to protein kinase A signaling
requires the transducers of regulated CREB family of CREB co-activators.

Goh SL(1), Looi Y, Shen H, Fang J, Bodner C, Houle M, Ng AC, Screaton RA,
Featherstone M.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

The transcription factor encoded by the murine ecotropic integration site 1 gene 
(MEIS1) is a partner of HOX and PBX proteins. It has been implicated in embryonic
patterning and leukemia, and causally linked to restless legs syndrome. The
MEIS1A C terminus harbors a transcriptional activation domain that is stimulated 
by protein kinase A (PKA) in a manner dependent on the co-activator of cAMP
response element-binding protein (CREB), CREB-binding protein (CBP). We explored 
the involvement of another mediator of PKA-inducible transcription, namely the
CREB co-activators transducers of regulated CREB activity (TORCs). Overexpression
of TORC1 or TORC2 bypassed PKA for activation by MEIS1A. Co-immunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrated a physical interaction between MEIS1 and TORC2 that is
dependent on the MEIS1A C terminus, whereas chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed PKA-inducible recruitment of MEIS1, PBX1, and TORC2 on the MEIS1 target 
genes Hoxb2 and Meis1. The MEIS1 interaction domain on TORC1 was mapped to the
N-terminal coiled-coil region, and TORC1 mutants lacking this domain attenuated
the response to PKA on a natural MEIS1A target enhancer. Thus, TORCs physically
cooperate with MEIS1 to achieve PKA-inducible transactivation through the MEIS1A 
C terminus, suggesting a concerted action in developmental and oncogenic
processes.

PMCID: PMC2707216
PMID: 19473990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genesis. 2009 Jun;47(6):361-5. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20507.

Utility of HoxB2 enhancer-mediated Cre activity for functional studies in the
developing inner ear.

Szeto IY(1), Leung KK, Sham MH, Cheah KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Centre for Reproduction, Development and
Growth, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong SAR, China.

The rhombomere 4(r4)-restricted expression of the mouse Hoxb2 gene is regulated
by a 1.4-kb enhancer-containing fragment. Here, we showthat transgenic mouse
lines expressing cre driven by this fragment (B2-r4-Cre), activated the R26R Cre 
reporter in rhombomere 4 and the second branchial arch, the epithelium of the
first branchial arch, apical ectodermal ridge of the limb buds and the tail
region. Of particular interest is Cre activity in the developing inner ear. Cre
activity was found in the preotic field and otic placode at E8.5 and otocyst at
E9.5-E12.5, in the cochleovestibular and facio-acoustic ganglia at E10.5 and the 
vestibular and spiral ganglia and all the otic epithelia derived from the otocyst
at E15.5 and P0. Our data suggest that the B2-r4-Cre transgenic mice provide an
important tool for conditional gene manipulation and lineage tracing in the inner
ear. In combination with other transgenic lines expressing cre exclusively in the
otic vesicle, the relative contributions of the hindbrain, periotic mesenchyme
and otic epithelium in otic development can be dissected.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19370753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Anticancer Res. 2008 Jul-Aug;28(4B):2121-7.

HOXB2, an adverse prognostic indicator for stage I lung adenocarcinomas, promotes
invasion by transcriptional regulation of metastasis-related genes in HOP-62
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Inamura K(1), Togashi Y, Ninomiya H, Shimoji T, Noda T, Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer 
Research (JFCR), Koto-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Previously, using microarray and real-time RT-PCR analysis, we
established that HOXB2 is an adverse prognostic indicator for Stage I lung
adenocarcinomas. HOXB2 is one of the homeobox master development-controlling
genes regulating morphogenesis and cell differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The molecular functions of HOXB2 were analyzed with a
small interfering RNA (siRNA) approach in HOP-62 human non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cells featuring high HOXB2 expression. Matrigel invasion assays and
microarray gene expression analysis were compared between the HOXB2-siRNA cells
and the control cells.
RESULTS: The Matrigel invasion assays showed attenuation of HOXB2 expression by
siRNA to result in a significant decrease of invasiveness compared to the control
cells (p = 0.0013, paired t-test). On microarray gene expression analysis,
up-regulation of many metastasis-related genes and others correlating with HOXB2 
expression was observed in the control case. With attenuation of HOXB2
expression, downregulation was noted for laminins alpha 4 and 5, involved in
enriched signaling, and for Mac-2BP (Mac-2 binding protein) and integrin beta 4
amongst the genes having an enriched glycoprotein ontology.
CONCLUSION: HOXB2 promotes invasion of lung cancer cells through the regulation
of metastasis-related genes.

PMID: 18751384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS Biol. 2008 Jun 10;6(6):e142. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060142.

Hox paralog group 2 genes control the migration of mouse pontine neurons through 
slit-robo signaling.

Geisen MJ(1), Di Meglio T, Pasqualetti M, Ducret S, Brunet JF, Chedotal A, Rijli 
FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, UMR 7104, CU de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2008 Jun;6(6):e153.

The pontine neurons (PN) represent a major source of mossy fiber projections to
the cerebellum. During mouse hindbrain development, PN migrate tangentially and
sequentially along both the anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (DV) axes.
Unlike DV migration, which is controlled by the Netrin-1/Dcc attractive pathway, 
little is known about the molecular mechanisms guiding PN migration along the AP 
axis. Here, we show that Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 are required both intrinsically and
extrinsically to maintain normal AP migration of subsets of PN, by preventing
their premature ventral attraction towards the midline. Moreover, the migration
defects observed in Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 mutant mice were phenocopied in compound
Robo1;Robo2, Slit1;Slit2, and Robo2;Slit2 knockout animals, indicating that these
guidance molecules act downstream of Hox genes to control PN migration. Indeed,
using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we further demonstrated that Robo2 is
a direct target of Hoxa2 in vivo and that maintenance of high Robo and Slit
expression levels was impaired in Hoxa2 mutant mice. Lastly, the analysis of
Phox2b-deficient mice indicated that the facial motor nucleus is a major Slit
signaling source required to prevent premature ventral migration of PN. These
findings provide novel insights into the molecular control of neuronal migration 
from transcription factor to regulation of guidance receptor and ligand
expression. Specifically, they address the question of how exposure to multiple
guidance cues along the AP and DV axes is regulated at the transcriptional level 
and in turn translated into stereotyped migratory responses during tangential
migration of neurons in the developing mammalian brain.

PMCID: PMC2422855
PMID: 18547144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2008 Feb;24(1):48-50.

[Influence of macrophages on some biological features of endothelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu L(1), Wang Y, Ziiang XQ, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 
510515, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the co-culture model of human macrophage cell line (U937)
with human vein umbilical cell line (ECV304), and to explore the feasibility of
using concanavalin A (ConA) as U937 cell stimulator in regulating angiogenesis.
METHODS: ECV304 cells were cultured in vitro, and to which were respectively
added U937 cells (1 x 10(5)), 25 microg/mL ConA, and U937 cell (1 x 10(5)) + ConA
(25 microg/mL) after cell fusion rate reaching 60%, and then co-cultured for 48
hours. ECV 304 cells in conventional culture were used as controls. 3H-TdR
incorporation test was employed to determine the DNA synthesis of vascular
endothelial cells. Flow cytometry was used to determine the changes in the cell
cycle, and RT-PCR was adopted to determine the expression of homeobox (HOXB2)
mRNA.
RESULTS: After conA stimulation to ECV 304 co-cultured with U937 cells, the
percentage of cells in S phase (48.860 +/- 2.290), the DNA synthesis [(5694 +/-
917) min(-1)], and the expression of HOXB2 mRNA (0.947 +/- 0.003) were obviously 
higher than those in control group [41.590 +/- 2.590 vs (2498 +/- 1109) min(-1)
vs 0.646 +/- 0.004, P > 0.01]. There was no obvious difference in apoptosis among
above stimulation methods (P >0.05).
CONCLUSION: U937 cells activated by ConA can promote the proliferation of ECV304 
cells and further regulate angiogenesis. HOXB2 gene is closely related to the
endothelial proliferation.

PMID: 18512562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Br J Biomed Sci. 2008;65(1):22-7.

Influence of homeobox B2 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides on the biological
characteristics of in vitro cultured primary human umbilical vein endothelial
cells.

Liu XS(1), Zhang XQ, Tian T, Liu L, Ming J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, P. R. China. liuxusheng7984@126.com

This study aims to explore the influence of homeobox B2 (HOXB2) antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides (asodn) on the biological characteristics of in vitro
cultured primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). The
distribution of HOXB2 asodn in the HUVECs was observed by fluorescent labelling, 
and the influence of different concentrations of HOXB2 asodn on the DNA synthesis
of HUVECs was assessed. Flow cytometry and a reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT- PCR) method were employed to observe the influence of HOXB2
asodn on HOXB2 expression and the HUVEC cell cycle. After the induction of
liposome, the nuclear fluorescent staining of HOXB2 asodn was weaker 15 min after
transfection and the staining reached the strongest level at 4-8 h but then
weakened and disappeared by 16 h after transfection. This indicated that
endothelial DNA synthesis could be inhibited by HOXB2 asodn in a dose-dependent
manner. Furthermore, the HUVECs could be delayed in their passage from G1 to S.
Simultaneously, expression of HOXB2 mRNA had decreased significantly by 24-48 h
after transfection. Clearly, HOXB2 plays important roles in the proliferation of 
endothelial cells and also affects the cell cycle.

PMID: 18476491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7981-90. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

p160 Myb-binding protein interacts with Prep1 and inhibits its transcriptional
activity.

Díaz VM(1), Mori S, Longobardi E, Menendez G, Ferrai C, Keough RA, Bachi A, Blasi
F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Molecular Biology and Functional
Genomics, Università Vita Salute San Raffaele and DIBIT, H San Raffaele, via
Olgettina 58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Prep1 is known to interact in vivo with Pbx1 to regulate development and
organogenesis. We have identified a novel Prep1-interacting protein, p160 c-Myb
binding protein (p160). p160 and Pbx1 compete for Prep1 in vitro, and p160
inhibits Prep1-dependent HoxB2 expression in retinoic acid-treated NT2-D1 cells. 
The N-terminal physiologically truncated form of p160, p67, binds the sequence
63LFPLL67 in the HR1 domain of Prep1. Mutation of both L63 and L66 impairs the
binding of Prep1 to both p160/p67 and Pbx1. The sequences required to bind Prep1 
are mainly located in residues 51 to 151. Immunofluorescence colocalization and
coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous p160 and Prep1 are induced by ActD, which
translocates p160 from the nucleolus to the nucleoplasm. These data therefore
show that p160 is a novel regulator of Prep1-Pbx1 transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC2169149
PMID: 17875935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Thorac Oncol. 2007 Sep;2(9):802-7.

HOXB2 as a novel prognostic indicator for stage I lung adenocarcinomas.

Inamura K(1), Togashi Y, Okui M, Ninomiya H, Hiramatsu M, Satoh Y, Okumura S,
Nakagawa K, Shimoji T, Noda T, Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, The Cancer Institute Hospital, 
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2008 Jan;3(1):100. Ishikawa, Yuichi [added].

BACKGROUND: Outcomes of patients with lung adenocarcinomas can be predicted to
some extent from the pathologic stage (p-stage). Although all attempts are made
to fully remove cancer lesions, still a number of p-stage I patients without
metastatic disease at the time of surgery develop recurrences and die of cancer. 
It is thus very important to identify p-stage I patients who are at risk of
recurrence.
METHODS: Previously, using microdissected samples, we identified
metastasis-related genes. Using real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain 
reaction analysis, we investigated the transcriptional levels of the top
metastasis-related genes using 96 independent test lung adenocarcinoma samples
and investigated their correlations with the prognosis.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We document evidence that p-stage I patients with HOXB2 
up-regulation have a worse prognosis than those with HOXB2 down-regulation (p =
0.0065), whereas the HOXB2 status has no prognostic significance for p-stage
II-IV patients. Comparing tumors and corresponding normal lung tissue, we
confirmed HOXB2 up-regulated lesions to have much higher HOXB2 expression than
the corresponding normal tissue. Confirmation with a larger number of samples is 
needed, with further research to clarify the molecular functions of HOXB2.

PMID: 17805056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Dyn. 2007 Sep;236(9):2675-84.

Identification of Lmo1 as part of a Hox-dependent regulatory network for
hindbrain patterning.

Matis C(1), Oury F, Remacle S, Lampe X, Gofflot F, Picard JJ, Rijli FM, Rezsohazy
R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

The embryonic functions of Hox proteins have been extensively investigated in
several animal phyla. These transcription factors act as selectors of
developmental programmes, to govern the morphogenesis of multiple structures and 
organs. However, despite the variety of morphogenetic processes Hox proteins are 
involved in, only a limited set of their target genes has been identified so far.
To find additional targets, we used a strategy based upon the simultaneous
overexpression of Hoxa2 and its cofactors Pbx1 and Prep in a cellular model.
Among genes whose expression was upregulated, we identified LMO1, which codes for
an intertwining LIM-only factor involved in protein-DNA oligomeric complexes. By 
analysing its expression in Hox knockout mice, we show that Lmo1 is
differentially regulated by Hoxa2 and Hoxb2, in specific columns of hindbrain
neuronal progenitors. These results suggest that Lmo1 takes part in a Hox
paralogue 2-dependent network regulating anteroposterior and dorsoventral
hindbrain patterning.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17676642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):2000-9. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with NPM1 mutations is characterized by a gene
expression profile with dysregulated HOX gene expression distinct from
MLL-rearranged leukemias.

Mullighan CG(1), Kennedy A, Zhou X, Radtke I, Phillips LA, Shurtleff SA, Downing 
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):1849-50.

Somatic mutations in nucleophosmin (NPM1) occur in approximately 35% of adult
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). To assess the frequency of NPM1 mutations in
pediatric AML, we sequenced NPM1 in the diagnostic blasts from 93 pediatric AML
patients. Six cases harbored NPM1 mutations, with each case lacking common
cytogenetic abnormalities. To explore the phenotype of the AMLs with NPM1
mutations, gene expression profiles were obtained using Affymetrix U133A
microarrays. NPM1 mutations were associated with increased expression of multiple
homeobox genes including HOXA9, A10, B2, B6 and MEIS1. As dysregulated homeobox
gene expression is also a feature of MLL-rearranged leukemia, the gene expression
signatures of NPM1-mutated and MLL-rearranged leukemias were compared.
Significant differences were identified between these leukemia subtypes including
the expression of different HOX genes, with NPM1-mutated AML showing higher
levels of expression of HOXB2, B3, B6 and D4. These results confirm recent
reports of perturbed HOX expression in NPM1-mutated adult AML, and provide the
first evidence that the NPM1-mutated signature is distinct from MLL-rearranged
AML. These findings suggest that mutated NPM1 leads to dysregulated HOX
expression via a different mechanism than MLL rearrangement.

PMID: 17597811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Androl. 2007 Sep-Oct;28(5):755-71. Epub 2007 May 9.

Postnatal expression and androgen regulation of HOXBES2 homeoprotein in rat
epididymis.

Prabagaran E(1), Hegde UC, Moodbidri SB, Bandivdekar AH, Raghavan VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (ICMR), J.M. Street, Parel - 400 012, Mumbai, India.

The multifunctional and androgen-regulated epididymis is known to provide a
conducive microenvironment for the maturation and storage of mature spermatozoa. 
HOXB2 homeodomain-containing epididymis-specific sperm protein (HOXBES2), a
molecule first reported by our group, exhibits cell- and region-specific
expression. It was found in the cytoplasm of the principal epithelial cells with 
maximum in the distal segments of the rat epididymis. The present study was
undertaken to determine whether HOXBES2 expression is regulated by androgens and 
postnatal epididymal development. Toward this, the epididymis was disallowed
access to circulating androgens either by chemical or biologic castration. In
bilaterally orchidectomized animals, the levels of immunoreactive HOXBES2
declined to <5 % of those seen in sham-operated animals. Exogenous
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) supplementation (250 microg/kg body weight) for 7 days 
restored the expression levels to >or= 90 % of that observed in intact animals.
Ethylene dimethane sulfonate (EDS) administration completely abolished HOXBES2
expression in the epididymis, and supplementation with DHT or DHT + estradiol for
10 days re-established HOXBES2 expression to near normalcy. However, in the
estradiol alone-supplemented EDS-treated group, HOXBES2 remained undetected. The 
unaltered HOXBES2 expression following efferent duct ligation suggested that
HOXBES2 is not critically dependent on testicular factors. During postnatal
development, protein expression in the epididymis begins to appear from day 40
and 50 and increased from day 60 onward, coinciding with the mature levels of
circulating androgens and the well-differentiated epididymis. Thus, the data
obtained from this study suggests that HOXBES2 expression could be regulated by
androgens, and its expression level is closely associated with the postnatal
development of the epididymis.

PMID: 17494099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):559-64. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

5-Bromodeoxyuridine induced differentiation of a human small cell lung cancer
cell line is associated with alteration of gene expression.

Chen Y(1), Pacyna-Gengelbach M, Deutschmann N, Ye F, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Medical School, University Hospital Charité,
Humboldt-University, Schumannstr 20-21, D-10098 Berlin, Germany.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) appears to arise from neuroendocrine cells with the
potential to differentiate into a variety of lung epithelial cell lineages. In
order to investigate molecular events underlying the cell type transition in
SCLC, we treated a SCLC cell line H526 with a differentiation inducing agent
5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU). The treatment led to a dramatic conversion from
suspension cells to adherent cells exhibiting an epithelioid phenotype, which
remarkably reduced the ability of colony formation in soft agar and suppressed
the tumor growth rate in nude mice. The phenotypic transition was consistent with
upregulation of surfactant protein C (SFTPC), thyroid transcription factor 1
(TTF-1), Connexin 26 (Cx26), insulin-like growth factor binding protein-related
protein 1 (IGFBP-rP1), as well as homeobox genes LAGY, PITX1, and HOXB2. Our data
suggest that BrdU induced cell differentiation could be linked to the development
of a less aggressively phenotype in small cell lung cancer.

PMID: 17196172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):646-60. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Expression of Hoxa2 in rhombomere 4 is regulated by a conserved cross-regulatory 
mechanism dependent upon Hoxb1.

Tümpel S(1), Cambronero F, Ferretti E, Blasi F, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

The Hoxa2 gene is an important component of regulatory events during hindbrain
segmentation and head development in vertebrates. In this study we have used
sequenced comparisons of the Hoxa2 locus from 12 vertebrate species in
combination with detailed regulatory analyses in mouse and chicken embryos to
characterize the mechanistic basis for the regulation of Hoxa2 in rhombomere (r) 
4. A highly conserved region in the Hoxa2 intron functions as an r4 enhancer. In 
vitro binding studies demonstrate that within the conserved region three
bipartite Hox/Pbx binding sites (PH1-PH3) in combination with a single binding
site for Pbx-Prep/Meis (PM) heterodimers co-operate to regulate enhancer activity
in r4. Mutational analysis reveals that these sites are required for activity of 
the enhancer, suggesting that the r4 enhancer from Hoxa2 functions in vivo as a
Hox-response module in combination with the Hox cofactors, Pbx and Prep/Meis.
Furthermore, this r4 enhancer is capable of mediating a response to ectopic HOXB1
expression in the hindbrain. These findings reveal that Hoxa2 is a target gene of
Hoxb1 and permit us to develop a gene regulatory network for r4, whereby Hoxa2,
along with Hoxb1, Hoxb2 and Hoxa1, is integrated into a series of auto- and
cross-regulatory loops between Hox genes. These data highlight the important role
played by direct cross-talk between Hox genes in regulating hindbrain patterning.

PMID: 17113575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biol Reprod. 2007 Feb;76(2):314-26. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

HOXBES2: a novel epididymal HOXB2 homeoprotein and its domain-specific
association with spermatozoa.

Prabagaran E(1), Bandivdekar AH, Dighe V, Raghavan VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (NIRRH), Indian Council of Medical Research, Parel 400 012, Mumbai, India.

The sperm from the testis acquires complete fertilizing ability and forward
progressive motility following its transit through the epididymis. Acquisition of
these characteristics results from the modification of the sperm proteome
following interactions with epididymal secretions. In our attempts to identify
epididymis-specific sperm plasma membrane proteins, a partial 2.83-kb clone was
identified by immunoscreening a monkey epididymal cDNA library with an
agglutinating monoclonal antibody raised against washed human spermatozoa. The
sequence of the 2.83-kb clone exhibited homology to the region between 1 and 1097
bp of the homeobox gene, Hoxb2. This sequence was found to be species conserved, 
as revealed by RT-PCR analysis. To obtain a full-length clone of the sequence, 5'
RACE-PCR (rapid amplification of cDNA ends PCR) was carried out using rat
epididymal RNA as the template. It resulted in a full-length 1.657-kb cDNA
encoding a 32.9-kDa putative protein. The protein designated HOXBES2 exhibited
homology to the conserved 61-amino acid homeodomain region of the HOXB2
homeoprotein. However, characteristic differences were noted in its amino and
carboxyl termini compared with HOXB2. A putative 30-kDa protein was detected in
the tissue extracts from adult rat epididymis and caudal spermatozoa, and a
37-kDa protein was detected in the rat embryo when probed with a polyclonal
antibody against HOXB2 protein. Multiple tissue Western blot and
immunohistochemical analysis further indicated its expression in the cytoplasm of
the principal and basal epithelial cells, with maximal expression in the distal
epididymal segments. Northern blot analysis detected a single approximately
2.5-kb transcript from the adult epididymis. Indirect immunofluorescence
localized the protein to the acrosome, midpiece, and equatorial segments of rat
caudal and ejaculated human and monkey spermatozoa, respectively. In conclusion, 
we have identified and characterized a novel epididymal homeoprotein different
from HOXB2 protein and hereafter referred to as HOXBES2, (HOXB2 homeodomain
containing epididymis-specific sperm protein) with a probable role in
fertilization.

PMID: 17065603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. FEBS Lett. 2006 Feb 20;580(5):1205-14. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

p205, a potential tumor suppressor, inhibits cell proliferation via multiple
pathways of cell cycle regulation.

Asefa B(1), Dermott JM, Kaldis P, Stefanisko K, Garfinkel DJ, Keller JR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute-Frederick, Building 560, Room 31-56, Frederick, MD 21702-1201,
USA.

p205 is a member of the interferon-inducible p200 family of proteins that
regulate cell proliferation. Over-expression of p205 inhibits cell growth,
although its mechanism of action is currently unknown. Therefore, we evaluated
the effect of p205 on the p53 and Rb-dependent pathways of cell cycle regulation.
p205 expression results in elevated levels of p21, and activates the p21 promoter
in vitro in a p53-dependent manner. In addition, p205 induces increased
expression of Rb, and binds directly to Rb and p53. Interestingly, p205 also
induces growth inhibition independent of p53 and Rb by delaying G2/M progression 
in proliferating cells, and is a substrate for Cdk2 kinase activity. Finally, we 
have identified other binding partners of p205 by a yeast two-hybrid screen,
including the paired homeodomain protein HoxB2. Taken together, our results
indicate that p205 induces growth arrest by interaction with multiple
transcription factors that regulate the cell cycle, including but not entirely
dependent on the Rb- and p53-mediated pathways of growth inhibition.

PMID: 16458891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006 Jan-Feb;16(1):329-35.

HOXB homeobox gene expression in cervical carcinoma.

López R(1), Garrido E, Piña P, Hidalgo A, Lazos M, Ochoa R, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico DF,
Mexico.

The homeobox (HOX) genes are a family of transcription factors that bind to
specific DNA sequences in target genes regulating gene expression. Thirty-nine
HOX genes have been mapped in four conserved clusters: A, B, C, and D; they act
as master genes regulating the identity of body segments along the
anteroposterior axis of the embryo. The role played by HOX genes in adult cell
differentiation is unclear to date, but growing evidence suggests that they may
play an important role in the development of cancer. To study the role played by 
HOX genes in cervical cancer, in the present work, we analyzed the expression of 
HOXB genes and the localization of their transcripts in human cervical tissues.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis and nonradioactive RNA
in situ hybridization were used to detect HOXB expression in 11 normal cervical
tissues and 17 cervical carcinomas. It was determined that HOXB1, B3, B5, B6, B7,
B8, and B9 genes are expressed in normal adult cervical epithelium and squamous
cervical carcinomas. Interestingly, HOXB2, HOXB4, and HOXB13 gene expression was 
found only in tumor tissues. Our findings suggest that the new expression of
HOXB2, HOXB4, and B13 genes is involved in cervical cancer.

PMID: 16445654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1759-65. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Murine mesenchymal and embryonic stem cells express a similar Hox gene profile.

Phinney DG(1), Gray AJ, Hill K, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Health Science Center, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA. dphinne@tulane.edu

Using degenerate oligonucleotide primers targeting the homeobox domain, we
amplified by PCR and sequenced 723 clones from five murine cell populations and
lines derived from embryonic mesoderm and adult bone marrow. Transcripts from all
four vertebrate Hox clusters were expressed by the different populations.
Hierarchical clustering of the data revealed that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
and the embryonic stem (ES) cell line D3 shared a similar Hox expression profile.
These populations exclusively expressed Hoxb2, Hoxb5, Hoxb7, and Hoxc4,
transcripts regulating self-renewal and differentiation of other stem cells.
Additionally, Hoxa7 transcript quantified by real-time PCR strongly correlated
(r2=0.89) with the number of Hoxa7 clones identified by sequencing, validating
that data from the PCR screen reflects differences in Hox mRNA abundance between 
populations. This is the first study to catalogue Hox transcripts in murine MSCs 
and by comparative analyses identify specific Hox genes that may contribute to
their stem cell character.

PMID: 16288716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):858-67.

Hoxa2 knockdown in Xenopus results in hyoid to mandibular homeosis.

Baltzinger M(1), Ori M, Pasqualetti M, Nardi I, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Strasbourg, France.

The skeletal structures of the face and throat are derived from cranial neural
crest cells (NCCs) that migrate from the embryonic neural tube into a series of
branchial arches (BAs). The first arch (BA1) gives rise to the upper and lower
jaw cartilages, whereas hyoid structures are generated from the second arch
(BA2). The Hox paralogue group 2 (PG2) genes, Hoxa2 and Hoxb2, show distinct
roles for hyoid patterning in tetrapods and fishes. In the mouse, Hoxa2 acts as a
selector of hyoid identity, while its paralogue Hoxb2 is not required. On the
contrary, in zebrafish Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 are functionally redundant for hyoid arch 
patterning. Here, we show that in Xenopus embryos morpholino-induced functional
knockdown of Hoxa2 is sufficient to induce homeotic changes of the second arch
cartilage. Moreover, Hoxb2 is downregulated in the BA2 of Xenopus embryos, even
though initially expressed in second arch NCCs, similar to mouse and unlike in
zebrafish. Finally, Xbap, a gene involved in jaw joint formation, is selectively 
upregulated in the BA2 of Hoxa2 knocked-down frog embryos, supporting a hyoid to 
mandibular change of NCC identity. Thus, in Xenopus Hoxa2 does not act
redundantly with Hoxb2 for BA2 patterning, similar to mouse and unlike in fish.
These data bring novel insights into the regulation of Hox PG2 genes and hyoid
patterning in vertebrate evolution and suggest that Hoxa2 function is required at
late stages of BA2 development.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16222714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Sep 15;14(18):2629-40. Epub 2005 Aug 3.

HoxB2 binds mutant SOD1 and is altered in transgenic model of ALS.

Zhai J(1), Lin H, Canete-Soler R, Schlaepfer WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
wws435jp@mail.med.upenn.edu

Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) cause approximately 20% of
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis by a toxic gain of function; however, the 
precise mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we report the identification of HoxB2, a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor, as a G93A mutant SOD1 interactive
protein in a yeast two-hybrid screen. We show that HoxB2 co-precipitates and
co-localizes with mutant SOD1 in neuronal cell lines, as well as in brain and
spinal cord of G93A mutant SOD1 transgenic mice. Mutagenesis further shows that
this interaction is mediated by the central homeodomain of HoxB2. In motor
neuron-like NSC-34 cells, overexpression of HoxB2 or its homeodomain decreases
the insolubility of mutant SOD1 and inhibits G93A or G86R mutant SOD1-induced
neuronal cell death. In human and mouse tissues, we show that expression of HoxB2
persists in adult spinal cord and is primarily localized in nuclei of motor
neurons. In G93A transgenic mice, HoxB2 co-localizes with mutant SOD1 and is
redistributed to perikarya and proximal neurites of motor neurons. In addition,
there is progressive accumulation of HoxB2 and mutant SOD1 as punctate inclusions
in the neuropil surrounding motor neurons. Taken together, our findings
demonstrate that interaction of HoxB2 with mutant SOD1 occurs in motor neurons of
G93A mutant SOD1 transgenic mice and suggest that this interaction may modulate
the neurotoxicity of mutant SOD1.

PMID: 16079151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2005 Jun;21(3):199-202.

[Influence of macrophages on the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor mRNA, homeobox B2 mRNA, and integrin alpha nu beta3 in vascular
endothelial strain].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu L(1), Liu C, Zhang XQ, Ming J, Liu XS, Xu H, Cheng TM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Institute of Burn
Research, Southwest Hospital, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of macrophages on the expression of the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor (KDR) mRNA, homeobox B2
(HOXB2) mRNA, and integrin alpha nu beta3 in vitro in vascular endothelial
strain.
METHODS: Human umbilical vein cells (ECV304) were cultured in vitro and divided
into 4 groups, i.e. (1) ECV304 group, (2) ECV304 + conA group [with conA (25
microg/ml in culture) added to ECV304], (3) ECV304 + U937 group (with 1 x
10(5)/ml of U937 cells added to 1 x 10(5)/ml ECV 304), (4) ECV304 + U937 + conA
group [with 1 x 10(5)/ml of U937 cells and conA (25 microg/ml in culture)]
groups. Forty-eight hours after culturing, the expression of integrin receptor
alpha nu beta3 and the changes in the expression of KDR mRNA and HOXB2 mRNA in
each group were determined by immunofluorescent technique and RT-PCR,
respectively.
RESULTS: The expression of integrin receptor alpha nu beta3, KDR mRNA, and HOXB2 
mRNA in ECV304 group were 6.7 +/- 1.5, 0.633 +/- 0.012, and 0.674 +/- 0.004,
respectively, while those in ECV304 + U937 + conA group (10.2 +/- 1.7, 0.879 +/- 
0.003, 0.947 +/- 0.003) were obviously more upregulated when compared with those 
in ECV304 group (P < 0.01). No difference in the above indices was found between 
ECV304 and ECV304 + conA, ECV304 + U937 groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Macrophages activated by ConA can accelerate the proliferation,
migration and adhesion to the basement membrane matrix of vascular endothelial
cells through the influence on the expression of KDR mRNA, HOXB2 mRNA and
integrin alpha nu beta3, and through this pathway the angiogenesis is modulated.

PMID: 15996286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 May 1;11(9):3587-96.

Expression of HOXB2, a retinoic acid signaling target in pancreatic cancer and
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Segara D(1), Biankin AV, Kench JG, Langusch CC, Dawson AC, Skalicky DA, Gotley
DC, Coleman MJ, Sutherland RL, Henshall SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE: Despite significant progress in understanding the molecular pathology of
pancreatic cancer and its precursor lesion: pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia 
(PanIN), there remain no molecules with proven clinical utility as prognostic or 
therapeutic markers. Here, we used oligonucleotide microarrays to interrogate
mRNA expression of pancreatic cancer tissue and normal pancreas to identify novel
molecular pathways dysregulated in the development and progression of pancreatic 
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: RNA was hybridized to Affymetrix Genechip HG-U133
oligonucleotide microarrays. A relational database integrating data from publicly
available resources was created to identify candidate genes potentially relevant 
to pancreatic cancer. The protein expression of one candidate, homeobox B2
(HOXB2), in PanIN and pancreatic cancer was assessed using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We identified aberrant expression of several components of the retinoic 
acid (RA) signaling pathway (RARalpha, MUC4, Id-1, MMP9, uPAR, HB-EGF, HOXB6, and
HOXB2), many of which are known to be aberrantly expressed in pancreatic cancer
and PanIN. HOXB2, a downstream target of RA, was up-regulated 6.7-fold in
pancreatic cancer compared with normal pancreas. Immunohistochemistry revealed
ectopic expression of HOXB2 in 15% of early PanIN lesions and 48 of 128 (38%)
pancreatic cancer specimens. Expression of HOXB2 was associated with
nonresectable tumors and was an independent predictor of poor survival in
resected tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified aberrant expression of RA signaling components in
pancreatic cancer, including HOXB2, which was expressed in a proportion of PanIN 
lesions. Ectopic expression of HOXB2 was associated with a poor prognosis for all
patients with pancreatic cancer and was an independent predictor of survival in
patients who underwent resection.

PMID: 15867264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2004 Oct;20(5):287-91.

[The role of homeobox B2 gene in vascular endothelial proliferation and the
protective effects of VEGF on the endothelia against radiation injury].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XS(1), Zhang XQ, Liu L, Ming J, Xu H, Ran XZ, Cheng TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Burn Research, Southwest Hospital, State Key Laboratory of
Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, The Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038. P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of HOXB2 gene in the proliferation of primary
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and the protective effects of
VEGF on the endothelia against radiation injury.
METHODS: HUVECs were isolated, cultured, subcultured and identified. (1) Liposome
coated oligodeoxynucleotide (odn) and homeoboxB2 antisense oligodeoxyncleotide
(HOXB2asodn) were prepared prepared in the concentrations of 0.25, 0.5, 1.0 and
2.5 mg/L for the stimulation of HUVEC. (3)H-TdR incorporation test and MTT method
were employed to determine the proliferation activity of HUVECs after activation.
The cell cycle analysis of HUVECs was determined by flow cytometry. The
expression level of HOXB2mRNA within HUVECs was detected by RT-PCR (reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction). (2) HUVECs were separately treated with
the addition of VEGF in concentration of 50 microg/L, by radiation in the dose of
6 Gy or 12 Gy (60)Co gamma gamma ray, or radiation with 12 Gy (60)Co gamma gamma 
ray followed by the addition of VEGF in dose of 50 microg/L. The cellular
morphology was observed and the cellular proliferation activity was determined by
MTT method.
RESULTS: (1) The proliferation activity of HUVECs could be markedly inhibited by 
liposome coated HOXB2asodn in comparison to liposome-odn (P < 0.05 or 0.001), and
the inhibition effect was positively correlated with the increase in asodn
concentration. The cell ratio in S phase and the expression level of the
HOXB2mRNA could be lowered by asodn in dose of 2.5 mg/L (P < 0.05 or 0.001). (2) 
Radiation by (60)Co gamma ray could lead to the nuclear enlargement, vacuolation 
in the cytoplasm, multiplicity of nucleus and nuclear swelling. The proliferative
activity of HUVECs was increased from 0.365 +/- 0.047 and 0.487 +/- 0.022 without
radiation to 0.557 +/- 0.042 and 0.648 +/- 0.021 24 and 48 hours after 6 Gy
radiation However it was decreased to 0.263 +/- 0.038 and 0.306 +/- 0.024 (P <
0.01) after 12 Gy (60)Co gamma ray radiation. Nevertheless, the cell morphology
was obviously improved and the proliferation was enhanced by the addition of VEGF
after 12 Gy radiation.
CONCLUSION: HOXB2 gene played important roles in the biological activities of
HUVECs. Small dose (6 Gy) gamma-radiation could promote, but large dose (12 Gy)
could decrease the mRNA expression of HOXB2 gene in HUVECs. In addition, VEGF
could protect HUVECs against radiation injury.

PMID: 15730655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2005 Feb;25(2):148-51.

[Effects of macrophages on the biological behaviors and VEGF receptor mRNA, Hoxb2
mRNA, and integrin alphavbeta3 expressions of vascular endothelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu L(1), Liu XS, Zhang XQ, Ming J, Xu H, Cheng TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 
510515, China. liuliang9@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the mechanism by which macrophages regulate angiogenesis by
co-culturing human umbilical vein endothelial cells (ECV-304) with human
macrophage cells (U937) stimulated by concanavalin A (ConA).
METHODS: Monolayer ECV-304 cells growing to 60% confluence were co-cultured with 
1 x 10(5)/ml U937 cells in the presence or absence of ConA (ConA+U937+ECV-304 and
U937+ECV-304 groups, respectively), with non-treated and ConA-treated ECV-304
cells serving as the control groups (ECV-304 and ConA+ECV-304 groups,
respectively). Forty-eight h later, U937 cells were removed from the cell
co-culture for examining changes in DNA synthesis of ECV-304 cells with (3)H-TdR 
incorporation assay and for cell cycle analysis with flow cytometry. RT-PCR was
employed to assess the influence of macrophages stimulated by ConA on the
expression of the target genes. With immunofluorescent method, the changes in the
expression of integrin receptor alphavbeta3 of ECV-304 were determined.
RESULTS: A significant increase in S-phase ECV-304 cells with enhanced DNA
synthesis was observed after co-culture of the cells with ConA-stimulated U937
cells (P<0.01), which also resulted in significant up-regulation of the
expressions of KDR mRNA (0.879+/-0.003), Hoxb2 mRNA (0.947+/-0.003) and integrin 
receptor alphavbeta3 (10.26+/-1.73).
CONCLUSION: Macrophages can accelerate the proliferation, migration and adhesion 
of the vascular endothelial cells to the basilar membrane matrix by affecting
their cell cycle, DNA synthesis, expression of KDR mRNA, Hoxb2 mRNA and integrin 
alphavbeta3, so as to modulate the angiogenetic process of the latter cells.

PMID: 15698991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2004 Aug;131(16):4071-83.

Integration of anteroposterior and dorsoventral regulation of Phox2b
transcription in cranial motoneuron progenitors by homeodomain proteins.

Samad OA(1), Geisen MJ, Caronia G, Varlet I, Zappavigna V, Ericson J, Goridis C, 
Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR7104, 
BP 10142-67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that integrate anteroposterior
(AP) and dorsoventral (DV) positional information in neural progenitors that
specify distinct neuronal types within the vertebrate neural tube. We have
previously shown that in ventral rhombomere (r)4 of Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutant mouse 
embryos, Phox2b expression is not properly maintained in the visceral motoneuron 
progenitor domain (pMNv), resulting in a switch to serotonergic fate. Here, we
show that Phox2b is a direct target of Hoxb1 and Hoxb2. We found a highly
conserved Phox2b proximal enhancer that mediates rhombomere-restricted expression
and contains separate Pbx-Hox (PH) and Prep/Meis (P/M) binding sites. We further 
show that both the PH and P/M sites are essential for Hox-Pbx-Prep ternary
complex formation and regulation of the Phox2b enhancer activity in ventral r4.
Moreover, the DV factor Nkx2.2 enhances Hox-mediated transactivation via a
derepression mechanism. Finally, we show that induction of ectopic
Phox2b-expressing visceral motoneurons in the chick hindbrain requires the
combined activities of Hox and Nkx2 homeodomain proteins. This study takes an
important first step to understand how activators and repressors, induced along
the AP and DV axes in response to signaling pathways, interact to regulate
specific target gene promoters, leading to neuronal fate specification in the
appropriate developmental context.

PMID: 15289435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):613-27. Epub 2004 Jan 7.

Prep1.1 has essential genetic functions in hindbrain development and cranial
neural crest cell differentiation.

Deflorian G(1), Tiso N, Ferretti E, Meyer D, Blasi F, Bortolussi M, Argenton F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Universita' di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131
Padova, Italy.

In this study we analysed the function of the Meinox gene prep1.1 during
zebrafish development. Meinox proteins form heterotrimeric complexes with Hox and
Pbx members, increasing the DNA binding specificity of Hox proteins in vitro and 
in vivo. However, a role for a specific Meinox protein in the regulation of Hox
activity in vivo has not been demonstrated. In situ hybridization showed that
prep1.1 is expressed maternally and ubiquitously up to 24 hours
post-fertilization (hpf), and restricted to the head from 48 hpf onwards.
Morpholino-induced prep1.1 loss-of-function caused significant apoptosis in the
CNS. Hindbrain segmentation and patterning was affected severely, as revealed by 
either loss or defective expression of several hindbrain markers
(foxb1.2/mariposa, krox20, pax2.1 and pax6.1), including anteriorly expressed Hox
genes (hoxb1a, hoxa2 and hoxb2), the impaired migration of facial nerve motor
neurons, and the lack of reticulospinal neurons (RSNs) except Mauthner cells.
Furthermore, the heads of prep1.1 morphants lacked all pharyngeal cartilages.
This was not caused by the absence of neural crest cells or their impaired
migration into the pharyngeal arches, as shown by expression of dlx2 and snail1, 
but by the inability of these cells to differentiate into chondroblasts. Our
results indicate that prep1.1 has a unique genetic function in craniofacial
chondrogenesis and, acting as a member of Meinox-Pbc-Hox trimers, it plays an
essential role in hindbrain development.

PMID: 14711874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5663-79. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Neuronal defects in the hindbrain of Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutants reflect
regulatory interactions among these Hox genes.

Gavalas A(1), Ruhrberg C, Livet J, Henderson CE, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Hox genes are instrumental in assigning segmental identity in the developing
hindbrain. Auto-, cross- and para-regulatory interactions help establish and
maintain their expression. To understand to what extent such regulatory
interactions shape neuronal patterning in the hindbrain, we analysed
neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation and motoneuron migration in Hoxa1, Hoxb1
and Hoxb2 mutant mice. This comparison revealed that neurogenesis and
differentiation of specific neuronal subpopulations in r4 was impaired in a
similar fashion in all three mutants, but with different degrees of severity. In 
the Hoxb1 mutants, neurons derived from the presumptive r4 territory were
re-specified towards an r2-like identity. Motoneurons derived from that territory
resembled trigeminal motoneurons in both their migration patterns and the
expression of molecular markers. Both migrating motoneurons and the resident
territory underwent changes consistent with a switch from an r4 to r2 identity.
Abnormally migrating motoneurons initially formed ectopic nuclei that were
subsequently cleared. Their survival could be prolonged through the introduction 
of a block in the apoptotic pathway. The Hoxa1 mutant phenotype is consistent
with a partial misspecification of the presumptive r4 territory that results from
partial Hoxb1 activation. The Hoxb2 mutant phenotype is a hypomorph of the Hoxb1 
mutant phenotype, consistent with the overlapping roles of these genes in facial 
motoneuron specification. Therefore, we have delineated the functional
requirements in hindbrain neuronal patterning that follow the establishment of
the genetic regulatory hierarchy between Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2.

PMID: 14522873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Sep 15;73(6):737-52.

Establishment of embryonic neuroepithelial cell lines exhibiting an epiplastic
expression pattern of region specific markers.

Nardelli J(1), Catala M, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U368, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
nardelli@idf.ext.jussieu.fr

Neuroepithelial b2T cells were derived from the hindbrain and the spinal cord of 
mouse transgenic embryos, which expressed SV40 T antigen under the control of a
Hoxb2 enhancer. Strikingly, b2T cell lines of either origin exhibit a very
similar gene expression pattern, including markers of the hindbrain and the
spinal cord, such as Hox genes, but not of more anterior cephalic regions. In
addition, the broad expression pattern of b2T cells, probably linked to culture
conditions, appeared to be appropriately modulated when the cells were
reimplanted at different longitudinal levels into chick host embryos, suggesting 
that these cells are responsive to exogenous signalling mechanisms. Further
support for these allegations was obtained by culturing b2T cells in defined
medium and by assessing the expression of Krox20, an odd-numbered rhombomere
marker, which appeared to be modulated by a complex interplay between FGF,
retinoic acid (RA), and noggin. With respect to these as yet unique properties,
b2T cells constitute an original alternative tool to in vivo models for the
analysis of molecular pathways involved in the patterning of the neural tube.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12949900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 12;22(24):3685-97.

Regulation of Hoxb2 by APL-associated PLZF protein.

Ivins S(1), Pemberton K, Guidez F, Howell L, Krumlauf R, Zelent A.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Fund Centre at the Institute of Cancer Research, Chester
Beatty Laboratories, Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

The PLZF gene is translocated in a subset of all-trans-retinoic acid resistant
acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL) cases, encodes a DNA binding transcription
factor and is expressed highly in haematopoietic progenitor cells as
well-developing central nervous system (CNS). The spatially restricted and
temporally dynamic pattern of PLZF expression in the developing CNS suggested
that it might play a role in the circuitry regulating hindbrain segmentation. We 
have now identified a PLZF binding site (PLZF-RE) in an enhancer region of Hoxb2 
that itself is required for directing high-level expression in rhombomers 3 and 5
of the developing hindbrain. The wild-type r3/r5 enhancer linked to a
heterologous promoter was responsive to regulation by PLZF, and this activity was
lost in variants containing a mutated PLZF-RE. Compared with the wild-type
protein, the binding of the APL-associated reciprocal RARalpha-PLZF fusion to
PLZF-RE was much stronger, suggesting that the N-terminal PLZF sequences missing 
from the fusion may play a role in the regulation of DNA binding. Consistent with
this, the N-terminal POZ domain was required for cooperative binding of PLZF to a
multimerized PLZF-RE. In the context of the r3/r5 enhancer, the PLZF-RE
cooperated for PLZF binding with an additional A/T-rich motif positioned
downstream of the PLZF-RE. This A/T motif was previously shown to be essential
for the regulation of Hoxb2 expression in r3 and r5 in cooperation with another
Krüppel-like zinc finger protein Krox 20. The presence of both the PLZF-RE and
the A/T-rich motif was required for a maximal effect of PLZF on a heterologous
promoter and was essential in vivo to direct the expression of a lacZ reporter in
the chick neural tube. Hence, both PLZF and Krox20 cooperate with a common A/T
motif in mediating in vivo activity of the Hoxb2 enhancer. Our findings indicate 
that Hoxb2 is a direct target for regulation by PLZF in the developing CNS and
suggest that deregulation of Hox gene expression may contribute to APL
pathogenesis.

PMID: 12802276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Genes Dev. 2003 Mar 15;17(6):729-37.

Coordinated temporal and spatial control of motor neuron and serotonergic neuron 
generation from a common pool of CNS progenitors.

Pattyn A(1), Vallstedt A, Dias JM, Samad OA, Krumlauf R, Rijli FM, Brunet JF,
Ericson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Neural progenitor cells often produce distinct types of neurons in a specific
order, but the determinants that control the sequential generation of distinct
neuronal subclasses in the vertebrate CNS remain poorly defined. We examined the 
sequential generation of visceral motor neurons and serotonergic neurons from a
common pool of neural progenitors located in the ventral hindbrain. We found that
the temporal specification of these neurons varies along the anterior-posterior
axis of the hindbrain, and that the timing of their generation critically depends
on the integrated activities of Nkx- and Hox-class homeodomain proteins. A
primary function of these proteins is to coordinate the spatial and temporal
activation of the homeodomain protein Phox2b, which in turn acts as a binary
switch in the selection of motor neuron or serotonergic neuronal fate. These
findings assign new roles for Nkx, Hox, and Phox2 proteins in the control of
temporal neuronal fate determination, and link spatial and temporal patterning of
CNS neuronal fates.

PMCID: PMC196019
PMID: 12651891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;21(11):819-25.

Hox proteins activate the IGFBP-1 promoter and suppress the function of hPR in
human endometrial cells.

Gao J(1), Mazella J, Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, State University 
of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8091, USA.

Previous studies have shown that progestin activates the transcription of IGFBP-1
(insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1). Four regions in the IGFBP-1
promotor have been identified to enhance the transcription. Two of the regions,
located at -73 to -65 bp and -319 to -311 bp formed identical DNA-protein
complexes with the nuclear extracts of endometrial stromal/decidual cells. To
identify the binding protein(s) in endometrial cells that interact with these two
regions, we have used the TGTCAATTA repeats (-319 to -11 bp of the IGFBP-1
promoter) to screen the human decidual cDNA library by yeast one-hybrid system.
We found that Hox A10, HoxA11, HoxB2, HoxB4, and HoxD11 interacted with the
TGTCAATTA repeats in yeast cells. Among these hox genes, the full-length coding
region of HoxA10, HoxA11, and HoxB4 were used for functional analysis in three
types of endometrial cells, undifferentiated endometrial stromal cells, decidual 
cells (differentiated stromal cells) and endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line
(HEC1-B). All these endometrial cells produce IGFBP-1. Transient transfection
assay showed that HoxA10 expression vector increased the promoter activity (the
IGFBP-1 proximal promoter containing TGC/TCAATTA and two functional PRE sites) in
endometrial stromal cells and in HEC-1B cells, but not in decidual cells. HoxB4
enhanced the promoter activity only in decidual cells, while HoxA11 had no
apparent effect in all three types of cells. To evaluate whether Hox proteins
would interact with progesterone receptor (hPR), cells were transfected with the 
promoter construct, Hox and hPR expression vectors. hPR alone activated the
IGFBP-1 promoter activity, but expression of Hox gene suppressed the activation. 
Hox proteins also suppressed the hPR enhanced promoter activities of MMTV
(containing consensus-PRE sites) and glycodelin (GdA, containing Sp1 site which
mediates the hPR function). These data showed that Hox genes selectively activate
the transcription of the IGFBP-1 and GdA genes in different types of endometrial 
cells. Hox genes, however, suppress the hPR enhanced activities. In addition, we 
found that HoxB4 expression was induced by estrogen and progestin. Other
investigators have shown that HoxA10 and 11 were stimulated by progestin. These
findings show that Hox proteins are molecular mediators of the steroid hormones
during endometrial cell development.

PMID: 12489992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mech Dev. 2002 Nov;119(1):81-90.

Hox cluster polarity in early transcriptional availability: a high order
regulatory level of clustered Hox genes in the mouse.

Roelen BA(1), de Graaff W, Forlani S, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The molecular mechanism underlying the 3' to 5' polarity of induction of mouse
Hox genes is still elusive. While relief from a cluster-encompassing repression
was shown to lead to all Hoxd genes being expressed like the 3'most of them,
Hoxd1 (Kondo and Duboule, 1999), the molecular basis of initial activation of
this 3'most gene, is not understood yet. We show that, already before primitive
streak formation, prior to initial expression of the first Hox gene, a dramatic
transcriptional stimulation of the 3'most genes, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2, is observed
upon a short pulse of exogenous retinoic acid (RA), whereas it is not in the case
for more 5', cluster-internal, RA-responsive Hoxb genes. In contrast, the
RA-responding Hoxb1lacZ transgene that faithfully mimics the endogenous gene
(Marshall et al., 1994) did not exhibit the sensitivity of Hoxb1 to precocious
activation. We conclude that polarity in initial activation of Hoxb genes
reflects a greater availability of 3'Hox genes for transcription, suggesting a
pre-existing (susceptibility to) opening of the chromatin structure at the 3'
extremity of the cluster. We discuss the data in the context of prevailing models
involving differential chromatin opening in the directionality of clustered Hox
gene transcription, and regarding the importance of the cluster context for
correct timing of initial Hox gene expression.Interestingly, Cdx1 manifested the 
same early transcriptional availability as Hoxb1.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12385756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Exp Zool. 2002 Oct 15;294(3):285-99.

Evolutionary divergence of vertebrate Hoxb2 expression patterns and
transcriptional regulatory loci.

Scemama JL(1), Hunter M, McCallum J, Prince V, Stellwag E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howell Science Complex, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina 27858, USA. scemamaj@mail.ecu.edu

Hox gene expression is regulated by a complex array of cis-acting elements that
control spatial and temporal gene expression in developing embryos. Here, we
report the isolation of the striped bass Hoxb2a gene, comparison of its
expression to the orthologous gene from zebrafish, and comparative genomic
analysis of the upstream regulatory region to that of other vertebrates.
Comparison of the Hoxb2a gene expression patterns from striped bass to zebrafish 
revealed similar expression patterns within rhombomeres 3, 4, and 5 of the
hindbrain but a notable absence of expression in neural crest tissues of striped 
bass while neural crest expression is observed in zebrafish and common to other
vertebrates. Comparative genomic analysis of the striped bass Hoxb2a-b3a
intergenic region to those from zebrafish, pufferfish, human, and mouse
demonstrated the presence of common Meis, Hox/Pbx, Krox-20, and Box 1 elements,
which are necessary for rhombomere 3, 4, and 5 expression. Despite their common
occurrence, the location and orientation of these transcription elements differed
among the five species analyzed, such that Krox-20 and Box 1 elements are located
3' to the Meis, Hox/Pbx elements in striped bass, pufferfish, and human while
they are located 5' of this r4 enhancer in zebrafish and mouse. Our results
suggest that the plasticity exhibited in the organization of key regulatory
elements responsible for rhombomere-specific Hoxb2a expression may reflect the
effects of stabilizing selection in the evolution cis-acting elements.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12362434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2002 Sep;129(17):4065-74.

Hoxa5 overexpression correlates with IGFBP1 upregulation and postnatal dwarfism: 
evidence for an interaction between Hoxa5 and Forkhead box transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Volovitch M, Frain M, Kim JJ, Souberbielle JC, Gan L, Unterman TG, 
Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole normale supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

Transgenic mice expressing the homeobox gene Hoxa5 under the control of Hoxb2
regulatory elements present a growth arrest during weeks two and three of
postnatal development, resulting in proportionate dwarfism. These mice present a 
liver phenotype illustrated by a 12-fold increase in liver insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) mRNA and a 50% decrease in liver insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) mRNA correlated with a 50% decrease in circulating IGF1.
We show that the Hoxa5 transgene is expressed in the liver of these mice, leading
to an overexpression of total (endogenous plus transgene) Hoxa5 mRNA in this
tissue. We have used several cell lines to investigate a possible physiological
interaction of Hoxa5 with the main regulator of IGFBP1 promoter activity, the
Forkhead box transcription factor FKHR. In HepG2 cells, Hoxa5 has little effect
by itself but inhibits the FKHR-dependent activation of the IGFBP1 promoter. In
HuF cells, Hoxa5 cooperates with FKHR to dramatically enhance IGFBP1 promoter
activity. This context-dependent physiological interaction probably corresponds
to the existence of a direct interaction between Hoxa5 and FKHR and
FoxA2/HNF3beta, as demonstrated by pull-down experiments achieved either in vitro
or after cellular co-expression. In conclusion, we propose that the impaired
growth observed in this transgenic line relates to a liver phenotype best
explained by a direct interaction between Hoxa5 and liver-specific Forkhead box
transcription factors, in particular FKHR but also Foxa2/HNF3beta. Because Hoxa5 
and homeogenes of the same paralog group are normally expressed in the liver, the
present results raise the possibility that homeoproteins, in addition to their
established role during early development, regulate systemic physiological
functions.

PMID: 12163409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Jul;82(13):907-10.

[Effects of HOXB2 antisense oligodeoxynucleotides on the biological properties of
primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Burn Research, Southwestern Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038 China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of HOXB2 antisense oligodeoxynuc leotides
(Asodn) on the biological properties of primary human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (ECs).
METHODS: Fluorescent labelled Asodn was transfected into the endothelial cells of
human unbilical vein mediated liposome and its distribution within endothelia was
observed. (3)H-TdR incorporation test was employed to determine its effects on
the DNA synthesis. Flow cytometry was applied to determine the change of the cell
cycle. In the same time, RT-PCR was adopted to study the influence of Asodn on
the expression of target genes.
RESULTS: Fifteen minutes after the transfection, weak nucleic staining was
observed. The fluorescent staining was the strongest 4 approximately 8 hours
after the transfection and began to weaken in 16 hours. The proportion of cells
in G1/0 phase in Asodn group was 53.4 +/- 3.1, significantly higher than that in 
control group (35.8 +/- 7.3, P < 0.01), and the proportion of cells in S phase in
Asodn group was 42.2 +/- 3.5, significantly lower than that in control group
(60.8 +/- 6.2, P < 0.01). The expression of HOXB2 mRNA was remarkably decreased
during 24 to 48 hours.
CONCLUSION: HOXB2 Asodn exerts inhibitory effects on EC proliferation
dose-dependently, delays the conversion of G1 phase to S Phase, and inhibits the 
expression of HOXB2 mRNA. HOXB2 gene plays an important role in proliferation of 
endothelial cells and the mechanism is related to cell cycle.

PMID: 12126517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 15;247(2):367-89.

Zebrafish hox paralogue group 2 genes function redundantly as selector genes to
pattern the second pharyngeal arch.

Hunter MP(1), Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
1027 E. 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA

The pharyngeal arches are one of the defining features of the vertebrates, with
the first arch forming the mandibles of the jaw and the second forming jaw
support structures. The cartilaginous elements of each arch are formed from
separate migratory neural crest cell streams, which derive from the dorsal aspect
of the neural tube. The second and more posterior crest streams are characterized
by specific Hox gene expression. The zebrafish has a larger overall number of Hox
genes than the tetrapod vertebrates, as the result of a duplication event in its 
lineage. However, in both zebrafish and mouse, there are just two members of Hox 
paralogue group 2 (PG2): Hoxa2 and Hoxb2. Here, we show that morpholino-mediated 
"knock-down" of both zebrafish Hox PG2 genes results in major defects in second
pharyngeal arch cartilages, involving replacement of ventral elements with a
mirror-image duplication of first arch structures, and accompanying changes to
pharyngeal musculature. In the mouse, null mutants of Hoxa2 have revealed that
this single Hox gene is required for normal second arch patterning. By contrast, 
loss-of-function of either zebrafish Hox PG2 gene individually has no phenotypic 
consequence, showing that these two genes function redundantly to confer proper
pattern to the second pharyngeal arch. We have also used hoxb1a mis-expression to
induce localized ectopic expression of zebrafish Hox PG2 genes in the first arch;
using this strategy, we find that ectopic expression of either Hox PG2 gene can
confer second arch identity onto first arch structures, suggesting that the
zebrafish Hox PG2 genes act as "selector genes."

2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12086473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Biol. 2002 Jun 1;246(1):45-56.

Conservation and diversity in the cis-regulatory networks that integrate
information controlling expression of Hoxa2 in hindbrain and cranial neural crest
cells in vertebrates.

Tümpel S(1), Maconochie M, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute, 1000 East 50th, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

The Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 genes are members of paralogy group II and display segmental 
patterns of expression in the developing vertebrate hindbrain and cranial neural 
crest cells. Functional analyses have demonstrated that these genes play critical
roles in regulating morphogenetic pathways that direct the regional identity and 
anteroposterior character of hindbrain rhombomeres and neural crest-derived
structures. Transgenic regulatory studies have also begun to characterize
enhancers and cis-elements for those mouse and chicken genes that direct
restricted patterns of expression in the hindbrain and neural crest. In light of 
the conserved role of Hoxa2 in neural crest patterning in vertebrates and the
similarities between paralogs, it is important to understand the extent to which 
common regulatory networks and elements have been preserved between species and
between paralogs. To investigate this problem, we have cloned and sequenced the
intergenic region between Hoxa2 and Hoxa3 in the chick HoxA complex and used it
for making comparative analyses with the respective human, mouse, and horn shark 
regions. We have also used transgenic assays in mouse and chick embryos to test
the functional activity of Hoxa2 enhancers in heterologous species. Our analysis 
reveals that three of the critical individual components of the Hoxa2 enhancer
region from mouse necessary for hindbrain expression (Krox20, BoxA, and TCT
motifs) have been partially conserved. However, their number and organization are
highly varied for the same gene in different species and between paralogs within 
a species. Other essential mouse elements appear to have diverged or are absent
in chick and shark. We find the mouse r3/r5 enhancer fails to work in chick
embryos and the chick enhancer works poorly in mice. This implies that new motifs
have been recruited or utilized to mediate restricted activity of the enhancer in
other species. With respect to neural crest regulation, cis-components are
embedded among the hindbrain control elements and are highly diverged between
species. Hence, there has been no widespread conservation of sequence identity
over the entire enhancer domain from shark to humans, despite the common function
of these genes in head patterning. This provides insight into how apparently
equivalent regulatory regions from the same gene in different species have
evolved different components to potentiate their activity in combination with a
selection of core components.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12027433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2002 Mar;24(2):126-8.

[Up regulation of phenylacetate to glioma homeobox gene expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian Y(1), Yang C, Zhao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun 130031, China.

OBJECTIVE: Even though phenylacetate (PA) bas been shown to inhibit the growth
and induce differentiation in rat C6 glioma cell line, its mechanisms are still
poorly understood. This study is aimed to identify which Hox gene is related to
glioma and to observe the change in expression on mRNA level as treated by
phenylasetate.
METHODS: Twenty-two kinds of Hox gene were divided into 3 groups according to
their primer sequence. Semiquantitative reverse transcription- polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) was used to investigate the mRNA expression of Hox gene groups 
and some Hox gene in rat C6 glioma cell line following differentiation induced by
PA. The level of Hox gene expression was expressed as ratio expression rate (RER)
of Hox gene/beta-actin according to computer image analysis and the difference
between C6 cells and PA treated C6 cells was analyzed by student t-test.
RESULTS: It was found that Hox genes matching to primers P2 were mildly expressed
in C6 cells and the expression of HoxB2 mRNA was significantly up-regulated in PA
treated C6 cells (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The weak expression of HoxB2 may be involved in glioma origin and the
mechanisms of PA action are correlated with transcription process in the glioma
cells.

PMID: 12015031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1645-55.

spiel ohne grenzen/pou2 is required for zebrafish hindbrain segmentation.

Hauptmann G(1), Belting HG, Wolke U, Lunde K, Söll I, Abdelilah-Seyfried S,
Prince V, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie I, Hauptstrasse 1, 
D-79104 Freiburg i. Br., Germany.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain leads to the formation of a series of
rhombomeres with distinct identities. In mouse, Krox20 and kreisler play
important roles in specifying distinct rhombomeres and in controlling segmental
identity by directly regulating rhombomere-specific expression of Hox genes. We
show that spiel ohne grenzen (spg) zebrafish mutants develop rhombomeric
territories that are abnormal in both size and shape. Rhombomere boundaries are
malpositioned or absent and the segmental pattern of neuronal differentiation is 
perturbed. Segment-specific expression of hoxa2, hoxb2 and hoxb3 is severely
affected during initial stages of hindbrain development in spg mutants and the
establishment of krx20 (Krox20 ortholog) and valentino (val; kreisler ortholog)
expression is impaired. spg mutants carry loss-of-function mutations in the pou2 
gene. pou2 is expressed at high levels in the hindbrain primordium of wild-type
embryos prior to activation of krx20 and val. Widespread overexpression of Pou2
can rescue the segmental krx20 and val domains in spg mutants, but does not
induce ectopic expression of these genes. This suggests that spg/pou2 acts in a
permissive manner and is essential for normal expression of krx20 and val. We
propose that spg/pou2 is an essential component of the regulatory cascade
controlling hindbrain segmentation and acts before krx20 and val in the
establishment of rhombomere precursor territories.

PMID: 11923201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2001 Dec;17(6):348-50.

[The influence of HOXB2 anti-sense oligodeoxynucleotides on the proliferation and
expression of human umbilical vein endothelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Liu X, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Burn Research, Southwestern Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of HOXB2 anti-sense oligodeoxynucleotides
(asodn) on the proliferation and the expression of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs).
METHODS: Various concentrations of HOXB2 ASODN modified by thiophosphate were
transfected into HUVECs by liposome mediation. MTT and RT-PCR methods were
employed to determine the influence of different concentrations of ASODN on
endothelial proliferation and the expression level of HOXB2 mRNA.
RESULTS: After the transfection of HOXB2 ASODN, the endothelial proliferation was
inhibited in dose-dependent manner. Simultaneously, the expression level of HOXB2
mRNA decreased significantly.
CONCLUSION: HOXB2 might play important roles in the proliferation of endothelial 
cells.

PMID: 11859612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Chin J Traumatol. 2002 Feb;5(1):12-5.

Effect of anti-sense oligodeoxynucleotides homeobox B2 on the proliferation and
expression of primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells.

Liu X(1), Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Burn Research, Southwestern Hospital, The Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing 400038, China. liuxsp@cta.cq.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of homeobox B2 (HOXB2) anti sense
oligodeoxynucleotides (asodn) on the proliferation and expression of primary
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).
METHODS: Various concentrations of HOXB2 asodn modified by thiophosphate
transfected the induction of liposome into HUVECs. MTT a nd RT-PCR methods were
employed to determine the effect of different conc ent rations of asodn on the
endothelial proliferation and the expression level of HOXB2 mRNA.
RESULTS: After the transfection of HOXB2 asodn, the endothelial proliferation was
inhibited in a dose-dependent fashion. Simultaneously, the expression of HOXB2
mRNA decreased significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB2 plays an important role in the proliferation of endothelia.

PMID: 11835749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Development. 2001 Nov;128(21):4139-51.

Zebrafish Meis functions to stabilize Pbx proteins and regulate hindbrain
patterning.

Waskiewicz AJ(1), Rikhof HA, Hernandez RE, Moens CB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Basic Sciences and Program in
Developmental Biology, B2-152, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Fairview Ave. N., Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Homeodomain-containing Hox proteins regulate segmental identity in Drosophila in 
concert with two partners known as Extradenticle (Exd) and Homothorax (Hth).
These partners are themselves DNA-binding, homeodomain proteins, and probably
function by revealing the intrinsic specificity of Hox proteins. Vertebrate
orthologs of Exd and Hth, known as Pbx and Meis (named for a myeloid ecotropic
leukemia virus integration site), respectively, are encoded by multigene families
and are present in multimeric complexes together with vertebrate Hox proteins.
Previous results have demonstrated that the zygotically encoded Pbx4/Lazarus
(Lzr) protein is required for segmentation of the zebrafish hindbrain and proper 
expression and function of Hox genes. We demonstrate that Meis functions in the
same pathway as Pbx in zebrafish hindbrain development, as expression of a
dominant-negative mutant Meis results in phenotypes that are remarkably similar
to that of lzr mutants. Surprisingly, expression of Meis protein partially
rescues the lzr(-) phenotype. Lzr protein levels are increased in embryos
overexpressing Meis and are reduced for lzr mutants that cannot bind to Meis.
This implies a mechanism whereby Meis rescues lzr mutants by stabilizing
maternally encoded Lzr. Our results define two functions of Meis during zebrafish
hindbrain segmentation: that of a DNA-binding partner of Pbx proteins, and that
of a post-transcriptional regulator of Pbx protein levels.

PMID: 11684652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Biol. 2001 Sep 1;237(1):130-44.

Hoxb2 and hoxb4 act together to specify ventral body wall formation.

Manley NR(1), Barrow JR, Zhang T, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA. nmanley@mail.mcg.edu

Three different alleles of the Hoxb4 locus were generated by gene targeting in
mice. Two alleles contain insertions of a selectable marker in the first exon in 
either orientation, and, in the third, the selectable marker was removed,
resulting in premature termination of the protein. Presence and orientation of
the selectable marker correlated with the severity of the phenotype, indicating
that the selectable marker induces cis effects on neighboring genes that
influence the phenotype. Homozygous mutants of all alleles had cervical skeletal 
defects similar to those previously reported for Hoxb4 mutant mice. In the most
severe allele, Hoxb4(PolII), homozygous mutants died either in utero at
approximately E15.5 or immediately after birth, with a severe defect in ventral
body wall formation. Analysis of embryos showed thinning of the primary ventral
body wall in mutants relative to control animals at E11.5, before secondary body 
wall formation. Prior to this defect, both Alx3 and Alx4 were specifically down
regulated in the most ventral part of the primary body wall in Hoxb4(PolII)
mutants. Hoxb4(loxp) mutants in which the neo gene has been removed did not have 
body wall or sternum defects. In contrast, both the Hoxb4(PolII) and the
previously described Hoxb2(PolII) alleles that have body wall defects have been
shown to disrupt the expression of both Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 in cell types that
contribute to body wall formation. Our results are consistent with a model in
which defects in ventral body wall formation require the simultaneous loss of at 
least Hoxb2 and Hoxb4, and may involve Alx3 and Alx4.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11518511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Biol. 2001 May 15;233(2):468-81.

Differences in Krox20-dependent regulation of Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 during hindbrain
development.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Manzanares M, Marshall H, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

During hindbrain development, segmental regulation of the paralogous Hoxa2 and
Hoxb2 genes in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 involves Krox20-dependent enhancers that
have been conserved during the duplication of the vertebrate Hox clusters from a 
common ancestor. Examining these evolutionarily related control regions could
provide important insight into the degree to which the basic Krox20-dependent
mechanisms, cis-regulatory components, and their organization have been
conserved. Toward this goal we have performed a detailed functional analysis of a
mouse Hoxa2 enhancer capable of directing reporter expression in r3 and r5. The
combined activities of five separate cis-regions, in addition to the conserved
Krox20 binding sites, are involved in mediating enhancer function. A CTTT (BoxA) 
motif adjacent to the Krox20 binding sites is important for r3/r5 activity. The
BoxA motif is similar to one (Box1) found in the Hoxb2 enhancer and indicates
that the close proximity of these Box motifs to Krox20 sites is a common feature 
of Krox20 targets in vivo. Two other rhombomeric elements (RE1 and RE3) are
essential for r3/r5 activity and share common TCT motifs, indicating that they
interact with a similar cofactor(s). TCT motifs are also found in the Hoxb2
enhancer, suggesting that they may be another common feature of Krox20-dependent 
control regions. The two remaining Hoxa2 cis-elements, RE2 and RE4, are not
conserved in the Hoxb2 enhancer and define differences in some of components that
can contribute to the Krox20-dependent activities of these enhancers.
Furthermore, analysis of regulatory activities of these enhancers in a Krox20
mutant background has uncovered differences in their degree of dependence upon
Krox20 for segmental expression. Together, this work has revealed a surprising
degree of complexity in the number of cis-elements and regulatory components that
contribute to segmental expression mediated by Krox20 and sheds light on the
diversity and evolution of Krox20 target sites and Hox regulatory elements in
vertebrates.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11336508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1299-312.

Meis3 synergizes with Pbx4 and Hoxb1b in promoting hindbrain fates in the
zebrafish.

Vlachakis N(1), Choe SK, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, and Program in
Neuroscience, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655,
USA.

Many Hox proteins are thought to require Pbx and Meis co-factors to specify cell 
identity during embryogenesis. Here we demonstrate that Meis3 synergizes with
Pbx4 and Hoxb1b in promoting hindbrain fates in the zebrafish. We find that
Hoxb1b and Pbx4 act together to induce ectopic hoxb1a expression in rhombomere 2 
of the hindbrain. In contrast, Hoxb1b and Pbx4 acting together with Meis3 induce 
hoxb1a, hoxb2, krox20 and valentino expression rostrally and cause extensive
transformation of forebrain and midbrain fates to hindbrain fates, including
differentiation of excess rhombomere 4-specific Mauthner neurons. This
synergistic effect requires that Hoxb1b and Meis3 have intact Pbx-interaction
domains, suggesting that their in vivo activity is dependent on binding to Pbx4. 
In the case of Meis3, binding to Pbx4 is also required for nuclear access. Our
results are consistent with Hoxb1b and Meis3 interacting with Pbx4 to form
complexes that regulate hindbrain development during zebrafish embryogenesis.

PMID: 11262231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 1;232(1):176-90.

Regulatory analysis of the mouse Hoxb3 gene: multiple elements work in concert to
direct temporal and spatial patterns of expression.

Kwan CT(1), Tsang SL, Krumlauf R, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 5 Sassoon Road, Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam, China.

The expression pattern of the mouse Hoxb3 gene is exceptionally complex and
dynamic compared with that of other members of the Hoxb cluster. There are
multiple types of transcripts for Hoxb3 gene, and the anterior boundaries of its 
expression vary at different stages of development. Two enhancers flanking Hoxb3 
on the 3' and 5' sides regulate Hoxb2 and Hoxb4, respectively, and these control 
regions define the two ends of a 28-kb interval in and around the Hoxb3 locus. To
assay the regulatory potential of DNA fragments in this interval we have used
transgenic analysis with a lacZ reporter gene to locate cis-elements for
directing the dynamic patterns of Hoxb3 expression. Our detailed analysis has
identified four new and widely spaced cis-acting regulatory regions that can
together account for major aspects of the Hoxb3 expression pattern. Elements Ib, 
IIIa, and IVb control gene expression in neural and mesodermal tissues; element
Va controls mesoderm-specific gene expression. The most anterior neural
expression domain of Hoxb3 is controlled by an r5 enhancer (element IVa); element
IIIa directs reporter expression in the anterior spinal cord and hindbrain up to 
r6, and the region A enhancer (in element I) mediates posterior neural
expression. Hence, the regulation of segmental expression of Hoxb3 in the
hindbrain is different from that of Hoxa3, as two separate enhancer elements
contribute to expression in r5 and r6. The mesoderm-specific element (Va) directs
reporter expression to prevertebra C1 at 12.5 dpc, which is the anterior limit of
paraxial mesoderm expression for Hoxb3. When tested in combinations, these
cis-elements appear to work as modules in an additive manner to recapitulate the 
major endogenous expression patterns of Hoxb3 during embryogenesis. Together our 
study shows that multiple control elements direct reporter gene expression in
diverse tissue-, temporal-, and spatially restricted subset of the endogenous
Hoxb3 expression domains and work in concert to control the neural and mesodermal
patterns of expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11254356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Pathol. 2001 Mar;158(3):955-66.

HOX genes in human lung: altered expression in primary pulmonary hypertension and
emphysema.

Golpon HA(1), Geraci MW, Moore MD, Miller HL, Miller GJ, Tuder RM, Voelkel NF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Hypertension Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
4200 E. Ninth Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes belong to the large family of homeodomain genes that function as
transcription factors. Animal studies indicate that they play an essential role
in lung development. We investigated the expression pattern of HOX genes in human
lung tissue by using microarray and degenerate reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction survey techniques. HOX genes predominantly from the 3' end of
clusters A and B were expressed in normal human adult lung and among them HOXA5
was the most abundant, followed by HOXB2 and HOXB6. In fetal (12 weeks old) and
diseased lung specimens (emphysema, primary pulmonary hypertension) additional
HOX genes from clusters C and D were expressed. Using in situ hybridization,
transcripts for HOXA5 were predominantly found in alveolar septal and epithelial 
cells, both in normal and diseased lungs. A 2.5-fold increase in HOXA5 mRNA
expression was demonstrated by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction in primary pulmonary hypertension lung specimens when compared to 
normal lung tissue. In conclusion, we demonstrate that HOX genes are selectively 
expressed in the human lung. Differences in the pattern of HOX gene expression
exist among fetal, adult, and diseased lung specimens. The altered pattern of HOX
gene expression may contribute to the development of pulmonary diseases.

PMCID: PMC1850338
PMID: 11238043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2000 Jan;127(1):155-66.

Segmental expression of Hoxb2 in r4 requires two separate sites that integrate
cooperative interactions between Prep1, Pbx and Hox proteins.

Ferretti E(1), Marshall H, Pöpperl H, Maconochie M, Krumlauf R, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, DIBIT, Università Vita-Salute S. Raffaele, Milan,
Italy.

Direct auto- and cross-regulatory interactions between Hox genes serve to
establish and maintain segmentally restricted patterns in the developing
hindbrain. Rhombomere r4-specific expression of both Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 depends upon
bipartite cis Hox response elements for the group 1 paralogous proteins, Hoxal
and Hoxbl. The DNA-binding ability and selectivity of these proteins depend upon 
the formation of specific heterodimeric complexes with members of the PBC
homeodomain protein family (Pbx genes). The r4 enhancers from Hoxb1 and Hoxb2
have the same activity, but differ with respect to the number and organisation of
bipartite Pbx/Hox (PH) sites required, suggesting the intervention of other
components/sequences. We report here that another family of homeodomain proteins 
(TALE, Three-Amino acids-Loop-Extension: Prep1, Meis, HTH), capable of dimerizing
with Pbx/EXD, is involved in the mechanisms of r4-restricted expression. We show 
that: (1) the r4-specific Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 enhancers are complex elements
containing separate PH and Prep/Meis (PM) sites; (2) the PM site of the Hoxb2,
but not Hoxb1, enhancer is essential in vivo for r4 expression and also
influences other sites of expression; (3) both PM and PH sites are required for
in vitro binding of Prepl-Pbx and formation and binding of a ternary Hoxbl-Pbxla 
(or 1b)-Prepl complex. (4) A similar ternary association forms in nuclear
extracts from embryonal P19 cells, but only upon retinoic acid induction. This
requires synthesis of Hoxbl and also contains Pbx with either Prepl or Meisl.
Together these findings highlight the fact that PM sites are found in close
proximity to bipartite PH motifs in several Hox responsive elements shown to be
important in vivo and that such sites play an essential role in potentiating
regulatory activity in combination with the PH motifs.

PMID: 10654609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;18(11):805-17.

The gammaPE complex contains both SATB1 and HOXB2 and has positive and negative
roles in human gamma-globin gene regulation.

Case SS(1), Huber P, Lloyd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Research Immunology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, California 90027, USA.

A large nuclear protein complex, termed gammaPE (for gamma-globin promoter and
enhancer binding factor), binds to five sites located 5' and 3' of the human
y-globin gene. Two proteins, SATB1 (special A-T-rich binding protein 1) and
HOXB2, can bind to yPE binding sites. SATB1 binds to nuclear matrix-attachment
sites, and HOXB2 is a homeodomain protein important in neural development that is
also expressed during erythropoiesis. The present work showed that antisera
directed against either SATB1 or HOXB2 reacted specifically with the entire
gammaPE complex in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), suggesting that
the two proteins can bind to the gammaPE binding site simultaneously. When SATB1 
or HOXB2 was expressed in vitro, they could bind independently to gammaPE binding
sites in EMSA. Interestingly, the proteins expressed in vitro competed
effectively with each other for the gammaPE binding site, suggesting that this
may occur under certain conditions in vivo. Transient cotransfections of a HOXB2 
cDNA and a y-globin-luciferase reporter gene construct into cells expressing
SATB1 suggested that SATB1 has a positive and HOXB2 a negative regulatory effect 
on transcription. Taking into account their potentially opposing effects and
binding activities, SATB1 and HOXB2 may modulate the amount of gamma-globin mRNA 
expressed during development and differentiation.

PMID: 10595394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5027-40.

Mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 show extensive remodeling of the hindbrain
and defects in craniofacial development.

Rossel M(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The analysis of mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 suggests that these two
genes function together to pattern the hindbrain. Separately, mutations in Hoxa1 
and Hoxb1 have profoundly different effects on hindbrain development. Hoxa1
mutations disrupt the rhombomeric organization of the hindbrain, whereas Hoxb1
mutations do not alter the rhombomeric pattern, but instead influence the fate of
cells originating in rhombomere 4. We suggest that these differences are not the 
consequences of different functional roles for these gene products, but rather
reflect differences in the kinetics of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 gene expression. In strong
support of the idea that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping functions, Hoxa1/Hoxb1 
double mutant homozygotes exhibit a plethora of defects either not seen, or seen 
only in a very mild form, in mice mutant for only Hoxa1 or Hoxb1. Examples
include: the loss of both rhombomeres 4 and 5, the selective loss of the 2(nd)
branchial arch, and the loss of most, but not all, 2(nd) branchial arch-derived
tissues. We suggest that the early role for both of these genes in hindbrain
development is specification of rhombomere identities and that the aberrant
development of the hindbrain in Hoxa1/Hoxb1 double mutants proceeds through two
phases, the misspecification of rhombomeres within the hindbrain, followed
subsequently by size regulation of the misspecified hindbrain through induction
of apoptosis.

PMID: 10529420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):5134-42.

Trimeric association of Hox and TALE homeodomain proteins mediates Hoxb2
hindbrain enhancer activity.

Jacobs Y(1), Schnabel CA, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

Pbx/exd proteins modulate the DNA binding affinities and specificities of Hox
proteins and contribute to the execution of Hox-dependent developmental programs 
in arthropods and vertebrates. Pbx proteins also stably heterodimerize and bind
DNA with Meis and Pknox1-Prep1, additional members of the TALE (three-amino-acid 
loop extension) superclass of homeodomain proteins that function on common
genetic pathways with a subset of Hox proteins. In this study, we demonstrated
that Pbx and Meis bind DNA as heterotrimeric complexes with Hoxb1 on a
genetically defined Hoxb2 enhancer, r4, that mediates the cross-regulatory
transcriptional effects of Hoxb1 in vivo. The DNA binding specificity of the
heterotrimeric complex for r4 is mediated by a Pbx-Hox site in conjunction with a
distal Meis site, which we showed to be required for ternary complex formation
and Meis-enhanced transcription. Formation of heterotrimeric complexes in which
all three homeodomains bind their cognate DNA sites is topologically facilitated 
by the ability of Pbx and Meis to interact through their amino termini and bind
DNA without stringent half-site orientation and spacing requirements.
Furthermore, Meis site mutation in the Hoxb2 enhancer phenocopies Pbx-Hox site
mutation to abrogate enhancer-directed expression of a reporter transgene in the 
murine embryonic hindbrain, demonstrating that DNA binding by all three proteins 
is required for trimer function in vivo. Our data provide in vitro and in vivo
evidence for the combinatorial regulation of Hox and TALE protein functions that 
are mediated, in part, by their interdependent DNA binding activities as ternary 
complexes. As a consequence, Hoxb1 employs Pbx and Meis-related proteins, as a
pair of essential cofactors in a higher-order molecular complex, to mediate its
transcriptional effects on an endogenous Hox response element.

PMCID: PMC84356
PMID: 10373562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neuron. 1999 Apr;22(4):677-91.

Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 control dorsoventral patterns of neuronal development in the
rostral hindbrain.

Davenne M(1), Maconochie MK, Neun R, Pattyn A, Chambon P, Krumlauf R, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale/Université Louis Pasteur, Collège de France, Strasbourg.

Little is known about how the generation of specific neuronal types at
stereotypic positions within the hindbrain is linked to Hox gene-mediated
patterning. Here, we show that during neurogenesis, Hox paralog group 2 genes
control both anteroposterior (A-P) and dorsoventral (D-V) patterning. Hoxa2 and
Hoxb2 differentially regulate, in a rhombomere-specific manner, the expression of
several genes in broad D-V-restricted domains or narrower longitudinal columns of
neuronal progenitors, immature neurons, and differentiating neuronal subtypes.
Moreover, Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 can functionally synergize in controlling the
development of ventral neuronal subtypes in rhombomere 3 (r3). Thus, in addition 
to their roles in A-P patterning, Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 have distinct and restricted
functions along the D-V axis during neurogenesis, providing insights into how
neuronal fates are assigned at stereotypic positions within the hindbrain.

PMID: 10230789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Dyn. 1998 Dec;213(4):370-85.

Ectopic expression of hoxb2 after retinoic acid treatment or mRNA injection:
disruption of hindbrain and craniofacial morphogenesis in zebrafish embryos.

Yan YL(1), Jowett T, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene 97403-1254, USA.

To investigate pattern formation in the vertebrate hindbrain, we isolated a full 
length hoxb2 cDNA clone from zebrafish. In a gene phylogeny, zebrafish hoxb2
clusters with human HOXB2, and it maps on linkage group 3 along with several
other loci whose orthologues are syntenic with human HOXB2. In the hindbrain,
hoxb2 is expressed at high levels in rhombomere 3 (r3), lower levels in r4, still
lower in r5, and at undetectable levels in r6. In r7, r8, and the rostral spinal 
cord, hoxb2 is expressed at a lower level than in r5. Lateral cells appearing to 
emanate from r4 express both hoxb2 and dlx2, suggesting that they are neural
crest. Overexpression of hoxb2 by mRNA injections into early cleavage stage
embryos resulted in abnormal morphogenesis of the midbrain and rostral hindbrain,
abnormal patterning in r4, fusion of cartilage elements arising from pharyngeal
arches 1 and 2, and ectopic expression of krx20 and valentino (but not pax2,
rtk1, or hoxb1) in the rostral hindbrain, midbrain, and, surprisingly, the eye.
Treatments with retinoic acid produced a phenotype similar to that of ectopic
hoxb2 expression, including ectopic krx20 (but not valentino) expression in the
eye, and fusion of cartilages from pharyngeal arches 1 and 2. The results suggest
that hoxb2 plays an important role in the patterning of hindbrain and pharyngeal 
arches in the zebrafish.

PMID: 9853959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1998 Nov-Dec;20(6):591-9.

All-trans-retinoic acid upregulates the expression of COUP-TFI in early-somite
mouse embryos cultured in vitro.

Clotman F(1), Van Maele-Fabry G, Picard JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium.

Exposure of embryos to an excess of retinoic acid (RA) modifies the
spatio-temporal pattern of expression of developmental genes. RA regulates the
expression of target genes through binding of the retinoid nuclear receptors
(RARs and RXRs), as heterodimers, to regulatory cis-acting elements. COUP-TF
factors, which are able to dimerize with the RXRs and to compete with the
retinoid receptors for their DNA binding sites, are suspected to modulate the
retinoid signal transduction pathway. Therefore, COUP-TF factors may be involved 
in the regulation of the expression of developmental genes and/or in the
modifications induced by an excess of RA in the expression of these genes. The
aim of this work is to assess whether RA-induced modifications in the expression 
of Krox-20 and Hox genes correlate with alterations of the expression of COUP-TF 
genes. In addition to spatial modifications in the expression patterns of Krox-20
and Hox genes, we report here an upregulation of the expression level of COUP-TFI
after RA exposure. However, this abnormality did not spatially overlap with the
modifications observed in the expression of Krox-20 and Hox genes. These data
suggest an involvement of COUP-TFI in the generation of RA-induced abnormalities,
but do not support the hypothesis of an involvement of this factor in the
regulation of the expression of Hox or Krox-20 genes.

PMID: 9831119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 1;273(18):11092-9.

Regulatory interactions between the human HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 proteins and
the upstream sequence of the Otx2 gene in embryonal carcinoma cells.

Guazzi S(1), Pintonello ML, Viganò A, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, H. San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy. guazzis@dibit.hsr.it

Vertebrate Hox and Otx genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors 
thought to transduce positional information along the body axis in the segmental 
portion of the trunk and in the rostral brain, respectively. Moreover, Hox and
Otx2 genes show a complementary spatial regulation during embryogenesis. In this 
report, we show that a 1821-base pair (bp) upstream DNA fragment of the Otx2 gene
is positively regulated by co-transfection with expression vectors for the human 
HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 proteins in an embryonal carcinoma cell line (NT2/D1) and
that a shorter fragment of only 534 bp is able to drive this regulation. We also 
identified the HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 DNA-binding region on the 534-bp Otx2
genomic fragment using nuclear extracts from Hox-transfected COS cells and 12.5
days postcoitum mouse embryos or HOXB3 homeodomain-containing bacterial extracts.
HOXB1, HOXB3, and nuclear extracts from 12.5 days postcoitum mouse embryos bind
to a sequence containing two palindromic TAATTA sites, which bear four copies of 
the ATTA core sequence, a common feature of most HOM-C/HOX binding sites. HOXB2
protected an adjacent site containing a direct repeat of an ACTT sequence, quite 
divergent from the ATTA consensus. The region bound by the three homeoproteins is
strikingly conserved through evolution and necessary (at least for HOXB1 and
HOXB3) to mediate the up-regulation of the Otx2 transcription. Taken together,
our data support the hypothesis that anteriorly expressed Hox genes might play a 
role in the refinement of the Otx2 early expression boundaries in vivo.

PMID: 9556594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Biochem J. 1998 Feb 15;330 ( Pt 1):573-9.

Effects of nutrient deprivation and differentiation on the expression of
growth-arrest genes (gas and gadd) in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Fleming JV(1), Hay SM, Harries DN, Rees WD.

Author information: 
(1)The Rowett Research Institute, Greenburn Road, Bucksburn, Aberdeen AB21 9SB,
Scotland.

The growth-arrest genes (gas and gadd) are widely expressed during mammalian
embryogenesis and may be useful as markers of nutritional stress in the embryo.
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells have been used to characterize the effect of serum
or amino acid deficiency on growth-arrest gene expression in a differentiating
embryonic cell. The differentiation markers, homeobox B2 (HoxB2), collagen type
IV and laminin B2, were not induced by growth arrest. Treatment with all-trans
retinoic acid (RA) produced a dose-dependent increase in alkaline phosphatase
activity, which was unchanged in lysine-deficient medium and reduced in low-serum
medium. Low-serum medium also reduced HoxB2 expression. There was a transient
2-6-fold increase in mRNAs for C/EBP-beta, gadd153/CHOP-10 and gas5 genes 24 h
after transfer to amino-acid-deficient media. The mRNAs for the gas2 and gas6
genes began to rise slowly by 5-10-fold after a delay of approx. 24 h. The
transient increases did not occur in low-serum medium where there was a much
smaller and slower increase. Differentiation caused 1-2-fold increases in gas2,
gas3 and gas6 mRNA levels. The transient overexpression of gas5, gadd153/CHOP-10 
and CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein-beta, and the later expression of gas6 mRNAs
in response to amino acid deficiency, were not affected by differentiation. RA
treatment increased the expression of gas3 and caused gas2 to be transiently
overexpressed in amino-acid-deficient medium. Differentiation in serum-deficient 
medium did not significantly alter the levels of the growth-arrest gene mRNAs.
These results show that in F9 cells the growth-arrest genes are expressed
sequentially as a result of nutrient stress.

PMCID: PMC1219175
PMID: 9461558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Biol. 1997 Nov 15;191(2):259-69.

Heterogeneous expression of multiple putative patterning genes by single cells
from the chick hindbrain.

Kato K(1), O'Dowd DK, Fraser SE, Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125, USA.

The metameric organization of the vertebrate hindbrain into rhombomeres appears
to result from the patterned expression of several transcription factors and
putative signaling molecules. We have applied a refined single-cell reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction strategy to examine the molecular logic
proposed to pattern the hindbrain at the single-cell level. This technique allows
analysis of the concurrent expression of several genes within an individual cell 
at higher sensitivity than by in situ hybridization. Our results demonstrate that
cells in rhombomere (r) 4 and r5 are heterogeneous in their expression of Hoxa-3,
Hoxb-2, Sek-1, and Krox-20, suggesting that single cells are dynamically
regulating their rhombomere-specific gene-expression profiles. Furthermore, the
strong correlation between Sek-1 and Krox-20 expression at stage 12 was greatly
diminished by stage 16, suggesting that the proposed interdependence of these two
genes is present only at early stages of hindbrain development.

PMID: 9398439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genes Dev. 1997 Jul 15;11(14):1885-95.

Cross-regulation in the mouse HoxB complex: the expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere
4 is regulated by Hoxb1.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Studer M, Chan SK, Pöpperl H, Sham MH, Mann RS,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC),
National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), London, UK.

Correct regulation of the segment-restricted patterns of Hox gene expression is
essential for proper patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain. We have examined the
molecular basis of restricted expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere 4 (r4), by using 
deletion analysis in transgenic mice to identify an r4 enhancer from the mouse
gene. A bipartite Hox/Pbx binding motif is located within this enhancer, and in
vitro DNA binding experiments showed that the vertebrate labial-related protein
Hoxb1 will cooperatively bind to this site in a Pbx/Exd-dependent manner. The
Hoxb2 r4 enhancer can be transactivated in vivo by the ectopic expression of
Hoxb1, Hoxa1, and Drosophila labial in transgenic mice. In contrast, ectopic
Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 are unable to induce expression, indicating that in vivo this
enhancer preferentially responds to labial family members. Mutational analysis
demonstrated that the bipartite Hox/Pbx motif is required for r4 enhancer
activity and the responses to retinoids and ectopic Hox expression. Furthermore, 
three copies of the Hoxb2 motif are sufficient to mediate r4 expression in
transgenic mouse embryos and a labial pattern in Drosophila embryos. This
reporter expression in Drosophila embryos is dependent upon endogenous labial and
exd, suggesting that the ability of this Hox/Pbx site to interact with
labial-related proteins has been evolutionarily conserved. The endogenous Hoxb2
gene is no longer upregulated in r4 in Hoxb1 homozygous mutant embryos. On the
basis of these experiments we conclude that the r4-restricted domain of Hoxb2 in 
the hindbrain is the result of a direct cross-regulatory interaction by Hoxb1
involving vertebrate Pbx proteins as cofactors. This suggests that part of the
functional role of Hoxb1 in maintaining r4 identity may be mediated by the Hoxb2 
gene.

PMID: 9242495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Apr;41(2):365-74.

Postimplantation mouse embryos cultured in vitro. Assessment with whole-mount
immunostaining and in situ hybridization.

Van Maele-Fabry G(1), Clotman F, Gofflot F, Bosschaert J, Picard JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Catholic University of Louvain,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

The postimplantation embryos of rodents have been particularly convenient to
study in culture using the whole embryo culture (WEC) system developed by New.
Two serious limitations of the method will be illustrated in the present paper
and proposals will be made to improve the quality of the information. The first
limitation is that the developmental period amenable to culture has not been
significantly extended in recent years. In the present paper, we show that the
culture of mouse presomitic stages for 48 h leads to poorly reproducible results 
and frequent dysmorphogenic embryos. We also show that early somite stages
cultured for 54 h or less have a normal growth and differentiation. In contrast, 
the culture of these embryos for 72 h results in subtle abnormalities of the head
and the first branchial arch. The second limitation is that the gross morphology 
and histology are often not informative enough to distinguish between overall
toxicity and developmental toxicity. We suggest some improvements by the
association of WEC with two specific techniques: 1) whole-mount immunostaining of
sensory ganglia and nerves and 2) in situ hybridization on histological sections 
using molecular probes for some developmental genes. Embryos reaching about the
30 somite stage at the end of the culture were processed for whole-mount
immunostaining of sensory ganglia and nerves. We show that these structures are
very sensitive to the noxious effects of HgCl2 and valproate. Both developmental 
retardations and dysmorphogeneses of the cervical ganglia and nerves were
observed. Embryos were also exposed in vitro to low concentrations of
all-trans-retinoic acid (AT-RA) and processed for in situ hybridization with
radiolabeled anti-sense RNA probes for the Hoxb-1 and Hoxb-2 developmental genes.
Three-dimensional reconstructions of the expression domains were performed. The
data show that AT-RA induces ectopic expression domains of Hoxb-1. Our
experiments demonstrate that techniques such as immunostaining and in situ
hybridization can significantly expand the information obtained from whole
postimplantation embryo culture.

PMID: 9184346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3817-28.

Targeted disruption of the Hoxb-2 locus in mice interferes with expression of
Hoxb-1 and Hoxb-4.

Barrow JR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Mice with a disruption in the hoxb-2 locus were generated by gene targeting. 75% 
of the hoxb-2 mutant homozygotes died within 24 hours of birth. While a majority 
of these mice had severe sternal defects that compromised their ability to
breathe, some had relatively normal sternum morphology, suggesting that one or
more additional factor(s) contributed to neonatal lethality. At 3-3.5 weeks of
age, half of the remaining hoxb-2 homozygotes became weak and subsequently died. 
All of the mutants that survived to 3 weeks of age showed marked facial paralysis
similar to, but more severe than, that reported for hoxb-1 mutant homozygotes
(Goddard, J. M., Rossel, M., Manley, N. R. and Capecchi, M. R. (1996) Development
122, 3217-3228). As for the hoxb-1 mutations, the facial paralysis observed in
mice homozygous for the hoxb-2 mutation results from a failure to form the
somatic motor component of the VIIth (facial) nerve which controls the muscles of
facial expression. Features of this phenotype closely resemble the clinical signs
associated with Bell's Palsy and Moebius Syndrome in humans. The sternal defects 
seen in hoxb-2 mutant mice are similar to those previously reported for hoxb-4
mutant mice (Ramirez-Solis, R., Zheng, H., Whiting, J., Krumlauf, R. and Bradley.
A. (1993) Cell 73, 279-294). The above results suggest that the hoxb-2 mutant
phenotype may result in part from effects of the hoxb-2 mutation on the
expression of both hoxb-1 and hoxb-4. Consistent with this proposal, we found
that the hoxb-2 mutation disrupts the expression of hoxb-1 in cis. In addition,
the hoxb-2 mutation changes the expression of hoxb-4 and the hoxb-4 mutation, in 
turn, alters the pattern of hoxb-2 expression. Hoxb-2 and hoxb-4 appear to
function together to mediate proper closure of the ventral thoracic body wall.
Failure in this closure results in severe defects of the sternum.

PMID: 9012503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. EMBO J. 1996 Oct 1;15(19):5383-96.

Hoxb-2 transcriptional activation in rhombomeres 3 and 5 requires an
evolutionarily conserved cis-acting element in addition to the Krox-20 binding
site.

Vesque C(1), Maconochie M, Nonchev S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Kuroiwa A, Charnay P,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 1996 Dec 16;15(24):7188.

Segmentation is a key feature of the development of the vertebrate hindbrain
where it involves the generation of repetitive morphological units termed
rhombomeres (r). Hox genes are likely to play an essential role in the
specification of segmental identity and we have been investigating their
regulation. We show here that the mouse and chicken Hoxb-2 genes are dependent
for their expression in r3 and r5 on homologous enhancer elements and on binding 
to this enhancer of the r3/r5-specific transcriptional activator Krox-20. Among
the three Krox-20 binding sites of the mouse Hoxb-2 enhancer, only the
high-affinity site is absolutely necessary for activity. In contrast, we have
identified an additional cis-acting element, Box1, essential for r3/r5 enhancer
activity. It is conserved both in sequence and in position respective to the
high-affinity Krox-20 binding site within the mouse and chicken enhancers.
Furthermore, a short 44 bp sequence spanning the Box1 and Krox-20 sites can act
as an r3/r5 enhancer when oligomerized. Box1 may therefore constitute a
recognition sequence for another factor cooperating with Krox-20. Taken together,
these data demonstrate the conservation of Hox gene regulation and of Krox-20
function during vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC452281
PMID: 8895582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Immunol. 1996 Sep 15;157(6):2462-9.

HOXB cluster genes in activated natural killer lymphocytes: expression from
3'-->5' cluster side and proliferative function.

Quaranta MT(1), Petrini M, Tritarelli E, Samoggia P, Carè A, Bottero L, Testa U, 
Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Istituto Superiore, Sanità, Italy.

The expression of HOXB cluster genes (i.e., B1 through B9) was evaluated in
purified IL-2/IL-1 beta-activated NK lymphocytes from normal adult peripheral
blood by RNase protection and reverse transcription-PCR. In quiescent NK cells
these genes are essentially not expressed. After IL-2/IL-1 beta addition, we
observed a coordinate induction wave in the 3'-5' HOXB cluster direction, i.e.,
from B1 through B9. As notable exceptions, B8 is silent, while B9 RNA is detected
starting from 6 h through day 11. Furthermore, the 3' located B2/B3/B4 are
expressed earlier and at higher level than the 5' located B5/B6/B7/B8. In
IL-2/IL-1 beta-activated NK cells, treatment with antisense oligonucleotides
targeting B2 mRNA causes a significant inhibition of both cell proliferation and 
expression of activation markers (i.e., IL-2R alpha-chain and transferrin
receptor). These studies provide novel evidence of the role of HOX genes in adult
NK cell proliferation. Thus, 1) a coordinate activation of HOXB genes from the
3'-->5' cluster side apparently underlies IL-2/IL-1 beta-induced NK cell
activation. 2) Since NK cell activation and survival induced by IL-12 and c-kit
ligand, respectively, are not associated with cell proliferation of HOXB gene
expression, it is apparent that HOXB gene induction is specifically associated
with IL-2-induced NK cell proliferation. 3) Studies with antisense oligomer
targeting HOXB2 mRNA suggest an important role for 82 in NK cell proliferation,
possibly in part via the IL-2R.

PMID: 8805646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Sep 3;93(18):9339-45.

The conserved role of Krox-20 in directing Hox gene expression during vertebrate 
hindbrain segmentation.

Nonchev S(1), Maconochie M, Vesque C, Aparicio S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Manzanares 
M, Maruthainar K, Kuroiwa A, Brenner S, Charnay P, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medicial
Research, Mill Hill, London.

Transient segmentation in the hindbrain is a fundamental morphogenetic phenomenon
in the vertebrate embryo, and the restricted expression of subsets of Hox genes
in the developing rhombomeric units and their derivatives is linked with regional
specification. Here we show that patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain involves 
the direct upregulation of the chicken and pufferfish group 2 paralogous genes,
Hoxb-2 and Hoxa-2, in rhombomeres 3 and 5 (r3 and r5) by the zinc finger gene
Krox-20. We identified evolutionarily conserved r3/r5 enhancers that contain high
affinity Krox-20. binding sites capable of mediating transactivation by Krox-20. 
In addition to conservation of binding sites critical for Krox-20 activity in the
chicken Hoxa-2 and pufferfish Hoxb-2 genes, the r3/r5 enhancers are also
characterized by the presence of a number of identical motifs likely to be
involved in cooperative interactions with Krox-20 during the process of hindbrain
patterning in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC38429
PMID: 8790331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. FEBS Lett. 1996 Feb 12;380(1-2):103-7.

Relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression of the HOXB gene cluster
in small cell lung cancers.

Flagiello D(1), Poupon MF, Cillo C, Dutrillaux B, Malfoy B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, CNRS, Paris, France.

The expression pattern of the HOXB gene cluster in four xenografted small-cell
lung cancers was compared to the methylation of the DNA in the corresponding
genomic regions. In 90% (17/19) of the studied cases, the expressed genes were in
methylated regions whereas 70% (12/17) of the unexpressed genes were in
unmethylated regions. This specific behavior could correspond to a particular
gene expression regulation mechanism of the HOX gene network. Since some genes
(HOXB2, HOXB4, HOXB7) were always inactive when unmethylated, this unexpected
relationship might indicate their key function(s) in the HOX gene network.

PMID: 8603715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4544-50.

Transcription factor GATA-1 regulates human HOXB2 gene expression in erythroid
cells.

Vieille-Grosjean I(1), Huber P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, unité 217, Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, Centre 
d'Etudes Nucléaires, Grenoble, France.

The human HOXB2 gene is a member of the vertebrate Hox gene family that contains 
genes coding for specific developmental stage DNA-binding proteins. Remarkably,
within the hematopoietic compartment, genes of the HOXB complex are expressed
specifically in erythromegakaryocytic cell lines and, for some of them, in
hematopoietic progenitors. Here, we report the study of HOXB2 gene
transcriptional regulation in hematopoietic cells, an initial step in
understanding the lineage-specific expression of the whole HOXB complex in these 
cells. We have isolated the HOXB2 5'-flanking sequence and have characterized a
promoter fragment extending 323 base pairs upstream from the transcriptional
start site, which, in transfection experiments, was sufficient to direct the
tissue-specific expression of HOXB2 in the erythroid cell line K562. In this
fragment, we have identified a potential GATA-binding site that is essential to
the promoter activity as demonstrated by point mutation experiments. Gel shift
analysis revealed the formation of a specific complex in both erythroleukemic
lines K562 and HEL that could be prevented by the addition of a specific
antiserum raised against GATA-1 protein. These findings suggest a regulatory
hierarchy in which GATA-1 is upstream of the HOXB2 gene in erythroid cells.

PMID: 7876223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Blood. 1994 Dec 1;84(11):3637-47.

Key functional role and lineage-specific expression of selected HOXB genes in
purified hematopoietic progenitor differentiation.

Giampaolo A(1), Sterpetti P, Bulgarini D, Samoggia P, Pelosi E, Valtieri M,
Peschle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Although it is well established that homeobox (HOX) genes play a key role in
normal human embryogenesis, the expression and function of HOX genes in normal
hematopoiesis is largely unknown. We have investigated by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction the mRNA expression of HOXB cluster genes
(3' to 5' position in the cluster: from HOXB2 through B9) in 72% to 88% purified 
hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) from adult peripheral blood induced in
liquid suspension culture to gradual erythroid or granulopoietic (largely
eosinophilic) differentiation and maturation by differential growth factor (GF)
stimulus (ie, low-dose interleukin-3 [IL-3] and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF] and high-dose erythropoietin, or saturating
amounts of IL-3/GM-CSF, respectively). Only B3 is expressed in quiescent HPCs.
After GF treatment B3 expression is enhanced in the initial 24 hours and then
through differentiation and maturation in erythroid and granulopoietic cultures. 
HOXB4 and B5 are induced at slightly later times and expressed through maturation
in both lineages, whereas B6 is selectively induced in granulocytic
differentiation. B2 is transiently expressed at low level in the granulopoietic
pathway, whereas it is detected only in advanced stages of erythropoiesis: B7,
B8, and B9 are essentially not detected. Functional studies were performed with
antisense phosphorothioate oligomers to HOX mRNAs and included control analysis
of the targeted mRNA. The results are strictly coherent with the HOX mRNA
expression pattern: (1) anti-B3 oligomer (alpha-B3) treatment of purified HPCs
induces a striking blockade of both erythroid and granulomonocytic colony
formation (similarly, alpha-B3 treatment of K562 cell line causes a significant
dose-related inhibition of cell proliferation); (2) alpha-B6 selectively and
markedly inhibits granulomonocytic colony formation; (3) alpha-B4 and alpha-B5
cause a significant, less pronounced decrease of both colony types; (4) finally, 
alpha-B2 and alpha-B7, -B9 exert little and no effect, respectively. These
studies provide novel evidence on the coordinate expression of selected HOXB
cluster genes in erythropoiesis and granulopoiesis, particularly in the early
stages of differentiation: B3 apparently functions as a master gene in early
hematopoiesis, whereas B6 exerts a key selective function in the granulopoietic
pathway.

PMID: 7949119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 7;91(12):5335-9.

Inhibition of retinoic acid-induced activation of 3' human HOXB genes by
antisense oligonucleotides affects sequential activation of genes located
upstream in the four HOX clusters.

Faiella A(1), Zappavigna V, Mavilio F, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Most homeobox genes belonging to the Hox family are sequentially activated in
embryonal carcinoma cells upon treatment with retinoic acid. Genes located at the
3' end of each one of the four Hox clusters are activated first, whereas upstream
Hox genes are activated progressively later. This activation has been extensively
studied for human HOX genes in the NT2/D1 cell line and shown to take place at
the transcriptional level. To understand the molecular mechanisms of sequential
HOX gene activation in these cells, we tried to modulate the expression of 3' HOX
genes through the use of antisense oligonucleotides added to the culture medium. 
We chose the HOXB locus. A 5- to 15-fold reduction of the expression of HOXB1 and
HOXB3 was sufficient to produce a significant inhibition of the activation of the
upstream HOXB genes, as well as of their paralogs in the HOXA, HOXC, and HOXD
clusters. Conversely, no effect was detectable on downstream HOX genes. The
extent of this inhibition increased for progressively more-5' genes. The
stability of the corresponding mRNAs appeared to be unaffected, supporting the
idea that the observed effect might be mediated at the transcriptional level.
These data suggest a cascade model of progressive activation of Hox genes, with a
3'-to-5' polarity.

PMCID: PMC43989
PMID: 7911240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Blood. 1994 Mar 1;83(5):1420-7.

The 87-kD A gamma-globin enhancer-binding protein is a product of the
HOXB2(HOX2H) locus.

Sengupta PK(1), Lavelle DE, DeSimone J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago.

Developmental regulation of globin gene expression may be controlled by
developmental stage-specific nuclear proteins that influence interactions between
the locus control region and local regulatory sequences near individual globin
genes. We previously isolated an 87-kD nuclear protein from K562 cells that bound
to DNA sequences in the beta-globin locus control region, gamma-globin promoter, 
and A gamma-globin enhancer. The presence of this protein in fetal
globin-expressing cells and its absence in adult globin-expressing cells
suggested that it may be a developmental stage-specific factor. A lambda gt11
K562 cDNA clone encoding a portion of the HOXB2 (formerly HOX2H) homeobox gene
was isolated on the basis of the ability of its beta-galactosidase fusion protein
to bind to the same DNA sequences as the 87-kD K562 protein. Because no other
relationship had been established between the 87-kD K562 protein and the HOXB2
protein other than their ability to bind ot the same DNA sequences, we have
investigated whether the two proteins are related antigenically. Our data show
that antisera produced against the HOXB2-beta-gal fusion protein and a synthetic 
HOXB2 decapeptide react specifically with an 87-kD protein from K562 nuclear
extract, showing that the 87-kD K562 nuclear protein is a product of the HOXB2
locus, and is the first demonstration of cellular HOXB2 protein.

PMID: 7906964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cell. 1993 Jan 29;72(2):183-96.

The zinc finger gene Krox20 regulates HoxB2 (Hox2.8) during hindbrain
segmentation.

Sham MH(1), Vesque C, Nonchev S, Marshall H, Frain M, Gupta RD, Whiting J,
Wilkinson D, Charnay P, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London.

The zinc finger gene Krox20 and many Hox homeobox genes are expressed in
segment-restricted domains in the hindbrain. The restricted expression patterns
appear before morphological segmentation, suggesting that these transcription
factors may play an early role in the establishment and identity of rhombomeric
segments. In this paper, we show that the HoxB2 (Hox2.8) gene is normally
upregulated in rhombomeres (r) 3, 4, and 5, and we identify an enhancer region
upstream of the gene that imposes r3/r5 expression in transgenic mice. This
enhancer contains three Krox20-binding sites required in vitro for complex
formation with Krox20 protein and in vivo for rhombomere-restricted expression.
In transgenic mice, Krox20 expressed in ectopic domains can transactivate a
reporter construct containing the HoxB2 r3/r5 enhancer. These data demonstrate
that Krox20 is a part of the upstream transcriptional cascade that directly
regulates HoxB2 expression during hindbrain segmentation.

PMID: 8093858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


