
1. Asian J Androl. 2016 Apr 1. doi: 10.4103/1008-682X.175785. [Epub ahead of print]

HOXB13 and other high penetrant genes for prostate cancer.

Pilie PG, Giri VN, Cooney KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Medical School and The University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

PMID: 27034017  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 24. pii: S0304-3835(16)30196-3. doi:
10.1016/j.canlet.2016.03.036. [Epub ahead of print]

Tumor-associated macrophage-derived CXCL8 could induce ERa suppression via HOXB13
in endometrial cancer.

Tong H(1), Ke JQ(1), Jiang FZ(1), Wang XJ(1), Wang FY(1), Li YR(1), Lu W(2), Wan 
XP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai
First Maternity and Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: wanxiaoping@tongji.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: To elucidate the role of tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) in the loss
of ERa in endometrial cancer (EC) and the underlying mechanism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tissue microarrays and immunohistochemistry assays were
performed using endometrial cancer tissue along with coculture,
immunofluorescence, invasion assays and ChIP-qPCR using a human endometrial
cancer cell line.
RESULTS: Compared with normal tissue, an increased number of TAM was found in EC 
tissue (34.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.6 vs. 8.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.1, respectively; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), which may
downregulate ERa (27.4%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 for HEC-1A and 16.9%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 for Ishikawa)
and promote EC cell invasion (1.8-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 for HEC-1A and 2.0-fold,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 for Ishikawa). Furthermore, we found that TAM-derived CXCL8 mediated
the loss of ERa and cancer invasion via HOXB13. HOXB13 was highly expressed in
the ERa-negative subtype (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.204, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and low expression of ESR1 was
associated with a poor prognosis for EC patients (log-rank p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSION: TAM-secreted CXCL8 downregulated the ERa expression of EC cells via
HOXB13, which may be associated with cancer invasion, metastasis and poor
prognosis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 27018308  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 5. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7926. [Epub ahead of print]

Systematic meta-analyses of gene-specific genetic association studies in prostate
cancer.

Hao Q(1,)(2,)(3), Wei D(2), Zhang Y(2), Chen X(2), Yang F(3), Yang Z(3), Zhu
X(3), Wang J(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital and Beijing Institute of Geriatrics,
Ministry of Health, Beijing, 100730, China.

In the past twenty-five years, over 700 case-control association studies on the
risk of prostate cancer have been published worldwide, but their results were
largely inconsistent. To facilitate following and explaining these findings, we
performed a systematic meta-analysis using allelic contrasts for gene-specific
SNVs from at least three independent population-based case-control studies, which
were published in the field of prostate cancer between August 1, 1990 and August 
1, 2015. Across 66 meta-analyses, a total of 20 genetic variants involving
584,100 subjects in 19 different genes (KLK3, IGFBP3, ESR1, SOD2, CAT, CYP1B1,
VDR, RFX6, HNF1B, SRD5A2, FGFR4, LEP, HOXB13, FAS, FOXP4, SLC22A3, LMTK2, EHBP1
and MSMB) exhibited significant association with prostate cancer. The average
summary OR was 1.33 (ranging from: 1.016-3.788) for risk alleles and 0.838
(ranging from: 0.757-0.896) for protective alleles. Of these positive variants,
FOXP4 rs1983891, LMTK2 rs6465657 and RFX6 rs339331 had not been previously
meta-analyzed. Further analyses with sufficient power design and investigations
of the potential biological roles of these genetic variants in prostate cancer
should be conducted.

PMID: 26967244  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Korean Neurosurg Soc. 2016 Mar;59(2):83-90. doi: 10.3340/jkns.2016.59.2.83.
Epub 2016 Feb 29.

The Similarities and Differences between Intracranial and Spinal Ependymomas : A 
Review from a Genetic Research Perspective.

Lee CH(1), Chung CK(2), Ohn JH(3), Kim CH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Ilsan Paik Hospital, Inje University College of
Medicine, Goyang, Korea. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea.; Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.; Neuroscience Research Institute, Seoul
National University Medical Research Center, Seoul, Korea.; Clinical Research
Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.; Department of Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, Seoul National University College of Natural Sciences,
Seoul, Korea. (3)Bioinformatics, Samsung Gene Institute, Samsung Medical Center, 
Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, 
Seoul, Korea.; Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.; Neuroscience Research Institute, Seoul National
University Medical Research Center, Seoul, Korea.; Clinical Research Institute,
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Ependymomas occur in both the brain and spine. The prognosis of these tumors
sometimes differs for different locations. The genetic landscape of ependymoma is
very heterogeneous despite the similarity of histopathologic findings. In this
review, we describe the genetic differences between spinal ependymomas and their 
intracranial counterparts to better understand their prognosis. From the
literature review, many studies have reported that spinal cord ependymoma might
be associated with NF2 mutation, NEFL overexpression, Merlin loss, and 9q gain.
In myxopapillary ependymoma, NEFL and HOXB13 overexpression were reported to be
associated. Prior studies have identified HIC-1 methylation, 4.1B deletion, and
4.1R loss as common features in intracranial ependymoma. Supratentorial
ependymoma is usually characterized by NOTCH-1 mutation and p75 expression. TNC
mutation, no hypermethylation of RASSF1A, and GFAP/NeuN expression may be
diagnostic clues of posterior fossa ependymoma. Although MEN1, TP53, and PTEN
mutations are rarely reported in ependymoma, they may be related to a poor
prognosis, such as recurrence or metastasis. Spinal ependymoma has been found to 
be quite different from intracranial ependymoma in genetic studies, and the
favorable prognosis in spinal ependymoma may be the result of the genetic
differences. A more detailed understanding of these various genetic aberrations
may enable the identification of more specific prognostic markers as well as the 
development of customized targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC4783489
PMID: 26962412  [PubMed]


5. Nat Genet. 2016 Apr;48(4):387-97. doi: 10.1038/ng.3523. Epub 2016 Mar 7.

Gene regulatory mechanisms underpinning prostate cancer susceptibility.

Whitington T(1), Gao P(2,)(3), Song W(2,)(3), Ross-Adams H(4), Lamb AD(4,)(5),
Yang Y(2,)(3), Svezia I(2,)(3), Klevebring D(1), Mills IG(6,)(7,)(8), Karlsson
R(1), Halim S(4,)(9), Dunning MJ(4), Egevad L(10,)(11), Warren AY(12), Neal
DE(13), Grönberg H(1), Lindberg J(1), Wei GH(2,)(3), Wiklund F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (3)Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(4)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. (5)Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. (6)Prostate 
Cancer Research Group, Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway, Nordic EMBL
Partnership, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (8)Prostate Cancer UK/Movember Centre of
Excellence for Prostate Cancer Research, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell
Biology, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK. (9)Cancer Research UK Beatson
Institute, Glasgow, UK. (10)Department of Pathology and Cytology, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Department of Oncology-Pathology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (12)Department of Pathology,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. (13)Nuffield Department of Surgical
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Molecular characterization of genome-wide association study (GWAS) loci can
uncover key genes and biological mechanisms underpinning complex traits and
diseases. Here we present deep, high-throughput characterization of gene
regulatory mechanisms underlying prostate cancer risk loci. Our methodology
integrates data from 295 prostate cancer chromatin immunoprecipitation and
sequencing experiments with genotype and gene expression data from 602 prostate
tumor samples. The analysis identifies new gene regulatory mechanisms affected by
risk locus SNPs, including widespread disruption of ternary androgen receptor
(AR)-FOXA1 and AR-HOXB13 complexes and competitive binding mechanisms. We
identify 57 expression quantitative trait loci at 35 risk loci, which we validate
through analysis of allele-specific expression. We further validate predicted
regulatory SNPs and target genes in prostate cancer cell line models. Finally,
our integrated analysis can be accessed through an interactive visualization
tool. This analysis elucidates how genome sequence variation affects disease
predisposition via gene regulatory mechanisms and identifies relevant genes for
downstream biomarker and drug development.

PMID: 26950096  [PubMed - in process]


6. Virchows Arch. 2016 Mar 1. [Epub ahead of print]

HOXB13 protein expression in metastatic lesions is a promising marker for
prostate origin.

Varinot J(1), Furudoï A(2), Drouin S(3), Phe V(3), Penna RR(4), Roupret M(3),
Bitker MO(3), Cussenot O(3), Compérat E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, 47-83, boulevard de
l'Hopital, 75013, Paris, France. justinevarinot@hotmail.com. (2)Department of
Pathology, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hopital, 75013,
Paris, France. (3)Department of Urology, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, 47-83,
boulevard de l'Hopital, 75013, Paris, France. (4)Department of Radiology, Hopital
Pitie-Salpetriere, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hopital, 75013, Paris, France.

The HOXB13 gene is a member of the homeobox gene family, and prostate development
depends on HOXB13 function. HOXB13 is a very sensitive and specific marker of
prostate tissue and prostate cancer. When the origin of a tumor in a resection
specimen or in biopsy material is unclear, it allows determining the prostate as 
the primary. Our aim was to determine whether HOXB13 has similar sensitivity for 
determining prostate origin of lymph node and bone metastases. We retrieved cases
of lymph node and bone metastases of histologically confirmed prostate cancer
(PCa) and selected lymph node metastases of urothelial carcinoma (UCa). A panel
of antibodies against HOXB13, PSA, ERG, Androgen receptors, p504S, p63, GATA-3,
CK7, and Uroplakin 2 and 3 was tested on these tissue samples. Two pathologists
analysed and scored staining as either 0 (negative) or + (positive). The selected
cohort consisted of 74 cases of lymph node and 15 of bone metastases of PCa and
15 of lymph node metastases of UCa. HOXB13 was expressed in 93 % of lymph node
and in 33 % of bone metastases of PCa. All lymph node metastases of UCa were
negative. Sensitivity of HOXB13 as a marker for prostate origin in lymph node
metastases was 93 % and for bone metastases 33 %. Inter-observer variability in
assessment of staining was good, as only two (1.9 %) of lymph node metastasis of 
PCa were discordant. HOXB13 is a useful marker for prostate origin when doubt
exists regarding the site of the primary of a metastatic lesion. On bone
metastases, HOXB13 immunohistochemistry performed less well, probably due to the 
use of tissue decalcification.

PMID: 26931741  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan 15. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4563. [Epub ahead of print]

HOXB13-mediated suppression of p21WAF1/CIP1 regulates JNK/c-Jun signaling in
prostate cancer cells.

Kim YR(1), Kang TW(2), To PK(1), Xuan Nguyen NT(1), Cho YS(1), Jung C(1), Kim
MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju
501-746, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Urology, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Statistics, 
College of Natural Sciences, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757,
Republic of Korea.

Many prostate cancer (PCa) patients die of recurrent disease due to the emergence
of hormone-independent cancer cells of which the mechanism is not fully
understood. Our previous studies demonstrated that most castration- resistant
prostate cancers (CRPC) overexpress the HOXB13 transcription factor to confer
positive growth signals. Since HOXB13 also suppresses p21WAF1/CIP1 (p21)
expression, we studied the correlation between HOXB13 and p21 in selected samples
of PCa. While there was no statistically significant correlation between
expression of HOXB13 and p21, HOXB13-deficient tumors had three times higher odds
for expressing p21 than HOXB13-positive tumors. Moreover, CRPC showed more
negative correlation than hormone-dependent PCa (HDPC). Further in vitro
proliferation assay demonstrated that androgen did not affect the
growth-suppressive function of p21 in androgen-dependent PCa cells, suggesting
that p21 seems to override the growth-promoting function of androgen and
suppression of p21 expression by HOXB13 is an important step in PCa cell survival
under no androgen influence. HOXB13 also inhibited AP-1 signals via suppressed
expression of JNK/c-Jun. While HOXB13 suppressed p21 expression via regulation of
JNK signals, alteration of p21 expression also affected c-Jun and AP-1 activity. 
Taken together, overexpression of HOXB13 in CRPC is an important step in avoiding
the growth-suppressive effect of p21 in a harsh condition such as an
androgen-deprived environment.

PMID: 26781690  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. BJU Int. 2016 Jan 18. doi: 10.1111/bju.13416. [Epub ahead of print]

Prevalence of the HOXB13 G84E mutation in Danish men treated by radical
prostatectomy and correlations with prostate cancer risk and aggressiveness.

Storebjerg TM(1,)(2,)(3), Høyer S(2), Kirkegaard P(4), Bro F(4); Lu Camp, Orntoft
TF(3), Borre M(1), Sørensen KD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Pathology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Research Unit for General Practice & Research Centre for Cancer Diagnosis in
Primary Care, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of the HOXB13 G84E mutation (rs138213197) 
in Danish men with/without prostate cancer (PC) and to investigate possible
correlations between HOXB13 mutation status and clinicopathological parameters
associated with tumor aggressiveness.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Case-control study including 995 men with PC (cases) who
underwent radical prostatectomy (RP) between 1997 and 2011 at the Department of
Urology, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark. As controls, we used 1622 healthy
male controls with normal prostate specific antigen (PSA) level.
RESULTS: The HOXB13 G84E mutation was identified in 0.49% of controls and in
2.51% of PC cases. The mutation was associated with a 5.12-fold increased
relative risk of PC (95% confidence interval [CI]=2.26-13.38; p=13×10-6).
Furthermore, carriers of the risk allele were significantly more likely to have a
higher PSA level at diagnosis (mean 19.9 vs. 13.6 ng/ml; p=0.032), pathological
Gleason score =7 (83.3% vs. 60.9%; p =0.032), and positive surgical margins
(56.0% vs. 28.5%; p=0.006) than non-carriers. Risk allele carriers were also more
likely to have aggressive disease (54.2% vs. 28.6%; p=0.011), as defined by
preoperative PSA =20 ng/ml, pathological Gleason score = (4+3) and/or presence of
regional/distant disease. At 70 months mean follow-up, we found no significant
association between HOXB13 mutation status and biochemical recurrence in this RP 
cohort.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to investigate the HOXB13 G84E mutation in
Danish males. The mutation was detected in 0.49% of controls and in 2.51% of
cases, and was associated with 5.12-fold increased relative risk of being
diagnosed with PC. In our RP cohort, HOXB13 mutation carriers were more likely to
develop aggressive PC. Further studies are needed to assess the potential of
HOXB13 for future targeted screening approaches. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26779768  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Breast Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 4;18(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0660-6.

Assessment of the prognostic and predictive utility of the Breast Cancer Index
(BCI): an NCIC CTG MA.14 study.

Sgroi DC(1,)(2,)(3), Chapman JA(4), Badovinac-Crnjevic T(5), Zarella
E(6,)(7,)(8), Binns S(9,)(10,)(11), Zhang Y(12), Schnabel CA(13), Erlander
MG(14), Pritchard KI(15), Han L(16), Shepherd LE(17), Goss PE(18), Pollak M(19).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Unit, Pathology Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, MGH East, Molecular Pathology, Research, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, 
MA, 02129, USA. dsgroi@partners.org. (2)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA. dsgroi@partners.org. (3)Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. dsgroi@partners.org. (4)NCIC 
Clinical Trials Group, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
jachapma@aol.com. (5)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, MA, USA. tbadovin@gmail.com. (6)Molecular Pathology Unit, Pathology 
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, MGH East, Molecular Pathology,
Research, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, MA, 02129, USA. e.richardson9@gmail.com. 
(7)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA,
USA. e.richardson9@gmail.com. (8)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. e.richardson9@gmail.com. (9)Molecular Pathology Unit, Pathology 
Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, MGH East, Molecular Pathology,
Research, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, MA, 02129, USA. shemeicabinns@gmail.com. 
(10)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, 
USA. shemeicabinns@gmail.com. (11)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. shemeicabinns@gmail.com. (12)bioTheranostics, Inc., San 
Diego, CA, USA. yi.zhang@biotheranostics.com. (13)bioTheranostics, Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA. cathy.schnabel@biotheranostics.com. (14)Trovagene Inc., San
Diego, CA, USA. merlander@trovagene.com. (15)Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre and 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. kathy.pritchard@sunnybrook.ca.
(16)NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
lhan@ctg.queensu.ca. (17)NCIC Clinical Trials Group, Queen's University,
Kingston, ON, Canada. lshepherd@ctg.queensu.ca. (18)Center for Cancer Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA. pgoss@partners.org.
(19)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada. pollak-lab.oncology@mcgill.ca.

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers that can be used to accurately assess the residual risk of
disease recurrence in women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer are
clinically valuable. We evaluated the prognostic value of the Breast Cancer Index
(BCI), a continuous risk index based on a combination of HOXB13:IL17BR and
molecular grade index, in women with early breast cancer treated with either
tamoxifen alone or tamoxifen plus octreotide in the NCIC MA.14 phase III clinical
trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT00002864; registered 1 November 1999).
METHODS: Gene expression analysis of BCI by real-time polymerase chain reaction
was performed blinded to outcome on RNA extracted from archived formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tumor samples of 299 patients with both lymph node-negative
(LN-) and lymph node-positive (LN+) disease enrolled in the MA.14 trial. Our
primary objective was to determine the prognostic performance of BCI based on
relapse-free survival (RFS). MA.14 patients experienced similar RFS on both
treatment arms. Association of gene expression data with RFS was evaluated in
univariate analysis with a stratified log-rank test statistic, depicted with a
Kaplan-Meier plot and an adjusted Cox survivor plot. In the multivariate
assessment, we used stratified Cox regression. The prognostic performance of an
emerging, optimized linear BCI model was also assessed in a post hoc analysis.
RESULTS: Of 299 samples, 292 were assessed successfully for BCI for 146 patients 
accrued in each MA.14 treatment arm. BCI risk groups had a significant univariate
association with RFS (stratified log-rank p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005, unstratified log-rank
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). Adjusted 10-year RFS in BCI low-, intermediate-, and high-risk groups
was 87.5 %, 83.9 %, and 74.7 %, respectively. BCI had a significant prognostic
effect [hazard ratio (HR) 2.34, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.33-4.11;
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004], although not a predictive effect, on RFS in stratified multivariate
analysis, adjusted for pathological tumor stage (HR 2.22, 95 % CI 1.22-4.07;
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). In the post hoc multivariate analysis, higher linear BCI was
associated with shorter RFS (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: BCI had a strong prognostic effect on RFS in patients with
early-stage breast cancer treated with tamoxifen alone or with tamoxifen and
octreotide. BCI was prognostic in both LN- and LN+ patients. This retrospective
study is an independent validation of the prognostic performance of BCI in a
prospective trial.

PMCID: PMC4700696
PMID: 26728744  [PubMed - in process]


10. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2016 Jan 1;8:40-5.

Hoxb13, a potential prognostic biomarker for prostate cancer.

Ouhtit A(1), Al-Kindi MN(2), Kumar PR(3), Gupta I(4), Shanmuganathan S(3), Tamimi
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, College of Arts &
Sciences, Qatar University, Qatar, aet74@cornell.edu. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, 
POBox35, PC 123, Al Khoud, Sultanate of Oman. (3)Department of Genetics, Sultan
Qaboos University, PO Box 35, PC 123, Al Khoud, Sultanate of Oman. (4)Department 
of Genetics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University,
PO Box 35, PC 123, Al Khoud, Sultanate of Oman.

HOXB13, a member of the homeobox proteins family, is a key regulator of the
epithelial differentiation in the prostate gland. HOXB13 is overexpressed during 
malignant progression of the prostatic tissue and suspected to contribute in the 
pathogenesis of the prostate gland. In androgen deprived conditions, HOXB13 is
thought to act through inhibition of the tumour suppressor protein p21. Since
HOXB13 has a multifaceted role in ventral prostate development, its critical
partners in the cascade need to be elucidated for a further understanding of its 
role in prostate malignancy. In this report, we review the functions attributed
to HOXB13, by highlighting the most recent findings supporting the hypothesis
that HOXB13 might serve as a novel biomarker for the prognosis of prostate
cancer.

PMID: 26709644  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jun 1;138(11):2579-91. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29949. Epub 2016 Feb
5.

Screening for familial and hereditary prostate cancer.

Lynch HT(1), Kosoko-Lasaki O(2), Leslie SW(3), Rendell M(4), Shaw T(1), Snyder
C(1), D'Amico AV(5), Buxbaum S(6), Isaacs WB(7), Loeb S(8), Moul JW(9), Powell
I(10).

Author information: 
(1)Hereditary Cancer Center and Department of Preventive Medicine, Creighton
University, 2500 California Plaza, Omaha, NE. (2)Departments of Surgery,
Preventive Medicine & Public Health, Creighton University, 2500 California Plaza,
Omaha, NE. (3)Department of Surgery (Urology), Creighton University Medical
Center, 601 North 30th Street, Suite 3700, Omaha, NE. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine, Creighton University Medical Center, 601 North 30th Street, Suite 3700,
Omaha, NE. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. (6)Jackson
State University School of Health Sciences, 350 W. Woodrow Wilson Drive, Jackson,
MS. (7)Departments of Urology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Marburg 115, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 600 N. Wolfe St, Baltimore, MD.
(8)Department of Urology and Population Health, New York University, 550 1st Ave 
VZ30 (#612), New York, NY. (9)Duke Prostate Center, Division of Urologic Surgery,
DUMC 3707-Room 1562 Duke South, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(10)Department of Urology, Wayne State University, Karmanos Cancer Institute,
University Health Center 7-C, Detroit, MI.

Prostate cancer (PC) has the highest degree of genetic transmission of any form
of malignancy. In some families, the hereditary pattern is so strong as to mimic 
an autosomal dominance trait. We reviewed the known predisposing genetic markers 
to assess possible strategies for screening of families at risk. We carried out a
systematic literature search using the Pubmed service of the National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and several gene libraries, including the NCBI
SNP Library, the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man® Catalog of Human Genes and 
Genetic Disorders (OMIM) and SNPedia to obtain known gene loci, SNPs and
satellite markers associated with PC. We further cross referenced information on 
identified loci comparing data from different articles and gene reference sites. 
Whenever possible, we recorded the odds ratio (OR) for the allele associated with
PC. In multiple different linkage studies, many independent PC associated loci
have been identified on separate chromosomes. Genome-wide association studies
have added many more markers to the set derived from linkage investigations. A
subset of the alleles is associated with early onset and aggressive cancer. Due
to the great heterogeneity, the OR for any one allele predicting future
development of this malignancy is low. The strongest predictors are the BRCA2
mutations, and the highly penetrant G84E mutation in HOXB13. The presence of
multiple risk alleles is more highly predictive than a single allele. Technical
limitations on screening large panels of alleles are being overcome. It is
appropriate to begin supplementing prostate specific antigen testing with
alleles, such as BRCA2 and HOXB13, disclosed by targeted genomic analysis in
families with an unfavorable family cancer history. Future population studies of 
PC should include genomic sequencing protocols, particularly in families with a
history of PC and other malignancies.

© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 26638190  [PubMed - in process]


12. APMIS. 2016 Mar;124(3):188-93. doi: 10.1111/apm.12483. Epub 2015 Nov 20.

HOXB13 as an immunohistochemical marker of prostatic origin in metastatic tumors.

Barresi V(1), Ieni A(1), Cardia R(1), Licata L(1), Vitarelli E(1), Reggiani
Bonetti L(2), Tuccari G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology "G. Barresi", University of Messina, Messina,
Italy. (2)Department of Forensic Medicine, Laboratory and Pathologic Anatomy,
Polyclinic of Modena, Modena, Italy.

HOBX13 is a transcription factor expressed in the normal prostatic glands and
overexpressed in prostate cancer. Recent studies suggested that HOXB13 represents
a prostate-specific marker in the differential diagnosis between prostatic and
urothelial carcinoma. The aim of this study was to analyze and compare the
diagnostic value of HOXB13 and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) immunoexpression
for the detection of prostatic origin in metastatic tumours. PSA and HOXB13
immunohistochemical expression was assessed in 50 metastatic tumors, including 15
metastases from prostatic adenocarcinoma, 11 from lung adenocarcinoma, 12 from
urinary bladder urothelial carcinoma, 11 from colorectal carcinoma, and in 1 from
hepatocellular carcinoma. Strong staining for HOXB13 was observed in >75% of
neoplastic cells in 15/15 (100%) metastases from prostate cancer. Weak staining
in <25% of cells was found in 2/12 (17%) metastases from urothelial carcinoma.
PSA immunostaining was detected only in 8 (53%) cases of prostatic origin. The
sensitivity and specificity for metastatic prostate cancer were 100% and 94% for 
HOXB13 and 53% and 100% for PSA. Due to its high sensitivity and specificity,
HOXB13 may be included in the pool of prostate-specific markers in metastases
showing absent or weak staining for PSA before excluding prostatic derivation.

© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26590121  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 15;76(2):283-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3280. Epub
2015 Nov 10.

Combined MYC Activation and Pten Loss Are Sufficient to Create Genomic
Instability and Lethal Metastatic Prostate Cancer.

Hubbard GK(1), Mutton LN(2), Khalili M(2), McMullin RP(2), Hicks JL(3),
Bianchi-Frias D(4), Horn LA(2), Kulac I(3), Moubarek MS(2), Nelson PS(4),
Yegnasubramanian S(5), De Marzo AM(6), Bieberich CJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore County,
Baltimore, Maryland. Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Department of Pathology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (4)Divisions of
Human Biology and Clinical Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington. (5)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (6)Department of Pathology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. The Brady Urological Research Institute, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (7)Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland.
bieberic@umbc.edu.

Genetic instability, a hallmark feature of human cancers including prostatic
adenocarcinomas, is considered a driver of metastasis. Somatic copy number
alterations (CNA) are found in most aggressive primary human prostate cancers,
and the overall number of such changes is increased in metastases. Chromosome
10q23 deletions, encompassing PTEN, and amplification of 8q24, harboring MYC, are
frequently observed, and the presence of both together portends a high risk of
prostate cancer-specific mortality. In extant genetically engineered mouse
prostate cancer models (GEMM), isolated MYC overexpression or targeted Pten loss 
can each produce early prostate adenocarcinomas, but are not sufficient to induce
genetic instability or metastases with high penetrance. Although a previous study
showed that combining Pten loss with focal MYC overexpression in a small fraction
of prostatic epithelial cells exhibits cooperativity in GEMMs, additional
targeted Tp53 disruption was required for formation of metastases. We
hypothesized that driving combined MYC overexpression and Pten loss using
recently characterized Hoxb13 transcriptional control elements that are active in
prostate luminal epithelial cells would induce the development of genomic
instability and aggressive disease with metastatic potential. Neoplastic lesions 
that developed with either MYC activation alone (Hoxb13-MYC) or Pten loss alone
(Hoxb13-Cre|Pten(Fl/Fl)) failed to progress beyond prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia and did not harbor genomic CNAs. By contrast, mice with both
alterations (Hoxb13-MYC|Hoxb13-Cre|Pten(Fl/Fl), hereafter, BMPC mice) developed
lethal adenocarcinoma with distant metastases and widespread genome CNAs that
were independent of forced disruption of Tp53 and telomere shortening. BMPC
cancers lacked neuroendocrine or sarcomatoid differentiation, features uncommon
in human disease but common in other models of prostate cancer that metastasize. 
These data show that combined MYC activation and Pten loss driven by the Hoxb13
regulatory locus synergize to induce genomic instability and aggressive prostate 
cancer that phenocopies the human disease at the histologic and genomic levels.
Cancer Res; 76(2); 283-92. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26554830  [PubMed - in process]


14. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):42312-21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5994.

Germline HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation and cancer susceptibility: a pooled analysis 
of 25 epidemiological studies with 145,257 participates.

Cai Q(1), Wang X(1), Li X(2), Gong R(3), Guo X(4), Tang Y(1), Yang K(1), Niu
Y(1), Zhao Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tianjin Institute of Urology, The Second Hospital of
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300211, China. (2)Department of
Radiotherapy, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300211,
China. (3)Pharmaceutical Department, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, 300211, China. (4)Library of Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China. (5)Tianjin Institute of
Infectious Diseases, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 
300211, China.

Numerous studies have investigated association between the germline HOXB13
p.Gly84Glu mutation and cancer risk. However, the results were inconsistent.
Herein, we performed this meta-analysis to get a precise conclusion of the
associations. A comprehensive literature search was conducted through Medline
(mainly Pubmed), Embase, Cochrane Library databases. Crude odds ratios (ORs) and 
their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated by STATA 12.1 software to
evaluate the association of HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation and cancer susceptibility.
Then, 25 studies including 51,390 cases and 93,867 controls were included, and
there was significant association between HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation and overall 
cancer risk (OR = 2.872, 95% CI = 2.121-3.888, P < 0.001), particularly in
prostate cancer (OR = 3.248, 95% CI = 2.313-4.560, P < 0.001), while no
association was found in breast (OR = 1.424, 95% CI = 0.776-2.613, P = 0.253) and
colorectal cancers (OR = 2.070, 95% CI = 0.485-8.841, P = 0.326). When we
stratified analysis by ethnicity, significant association was found in Caucasians
(OR = 2.673, 95%CI = 1.920-3.720, P < 0.001). Further well-designed with large
samples and other various cancers should be performed to validate our results.

PMCID: PMC4747227
PMID: 26517352  [PubMed - in process]


15. Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1346-51. doi: 10.1038/ng.3419. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

The androgen receptor cistrome is extensively reprogrammed in human prostate
tumorigenesis.

Pomerantz MM(1), Li F(2,)(3), Takeda DY(1,)(4), Lenci R(1), Chonkar A(1), Chabot 
M(1), Cejas P(1,)(2), Vazquez F(4), Cook J(1), Shivdasani RA(1,)(2), Bowden M(5),
Lis R(5), Hahn WC(1,)(4), Kantoff PW(1), Brown M(1,)(2), Loda M(1,)(4,)(5), Long 
HW(1,)(2), Freedman ML(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Master transcription factors interact with DNA to establish cell type identity
and to regulate gene expression in mammalian cells. The genome-wide map of these 
transcription factor binding sites has been termed the cistrome. Here we show
that the androgen receptor (AR) cistrome undergoes extensive reprogramming during
prostate epithelial transformation in man. Using human prostate tissue, we
observed a core set of AR binding sites that are consistently reprogrammed in
tumors. FOXA1 and HOXB13 colocalized at the reprogrammed AR binding sites in
human tumor tissue. Introduction of FOXA1 and HOXB13 into an immortalized
prostate cell line reprogrammed the AR cistrome to resemble that of a prostate
tumor, functionally linking these specific factors to AR cistrome reprogramming. 
These findings offer mechanistic insights into a key set of events that drive
normal prostate epithelium toward transformation and establish the centrality of 
epigenetic reprogramming in human prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4707683 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26457646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nat Med. 2015 Nov;21(11):1357-63. doi: 10.1038/nm.3975. Epub 2015 Sep 23.

CAUSEL: an epigenome- and genome-editing pipeline for establishing function of
noncoding GWAS variants.

Spisák S(1,)(2), Lawrenson K(3), Fu Y(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Csabai I(8), Cottman
RT(4,)(5,)(6,)(9), Seo JH(1,)(2), Haiman C(3,)(10), Han Y(3), Lenci R(1,)(2), Li 
Q(1,)(2,)(11), Tisza V(1,)(12), Szállási Z(12,)(13,)(14), Herbert ZT(15), Chabot 
M(1), Pomerantz M(1), Solymosi N(16); GAME-ON/ELLIPSE Consortium, Gayther
SA(3,)(17), Joung JK(4,)(5,)(6,)(7,)(9), Freedman ML(1,)(2,)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (2)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department of Preventive
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California, USA. (4)Molecular Pathology Unit, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Center for Cancer Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA. (6)Center for
Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (8)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, 
Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary. (9)Program in Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(10)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California, USA. (11)Medical College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. 
(12)Computational Health Informatics Program (CHIP), Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (13)Department of Systems Biology, Technical
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. (14)Second Department of Pathology,
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. (15)Molecular Biology Core Facilities
at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (16)Department of
Animal Hygiene, Szent István University, Budapest, Hungary. (17)The Eli and
Edythe L. Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

The vast majority of disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
mapped by genome-wide association studies (GWASs) are located in the
non-protein-coding genome, but establishing the functional and mechanistic roles 
of these sequence variants has proven challenging. Here we describe a general
pipeline in which candidate functional SNPs are first evaluated by fine mapping, 
epigenomic profiling, and epigenome editing, and then interrogated for causal
function by using genome editing to create isogenic cell lines followed by
phenotypic characterization. To validate this approach, we analyzed the 6q22.1
prostate cancer risk locus and identified rs339331 as the top-scoring SNP.
Epigenome editing confirmed that the rs339331 region possessed regulatory
potential. By using transcription activator-like effector nuclease
(TALEN)-mediated genome editing, we created a panel of isogenic 22Rv1 prostate
cancer cell lines representing all three genotypes (TT, TC, CC) at rs339331.
Introduction of the 'T' risk allele increased transcription of the regulatory
factor 6 (RFX6) gene, increased homeobox B13 (HOXB13) binding at the rs339331
region, and increased deposition of the enhancer-associated H3K4me2 histone mark 
at the rs339331 region compared to lines homozygous for the 'C' protective
allele. The cell lines also differed in cellular morphology and adhesion, and
pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes suggested an influence of
androgens. In summary, we have developed and validated a widely accessible
approach that can be used to establish functional causality for noncoding
sequence variants identified by GWASs.

PMCID: PMC4746056 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26398868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. APMIS. 2015 Sep;123(9):772-8. doi: 10.1111/apm.12415. Epub 2015 Jul 22.

Do HOXB13 and P63 have a role in differentiating poorly differentiated prostatic 
carcinoma from urothelial high-grade carcinoma?

Alshenawy HA(1), Saied E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. 
(2)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kafr Alshikh University, Kafr
Alshikh, Egypt.

Poorly differentiated prostatic carcinoma may overlap with high-grade urothelial 
carcinoma; a distinction is a must as treatments differ. This study aims to
evaluate traditional (PSA and HMWCK) and relatively novel (P63 and HOXB13)
markers in distinguishing them; and to evaluate their role in the diagnosis of
challenging cases. Sections from: diagnosed group includes 65 prostatic and
urothelial carcinoma cases were stained with PSA, HMWCK, P63, and HOXB13.
Sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy were evaluated. The second group includes 
25 challenging cases which were stained first by PSA and HMWCK, then solved the
problematic cases with P63 and HOXB13. PSA and HMWCK were sensitive and specific 
for prostatic and urothelial carcinomas, respectively, but the sensitivity and
accuracy were higher for P63 and HOXB13. By using the traditional markers, 17
cases were diagnosed in the second group while the remaining eight cases need the
novel markers to be diagnosed. A confident diagnosis can be established in the
majority of cases of poorly differentiated carcinoma in either prostatic or
urothelial by using a panel of PSA and HMWCK. In some problematic cases, an
extended panel including P63 and HOXB13 is helpful in resolving the diagnosis.

© 2015 APMIS. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26200506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 15;10(7):e0132728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132728.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Two Novel HOXB13 Germline Mutations in Portuguese Prostate
Cancer Patients.

Maia S(1), Cardoso M(1), Pinto P(1), Pinheiro M(1), Santos C(1), Peixoto A(1),
Bento MJ(2), Oliveira J(3), Henrique R(4), Jerónimo C(5), Teixeira MR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cancer Genetics Group-CI-IPOP, Portuguese Oncology 
Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Portuguese
Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal; North Region Cancer Registry,
Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal; Biomedical Sciences
Institute (ICBAS), University of Porto-Porto, Portugal. (3)Department of Urology,
Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal. (4)Biomedical Sciences
Institute (ICBAS), University of Porto-Porto, Portugal; Cancer Biology and
Epigenetics Group-CI-IPOP, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal; 
Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(5)Biomedical Sciences Institute (ICBAS), University of Porto-Porto, Portugal;
Cancer Biology and Epigenetics Group-CI-IPOP, Portuguese Oncology
Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal. (6)Department of Genetics and Cancer Genetics
Group-CI-IPOP, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal; Biomedical
Sciences Institute (ICBAS), University of Porto-Porto, Portugal.

The HOXB13 germline variant G84E (rs138213197) was recently described in men of
European descent, with the highest prevalence in Northern Europe. The G84E
mutation has not been found in patients of African or Asian ancestry, which may
carry other HOXB13 variants, indicating allelic heterogeneity depending on the
population. In order to gain insight into the full scope of coding HOXB13
mutations in Portuguese prostate cancer patients, we decided to sequence the
entire coding region of the HOXB13 gene in 462 early-onset or familial/hereditary
cases. Additionally, we searched for somatic HOXB13 mutations in 178 prostate
carcinomas to evaluate their prevalence in prostate carcinogenesis. Three
different patients were found to carry in their germline DNA two novel missense
variants, which were not identified in 132 control subjects. Both variants are
predicted to be deleterious by different in silico tools. No somatic mutations
were found. These findings further support the hypothesis that different rare
HOXB13 mutations may be found in different ethnic groups. Detection of mutations 
predisposing to prostate cancer may require re-sequencing rather than genotyping,
as appropriate to the population under investigation.

PMCID: PMC4503425
PMID: 26176944  [PubMed - in process]


19. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun 26;11(6):e1005362. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005362.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: Imputation of the Rare HOXB13 G84E Mutation and Cancer Risk in a
Large Population-Based Cohort.

PLOS Genetics Staff.

Erratum for
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan;11(1):e1004930.

PMCID: PMC4483271
PMID: 26115117  [PubMed]


20. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Sep;24(9):1366-72. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-0247. Epub 2015 Jun 24.

The HOXB13 G84E Mutation Is Associated with an Increased Risk for Prostate Cancer
and Other Malignancies.

Beebe-Dimmer JL(1), Hathcock M(2), Yee C(3), Okoth LA(4), Ewing CM(5), Isaacs
WB(5), Cooney KA(4), Thibodeau SN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit,
Michigan. Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan.
dimmerj@karmanos.org. (2)Department of Health Science Research, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota. (3)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, Michigan. Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit,
Michigan. (4)Departments of Internal Medicine and Urology, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. University of Michigan Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (5)Department of Urology, Brady Urological
Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.

BACKGROUND: A rare nonconservative substitution (G84E) in the HOXB13 gene has
been shown to be associated with risk of prostate cancer. DNA samples from male
patients included in the Mayo Clinic Biobank (MCB) were genotyped to determine
the frequency of the G84E mutation and its association with various cancers.
METHODS: Subjects were genotyped using a custom TaqMan (Applied Biosystems) assay
for G84E (rs138213197). In addition to donating a blood specimen, all MCB
participants completed a baseline questionnaire to collect information on medical
history and family history of cancer.
RESULTS: Forty-nine of 9,012 male patients were carriers of G84E (0.5%).
Thirty-one percent (n = 2,595) of participants had been diagnosed with cancer,
including 51.1% of G84E carriers compared with just 30.6% of noncarriers (P =
0.004). G84E was most frequently observed among men with prostate cancer compared
with men without cancer (P < 0.0001). However, the mutation was also more
commonly observed in men with bladder cancer (P = 0.06) and leukemia (P = 0.01). 
G84E carriers were more likely to have a positive family history of prostate
cancer in a first-degree relative compared to noncarriers (36.2% vs. 16.0%, P =
0.0003).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms the association between the HOXB13 G84E variant
and prostate cancer and suggests a novel association between G84E and leukemia
and a suggestive association with bladder cancer. Future investigation is
warranted to confirm these associations in order to improve our understanding of 
the role of germline HOXB13 mutations in human cancer.
IMPACT: The associations between HOXB13 and prostate, leukemia, and bladder
suggest that this gene is important in carcinogenesis.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4560608 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26108461  [PubMed - in process]


21. Lancet. 2016 Jan 2;387(10013):70-82. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61947-4. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

Prostate cancer.

Attard G(1), Parker C(2), Eeles RA(3), Schröder F(4), Tomlins SA(5), Tannock
I(6), Drake CG(7), de Bono JS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK;
Prostate Cancer Targeted Therapy Group, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
Sutton, Surrey, UK. (2)Academic Urology Unit, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
Sutton, Surrey, UK. (3)Clinical Academic Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sutton, Surrey, UK; Oncogenetics Team, Division of Cancer
Genetics and Epidemiology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(4)Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. (5)Departments of
Pathology Urology, Comprehensive Cancer Center and Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. (6)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (7)Division of Medical Oncology, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MA,
USA. (8)Division of Clinical Studies, The Institute of Cancer Research, London,
UK; Prostate Cancer Targeted Therapy Group, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
Sutton, Surrey, UK. Electronic address: jdebono@icr.ac.uk.

Much progress has been made in research for prostate cancer in the past decade.
There is now greater understanding for the genetic basis of familial prostate
cancer with identification of rare but high-risk mutations (eg, BRCA2, HOXB13)
and low-risk but common alleles (77 identified so far by genome-wide association 
studies) that could lead to targeted screening of patients at risk. This is
especially important because screening for prostate cancer based on
prostate-specific antigen remains controversial due to the high rate of
overdiagnosis and unnecessary prostate biopsies, despite evidence that it reduces
mortality. Classification of prostate cancer into distinct molecular subtypes,
including mutually exclusive ETS-gene-fusion-positive and SPINK1-overexpressing, 
CHD1-loss cancers, could allow stratification of patients for different
management strategies. Presently, men with localised disease can have very
different prognoses and treatment options, ranging from observation alone through
to radical surgery, with few good-quality randomised trials to inform on the best
approach for an individual patient. The survival of patients with metastatic
prostate cancer progressing on androgen-deprivation therapy (castration-resistant
prostate cancer) has improved substantially. In addition to docetaxel, which has 
been used for more than a decade, in the past 4 years five new drugs have shown
efficacy with improvements in overall survival leading to licensing for the
treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Because of this
rapid change in the therapeutic landscape, no robust data exist to inform on the 
selection of patients for a specific treatment for castration-resistant prostate 
cancer or the best sequence of administration. Moreover, the high cost of the
newer drugs limits their widespread use in several countries. Data from
continuing clinical and translational research are urgently needed to improve,
and, crucially, to personalise management.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26074382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Prostate. 2015 Sep;75(12):1264-76. doi: 10.1002/pros.23008. Epub 2015 May 25.

Systematic enrichment analysis of potentially functional regions for 103 prostate
cancer risk-associated loci.

Chen H(1,)(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Wang J(4), Zhang Z(2), Gao Z(2), Chen Z(2), Lu Y(1), 
Liu W(5), Jiang D(1,)(5), Zheng SL(2,)(5), Wei GH(6), Issacs WB(7), Feng J(2), Xu
J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (2)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, North Carolina. (3)Center for
Genomic Translational Medicine and Prevention, Fudan School of Public Health,
Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (4)Fudan Institute of Urology, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (5)Program for Personalized
Cancer Care and Department of Surgery, North Shore University Health System,
Evanston, Illinois. (6)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter 
Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (7)Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: More than 100 prostate cancer (PCa) risk-associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified by genome wide association studies
(GWAS). However, the molecular mechanisms are unclear for most of these SNPs.
METHODS: All reported PCa risk-associated SNPs reaching the genome-wide
significance level of P < 1 × 10(-7) (index SNPs), as well as SNPs in linkage
disequilibrium (LD, r(2) = 0.5) with them were cataloged. Genomic regions with
potentially functional impact were also identified, including UCSC annotated
coding regions (exon and snoRNA/miRNA) and regulatory regions, as well as binding
regions for transcription factors (TFs), histone modifications (HMs), DNase I
hypersensitivity (DHSs), and RNA Polymerase IIA (POLR2A) defined by ChIP-Seq in
prostate cell lines and tissues. Enrichment analysis was performed to test
whether PCa risk-associated SNPs are located in these functional regions more
than expected.
RESULTS: A total of 103 PCa risk-associated index SNPs and 7,244 SNPs in LD with 
these index SNPs were cataloged. Genomic regions with potentially functional
impact, grouped in 30 different categories of functionalities, were identified.
Enrichment analysis indicated that genomic regions in the following 15 categories
were enriched for the PCa risk-associated SNPs: exons, CpG regions, 6 TFs (AR,
ERG, FOXA1, HOXB13, CTCF, and NR3C1), 5 HMs (H3K4me1, H3K4me2, H3K4me3, H3K27AC, 
and H3T11P), DHSs and POLR2A. In contrast, significantly fewer PCa risk SNPs were
mapped to binding regions for H3K27me3, a repressive chromatin marker.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCa risk-associated SNPs discovered to date may affect PCa risk 
through multiple different mechanisms, especially by affecting binding regions of
TFs/HMs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26015065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13359-70.

HOXB13 and ALX4 induce SLUG expression for the promotion of EMT and cell invasion
in ovarian cancer cells.

Yuan H(1), Kajiyama H(1), Ito S(2), Chen D(2), Shibata K(1), Hamaguchi M(2),
Kikkawa F(1), Senga T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan. (2)Division of Cancer Biology, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

Homeoproteins, a family of transcription factors that have conserved homeobox
domains, play critical roles in embryonic development in a wide range of species.
Accumulating studies have revealed that homeoproteins are aberrantly expressed in
multiple tumors and function as either tumor promoters or suppressors. In this
study, we show that two homeoproteins, HOXB13 and ALX4, are associated with
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasion of ovarian cancer cells. 
HOXB13 and ALX4 formed a complex in cells, and exogenous expression of either
protein promoted EMT and invasion. Conversely, depletion of either protein
suppressed invasion and induced reversion of EMT. SLUG is a C2H2-type zinc-finger
transcription factor that promotes EMT in various cell lines. Knockdown of HOXB13
or ALX4 suppressed SLUG expression, and exogenous expression of either protein
promoted SLUG expression. Finally, we showed that SLUG expression was essential
for the HOXB13- or ALX4-mediated EMT and invasion. Our results show that
HOXB13/SLUG and ALX4/SLUG axes are novel pathways that promote EMT and invasion
of ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4537020
PMID: 25944620  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 14;11(4):e1005114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005114.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: imputation of the rare HOXB13 G84E mutation and cancer risk in a
large population-based cohort.

PLOS Genetics Staff.

Erratum for
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan;11(1):e1004930.

PMCID: PMC4396849
PMID: 25875002  [PubMed]


25. J Cancer. 2015 Feb 27;6(5):409-11. doi: 10.7150/jca.11413. eCollection 2015.

Synonymous Polymorphisms in HOXB13 as a Protective Factor for Prostate Cancer.

Albitar F(1), Diep K(1), Ma W(1), Albitar M(1).

Author information: 
(1)NeoGenomics Laboratories, 5 Jenner Suite 100, Irvine, CA USA 92618.

BACKGROUND: Genomic association and linkage studies, as well as epidemiological
data have implicated both the HOXB13 gene and single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the development of prostate cancer (PCa). The recent association
between the G84E polymorphism in the HOXB13 gene and PCa has been shown to result
in a more aggressive cancer with an earlier onset of the disease. We examined the
frequency of this mutation and other recurrent HOXB13 SNPs in patients with PCa
and those with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or no cancer.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed
on exons 1 and 2 of HOXB13 gene, followed by bidirectional Sanger Sequencing on
peripheral blood from 232 PCa (age 46-92) and 110 BPH (age 45-84) patients.
Statistical analysis was used to correlate between recurrent SNPs and PCa.
RESULTS: The G84E mutation was found at a low frequency in randomly selected PCa 
and BPH (both 0.9%). Two recurrent, synonymous SNPs, rs8556 and rs900627, were
also detected. rs8556 was detected in 48 PCa (20.7%) and 26 BPH (23.6%) subjects;
rs9900627was detected in 27 PCa (11.6%) and 19 BPH (17.3%) subjects. Having both 
rs8556 and rs9900627 or being homozygous for either one was associated with being
2.9 times less likely to develop PCa (p=0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Although a larger study in order to confirm our findings, our data
suggests a significant negative correlation between two SNPs, rs8556 and
rs9900627, and the presence of PCa.

PMCID: PMC4392048
PMID: 25874003  [PubMed]


26. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Jul;68(7):511-5. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-202993. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

Young-age prostate cancer.

Hussein S(1), Satturwar S(2), Van der Kwast T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kuwait Cancer Control Center, Kuwait,
Kuwait. (2)Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Although prostate cancer is a disease of the elderly, its diagnosis is not
uncommonly made in men younger than 55 years. Both ethnic, familial and genetic
factors play a role in the early onset of prostate cancer, but the biology,
particularly of low-grade prostate cancers detected at young age is not well
understood. Autopsy studies have shown a high prevalence of Gleason score 6
prostate cancers in men under 55 years, but mortality of prostate cancer at this 
young age is almost negligible. Recently, a number of susceptibility genes such
as BRCA2 and HOXB13 were reported, each with their own specific biological and
histopathology features. In this review, we provide an update on the most recent 
findings in young-age prostate cancer.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25837493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncotarget. 2015 May 20;6(14):12822-34.

HOXB13 overexpression is an independent predictor of early PSA recurrence in
prostate cancer treated by radical prostatectomy.

Zabalza CV(1), Adam M(2), Burdelski C(3), Wilczak W(1), Wittmer C(1), Kraft S(1),
Krech T(1), Steurer S(1), Koop C(1), Hube-Magg C(1), Graefen M(2), Heinzer H(2), 
Minner S(1), Simon R(1), Sauter G(1), Schlomm T(2,)(4), Tsourlakis MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. 
(2)Martini-Clinic, Prostate Cancer Center, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (3)General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery Department 
and Clinic, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. (4)Department
of Urology, Section for Translational Prostate Cancer Research, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany.

HOXB13 is a prostate cancer susceptibility gene which shows a cancer predisposing
(G84E) mutation in 0.1-0.6% of males. We analyzed the prognostic impact of HOXB13
expression by immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray containing more than
12,400 prostate cancers. Results were compared to tumor phenotype, biochemical
recurrence, androgen receptor (AR) and prostate specific antigen (PSA) as well as
molecular subtypes defined by ERG status and genomic deletions of 3p, 5q, 6q, and
PTEN. HOXB13 immunostaining was detectable in 51.7% of 10,216 interpretable
cancers and considered strong in 9.6%, moderate in 19.7% and weak in 22.3% of
cases. HOXB13 expression was linked to advanced pT stage, high Gleason grade,
positive lymph node status (p < 0.0001 each), high pre-operative PSA levels (p = 
0.01), TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, PTEN deletions, AR expression, cell proliferation,
reduced PSA expression and early PSA recurrence (p < 0.0001 each). The prognostic
value of HOXB13 was independent from established parameters including Gleason,
stage, nodal stage and PSA. Co-expression analysis identified a subset of tumors 
with high HOXB13 and AR but low PSA expression that had a particularly poor
prognosis. HOXB13 appears to be a promising candidate for clinical routine tests 
either alone or in combination with other markers, including AR and PSA.

PMCID: PMC4494977
PMID: 25825985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015 Mar 17. [Epub ahead of print]

The Molecular feature of HOX Gene Family in the Intramedullary Spinal Tumors.

Gu S(1), Gu W, Shou J, Xiong J, Liu X, Sun B, Yang D, Xie R.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040, China 2Department of Neuropathology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200040, China.

STUDY DESIGN: The protein expression of HOXB13 and HOXA9 were detected.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to investigate the molecular signature of
spinal ependymoma (EPN) and astrocytoma, two most common types of intramedullary 
spinal tumor.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Intramedullary spinal tumor is unusual. It will lead 
to high neurological morbidity and mortality without treatment. Till now, little 
molecular feature has been elucidated.
METHOD: A total of 37 cases of spinal EPN including 12 myxopapillary EPN, 18
classic EPN, and 7 anaplastic EPN, and another 12 cases of astrocytoma were
enrolled in this study. Immunohistochemistry analysis in a large cohort of
clinical tumor samples to compare the expressions of HOXB13 and HOXA9 not only
between spinal EPN and astrocytoma, but also among all three WHO grades of spinal
EPN.
RESULTS: The results showed that HOXB13 and HOXA9 were selectively expressed in
spinal EPN instead of astrocytoma. Further, we found the strongest positive
response of HOXB13 in MEPN, while that of HOXA9 was ubiquitously detected in all 
subgroups of EPN.
CONCLUSION: The specificity and sensitivity of HOXB13 in MEPN indicated that
HOXB13 might be a diagnostic marker to distinguish MEPN from other two types of
EPN, and a promising therapeutic target for MEPN. The strong immunoreactivity of 
HOXA9 in spinal EPN suggested an indispensible role in the progression of spinal 
EPN, and further researches on its molecular function will provide new clues for 
developing treatment options.

PMID: 25785959  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(4):1349-53.

Increased expression of HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins is associated with HPV
infection and cervical cancer progression.

Gonzalez-Herrera A(1), Salgado-Bernabe M, Velazquez-Velazquez C, Salcedo-Vargas
M, Andrade-Manzano A, Avila-Moreno F, Pina-Sanchez P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Oncologia Molecular, Unidad de Investigacion Medica en
Enfermedades Oncologicas CMN S XXI IMSS, Mexico E-mail : 1307patricia@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer (CeCa) is the second most common cancer in women in
developing countries, and human papilloma virus (HPV) is the primary etiological 
factor. Aberrant expression of HOX transcription factors has been observed in
several types of cancer. To date, however, no reports exist on the expression of 
HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins during neoplastic progression in CeCa and its
correlation with HPV infection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins was assessed in
tissue microarrays from normal cervical epithelium, cervical intraepithelial
neoplasias grade 1-3, and CeCa. HPV was detected by PCR and sequencing.
Expression of HOX-positive cells was determined in each diagnostic group.
RESULTS: Percentage of HOXB2- and HOXB13-positive cells gradually increased from 
means of 10.9% and 16.7%, respectively, in samples from healthy women, to 75.2%
and 88.6% in those from CeCa patients. Frequency of HPV infection also increased 
from 13% in healthy tissue samples to 92.3% in CeCa. Both HOXB2 and HOXB13
proteins were preferentially expressed in HPV+ samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study represents the first report on the expression of
both HOXB2 and HOXB13 proteins through cervix tumorigenesis, providing evidence
that increased expression of such proteins is a common event during progression
to CeCa.

PMID: 25743797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(1):291-7.

Association of miR-1266 with recurrence/metastasis potential in estrogen receptor
positive breast cancer patients.

Sevinc ED(1), Egeli U, Cecener G, Tezcan G, Tunca B, Gokgoz S, Tasdelen I,
Tolunay S, Evrensel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Uludag,
Bursa, Turkey E-mail : egeli@uludag.edu.tr.

The Homeobox B13 (HOXB13):Interleukin 17 Receptor B (IL17BR) index of estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer (ER (+) BC) patients may be a potential
biomarker of recurrence/ metastasis. However, effects of microRNA (miRNA) binding
to the 3' untranslated region (3 ?UTR) of HOXB13 and IL17BR and its function on
recurrence/metastasis in ER (+) BC remains elusive. The aims of this study were
to determine the expression of miRNAs that bind to 3 ?UTR of HOXB13 and IL17BR in
ER (+) BC patients and asess the effects of these miRNAs on
recurrence/metastasis. The expression profiles of HOXB13 and IL17BR were
evaluated using RT- PCR in tumors and normal tissue samples from 40 ER (+) BC
patients. The expression level of 4 miRNAs, which were predicted to bind the 3
?UTR of HOXB13 and IL17BR using TargetScan, microRNA.org and miRDB online
databases, were further evaluated with RT-PCR. Our findings demonstrated that
high miR-1266 levels might be significant prognostic factor for
recurrence/metastasis occurrence (3.05 fold p=0.004) and tamoxifen response (3.90
fold; p=0.2514) in ER (+) BC cases. Although we suggest that modulation of
miR-1266 expression may be an important mechanism underlying the chemoresistance 
of ER (+) BC, advanced studies and validation are required.

PMID: 25640367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Horm Cancer. 2015 Jun;6(2-3):67-86. doi: 10.1007/s12672-014-0215-9. Epub 2015 Jan
29.

Interaction of the Androgen Receptor, ETV1, and PTEN Pathways in Mouse Prostate
Varies with Pathological Stage and Predicts Cancer Progression.

Higgins J(1), Brogley M, Palanisamy N, Mehra R, Ittmann MM, Li JZ, Tomlins SA,
Robins DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

To examine the impact of common somatic mutations in prostate cancer (PCa) on
androgen receptor (AR) signaling, mouse models were designed to perturb
sequentially the AR, ETV1, and PTEN pathways. Mice with "humanized" AR (hAR)
alleles that modified AR transcriptional strength by varying polyglutamine tract 
(Q-tract) length were crossed with mice expressing a prostate-specific,
AR-responsive ETV1 transgene (ETV1(Tg)). While hAR allele did not grossly affect 
ETV1-induced neoplasia, ETV1 strongly antagonized global AR regulation and
repressed critical androgen-induced differentiation and tumor suppressor genes,
such as Nkx3-1 and Hoxb13. When Pten was varied to determine its impact on
disease progression, mice lacking one Pten allele (Pten(+/-) ) developed more
frequent prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Yet, only those with the ETV1
transgene progressed to invasive adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, progression was
more frequent with the short Q-tract (stronger) AR, suggesting that the AR, ETV1,
and PTEN pathways cooperate in aggressive disease. On the Pten(+/-) background,
ETV1 had markedly less effect on AR target genes. However, a strong inflammatory 
gene expression signature, notably upregulation of Cxcl16, was induced by ETV1.
Comparison of mouse and human patient data stratified by the presence of E26
transformation-specific ETS fusion genes highlighted additional factors, some not
previously associated with prostate cancer but for which targeted therapies are
in development for other diseases. In sum, concerted use of these mouse models
illuminates the complex interplay of AR, ETV1, and PTEN pathways in pre-cancerous
neoplasia and early tumorigenesis, disease stages difficult to analyze in man.

PMCID: PMC4414739 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25631336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 28;11(1):e1004930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004930.
eCollection 2015.

Imputation of the rare HOXB13 G84E mutation and cancer risk in a large
population-based cohort.

Hoffmann TJ(1), Sakoda LC(2), Shen L(2), Jorgenson E(2), Habel LA(2), Liu J(3),
Kvale MN(3), Asgari MM(2), Banda Y(3), Corley D(2), Kushi LH(2), Quesenberry CP
Jr(2), Schaefer C(2), Van Den Eeden SK(4), Risch N(5), Witte JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America; Institute for
Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, United States of America. (2)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente,
Northern California, Oakland, California, United States of America. (3)Institute 
for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, United States of America. (4)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente,
Northern California, Oakland, California, United States of America; Department of
Urology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
United States of America. (5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States 
of America; Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, California, United States of America; Division of Research, Kaiser
Permanente, Northern California, Oakland, California, United States of America.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America; Institute for
Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, United States of America; Department of Urology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1005362.
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1005114.

An efficient approach to characterizing the disease burden of rare genetic
variants is to impute them into large well-phenotyped cohorts with existing
genome-wide genotype data using large sequenced referenced panels. The success of
this approach hinges on the accuracy of rare variant imputation, which remains
controversial. For example, a recent study suggested that one cannot adequately
impute the HOXB13 G84E mutation associated with prostate cancer risk (carrier
frequency of 0.0034 in European ancestry participants in the 1000 Genomes
Project). We show that by utilizing the 1000 Genomes Project data plus an
enriched reference panel of mutation carriers we were able to accurately impute
the G84E mutation into a large cohort of 83,285 non-Hispanic White participants
from the Kaiser Permanente Research Program on Genes, Environment and Health
Genetic Epidemiology Research on Adult Health and Aging cohort. Imputation
authenticity was confirmed via a novel classification and regression tree method,
and then empirically validated analyzing a subset of these subjects plus an
additional 1,789 men from Kaiser specifically genotyped for the G84E mutation (r2
= 0.57, 95% CI = 0.370.77). We then show the value of this approach by using the
imputed data to investigate the impact of the G84E mutation on age-specific
prostate cancer risk and on risk of fourteen other cancers in the cohort. The
age-specific risk of prostate cancer among G84E mutation carriers was higher than
among non-carriers. Risk estimates from Kaplan-Meier curves were 36.7% versus
13.6% by age 72, and 64.2% versus 24.2% by age 80, for G84E mutation carriers and
non-carriers, respectively (p = 3.4x10-12). The G84E mutation was also associated
with an increase in risk for the fourteen other most common cancers considered
collectively (p = 5.8x10-4) and more so in cases diagnosed with multiple cancer
types, both those including and not including prostate cancer, strongly
suggesting pleiotropic effects. [corrected].

PMCID: PMC4309593
PMID: 25629170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Bull Cancer. 2015 Jan;102(1):53-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bulcan.2014.12.007. Epub 2014
Dec 29.

[Update on genetic predisposition to prostate cancer].

[Article in French]

Cussenot O(1), Cancel-Tassin G(2).

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, hôpital Tenon, service d'urologie, CeRePP, GHU Est, 4, rue de la Chine,
75970 Paris cedex 20, France; UPMC université Paris 06, GRC n(o) 5, Oncotype-Uro,
Paris, France; Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, CeRePP, Paris, France. Electronic
address: olivier.cussenot@tnn.aphp.fr. (2)UPMC université Paris 06, GRC n(o) 5,
Oncotype-Uro, Paris, France; Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, CeRePP, Paris, France.

Genetic predisposition to prostate cancer rarely corresponds to a high penetrance
Mendelian pattern of inheritance. These hereditary forms are specific entities
for which mutations in the BRCA2 gene, the HOXB13 gene (variant G84E) or, to a
lesser extent BRCA1 gene, must be researched. In contrast, the genetic component 
of the majority of prostate cancer is polygenic, involving an unfavorable
combination of common genetic variants, resulting from a mixture of the genetic
inheritance of the father and the mother. One hundred of these genetic
susceptibility variants have now been identified and validated. The main
phenotypic trait associated with hereditary predisposition is the younger age at 
onset, which warrants special monitoring in order to stay in the window of
curability at diagnosis. The psychological impact of a family history of prostate
cancer or breast cancer favors the establishment of a dedicated monitoring and
procedures for early diagnosis.

Copyright © 2014 Société Française du Cancer. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25609482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Ann Oncol. 2015 Apr;26(4):756-61. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv004. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Prevalence of the HOXB13 G84E germline mutation in British men and correlation
with prostate cancer risk, tumour characteristics and clinical outcomes.

Kote-Jarai Z(1), Mikropoulos C(2), Leongamornlert DA(2), Dadaev T(2),
Tymrakiewicz M(2), Saunders EJ(2), Jones M(2), Jugurnauth-Little S(2),
Govindasami K(2), Guy M(2), Hamdy FC(3), Donovan JL(4), Neal DE(5), Lane JA(5),
Dearnaley D(2), Wilkinson RA(2), Sawyer EJ(2), Morgan A(2), Antoniou AC(6), Eeles
RA(7); UK Genetic Prostate Cancer Study Collaborators, and ProtecT Study Group.

Collaborators: Hall P, Berchuck A, Dennis J, Dunning AM, Lee A, Dicks E, Simard
J, Tessier DC, Bacot F, Vincent D, LaBoissière S, Robidoux F, Bojesen SE, Nielsen
SF, Nordestgaard BG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, London zsofia.kote-jarai@icr.ac.uk. (2)Institute
of Cancer Research, London. (3)Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences,
University of Oxford, Oxford Faculty of Medical Science, University of Oxford,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. (4)School of Social and Community Medicine,
University of Bristol, Bristol. (5)Surgical Oncology (Uro-Oncology: S4),
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge Cancer Research UK,
Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge. (6)Centre for Cancer
Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of
Cambridge, Strangeways Laboratory, Worts Causeway, Cambridge. (7)Institute of
Cancer Research, London The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
zsofia.kote-jarai@icr.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: A rare recurrent missense variant in HOXB13 (rs138213197/G84E) was
recently reported to be associated with hereditary prostate cancer.
Population-based studies have established that, since the frequency of this
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) varies between geographic regions, the
associated proportion of prostate cancer (PrCa) risk contribution is also highly 
variable by country.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is the largest comprehensive case-control study
assessing the prevalence of the HOXB13 G84E variant to date and is the first in
the UK population. We genotyped 8652 men diagnosed with PrCa within the UK
Genetic Prostate Cancer Study (UKGPCS) and 5252 healthy men from the UK ProtecT
study.
RESULTS: HOXB13 G84E was identified in 0.5% of the healthy controls and 1.5% of
the PrCa cases, and it was associated with a 2.93-fold increased risk of PrCa
[95% confidence interval (CI) 1.94-4.59; P = 6.27 × 10(-8)]. The risk was even
higher among men with family history of PrCa [odds ratio (OR) = 4.53, 95% CI
2.86-7.34; P = 3.1 × 10(-8)] and in young-onset PrCa (diagnosed up to the age of 
55 years; OR = 3.11, 95% CI 1.98-5.00; P = 6.1 × 10(-7)). There was no
significant association between Gleason Score, presenting prostate specific
antigen, tumour-node-metastasis (TNM) stage or NCCN risk group and carrier
status. HOXB13 G84E was not associated with overall or cancer-specific survival. 
We found that the polygenic PrCa risk score (PR score), calculated using the 71
known single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with PrCa and the HOXB13 
G84E variant act multiplicatively on PrCa risk. Based on the estimated prevalence
and risk, this rare variant explains ~1% of the familial risk of PrCa in the UK
population.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical importance of HOXB13 G84E in PrCa management has not
been established. This variant was found to have no effect on prognostic
implications but could be used for stratifying screening, by identifying men at
high risk.
CLINICAL TRIALS NUMBERS: Prostate Testing for Cancer and Treatment (ProtecT):
NCT02044172.
UK GENETIC PROSTATE CANCER STUDY: Epidemiology and Molecular Genetics Studies
(UKGPCS): NCT01737242.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25595936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Feb;24(2):442-7. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1131. Epub 2014 Dec 4.

Putative linkage signals identified for breast cancer in African American
families.

Ochs-Balcom HM(1), Sun X(2), Chen Y(3), Barnholtz-Sloan J(3), Erwin DO(4),
Jandorf L(5), Sucheston-Campbell L(4), Elston RC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, School of Public Health
and Health Professions, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York.
hmochs2@buffalo.edu. (2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio. (3)Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio. Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio. (4)Department of Cancer
Prevention and Population Sciences, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New
York. (5)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have identified polymorphisms
associated with breast cancer subtypes and across multiple population subgroups; 
however, few studies to date have applied linkage analysis to other population
groups.
METHODS: We performed the first genome-wide breast cancer linkage analysis in 106
African American families (comprising 179 affected and 79 unaffected members) not
known to be segregating BRCA mutations to search for novel breast cancer loci. We
performed regression-based model-free multipoint linkage analyses of the sibling 
pairs using SIBPAL, and two-level Haseman-Elston linkage analyses of affected
relative pairs using RELPAL.
RESULTS: We identified -log10 P values that exceed 4 on chromosomes 3q and 12q,
as well as a region near BRCA1 on chromosome 17 (-log10 P values in the range of 
3.0-3.2) using both sibling-based and relative-based methods; the latter
observation may suggest that undetected BRCA1 mutations or other mutations nearby
such as HOXB13 may be segregating in our sample.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, these results suggest novel putative regions harboring
risk alleles in African Americans that deserve further study.
IMPACT: We hope that our study will spur further family-based investigation into 
specific mechanisms for breast cancer disparities.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4323921
PMID: 25477366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Animal. 2015 Apr;9(4):650-9. doi: 10.1017/S1751731114002754. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Longitudinal muscle gene expression patterns associated with differential
intramuscular fat in cattle.

Hudson NJ(1), Reverter A(1), Greenwood PL(2), Guo B(1), Cafe LM(2), Dalrymple
BP(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Computational and Systems Biology,CSIRO Agriculture Flagship,306 Carmody
Road,St Lucia,Brisbane,QLD 4067,Australia. (2)2NSW Department of Primary
Industries Beef Industry Centre,University of New England,Armidale,NSW
2350,Australia.

Intramuscular fat (IMF) can improve meat product quality through its impact on
flavour and juiciness. High marbling cuts can command premium prices in some
countries and grading systems, but there is substantial cost involved in choosing
to grain feed animals in an effort to deposit more IMF. There would be value in
developing methods to predict predisposition to 'marble' well. Unfortunately, the
biological mechanisms underpinning marbling remain a mystery: the key adipocyte
cell populations have not been defined, there are no reliable DNA markers, no
known (if any) causal mutations and gene expression analyses in the main have
tended to characterise increases in expression of end-point fat metabolism
proteins such as the fatty acid-binding proteins. To shed light on
expression-based markers of marbling potential, we contrasted LD gene expression 
in high IMF Wagyu cross animals with a low IMF Piedmontese cross at various time 
points. The expected divergence in the fat metabolism genes FABP4, THRSP, CIDEC
and ACACA between the breeds occurs surprisingly late in postnatal development at
about 20 months. On the other hand, divergent expression of WISP2, RAI14 and
CYP4F2 was discovered in animals at or before 12 months of age, suggesting these 
genes may have potential as earlier predictors of marbling potential. In line
with other researchers, we found intriguing links between IMF development and
connective tissue remodelling. WISP2 - a novel adipokine highly expressed and
secreted by adipose precursor cells and an inhibitor of the pro-fibrotic
connective tissue growth factor - emerges as a particularly attractive candidate.
It is relatively upregulated in high marbling Wagyu before admission to
feedlotting, somewhere between 7 and 12 months. This difference is subsequently
maintained until 25 months, but not thereafter. RAI14, thought to play a role in 
porcine adipocyte differentiation and with links to retinoic acid metabolism, has
an unusual expression profile. Its expression level increases monotonically with 
postnatal development, and is always higher in Wagyu than Piedmontese. Strong,
sustained upregulation of the anti-inflammatory CYP4F2 in Piedmontese is
consistent with Wagyu adiposity being a pro-inflammatory state. Application of
regulatory impact factor analysis, a network method for identifying causal
effector molecules, suggests marbling roles for transcription factors previously 
implicated in (1) the formation of liposarcoma (unconstrained fatty masses)
(YEATS4, MDM2), (2) adipogenesis (CREBL2, SP1, STAT1) and (3) inflammation
(ISGF3G, HOXB13, PML).

PMID: 25391663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Int J Cancer. 2015 May 15;136(10):2316-27. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29276. Epub 2014 Nov 
8.

Fine-mapping the 2q37 and 17q11.2-q22 loci for novel genes and sequence variants 
associated with a genetic predisposition to prostate cancer.

Laitinen VH(1), Rantapero T, Fischer D, Vuorinen EM, Tammela TL; PRACTICAL
Consortium, Wahlfors T, Schleutker J.

Collaborators: Eeles R, Easton D, Muir K, Giles G, Wiklund F, Grönberg H, Haiman 
C, Schleutker J, Weischer M, Travis RC, Neal D, Pharoah P, Khaw KT, Stanford JL, 
Blot WJ, Thibodeau S, Maier C, Kibel AS, Cybulski C, Brenner H, Park J, Moffitt
H, Kaneva R, Batra J, Teixeira MR, Kote-Jarai Z, Al Olama AA, Benlloch S.

Author information: 
(1)BioMediTech, University of Tampere and Fimlab Laboratories, FI-33520, Tampere,
Finland.

The 2q37 and 17q12-q22 loci are linked to an increased prostate cancer (PrCa)
risk. No candidate gene has been localized at 2q37 and the HOXB13 variant G84E
only partially explains the linkage to 17q21-q22 observed in Finland. We screened
these regions by targeted DNA sequencing to search for cancer-associated
variants. Altogether, four novel susceptibility alleles were identified. Two
ZNF652 (17q21.3) variants, rs116890317 and rs79670217, increased the risk of both
sporadic and hereditary PrCa (rs116890317: OR = 3.3-7.8, p = 0.003-3.3 × 10(-5) ;
rs79670217: OR = 1.6-1.9, p = 0.002-0.009). The HDAC4 (2q37.2) variant rs73000144
(OR = 14.6, p = 0.018) and the EFCAB13 (17q21.3) variant rs118004742 (OR = 1.8, p
= 0.048) were overrepresented in patients with familial PrCa. To map the variants
within 2q37 and 17q11.2-q22 that may regulate PrCa-associated genes, we combined 
DNA sequencing results with transcriptome data obtained by RNA sequencing. This
expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analysis identified 272
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) possibly regulating six genes that were
differentially expressed between cases and controls. In a modified approach,
prefiltered PrCa-associated SNPs were exploited and interestingly, a novel eQTL
targeting ZNF652 was identified. The novel variants identified in this study
could be utilized for PrCa risk assessment, and they further validate the
suggested role of ZNF652 as a PrCa candidate gene. The regulatory regions
discovered by eQTL mapping increase our understanding of the relationship between
regulation of gene expression and susceptibility to PrCa and provide a valuable
starting point for future functional research.

© 2014 The Authors. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of UICC.

PMCID: PMC4355047 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25335771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (ß) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2014 Aug 5;7:193-201. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S38117.
eCollection 2014.

Dysregulation of the homeobox transcription factor gene HOXB13: role in prostate 
cancer.

Decker B(1), Ostrander EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA ; Centre for
Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, School
of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (2)Cancer Genetics 
and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common noncutaneous cancer in men, and
epidemiological studies suggest that about 40% of PC risk is heritable. Linkage
analyses in hereditary PC families have identified multiple putative loci.
However, until recently, identification of specific risk alleles has proven
elusive. Cooney et al used linkage mapping and segregation analysis to identify a
putative risk locus on chromosome 17q21-22. In search of causative variant(s) in 
genes from the candidate region, a novel, potentially deleterious G84E
substitution in homeobox transcription factor gene HOXB13 was observed in
multiple hereditary PC families. In follow-up testing, the G84E allele was
enriched in cases, especially those with an early diagnosis or positive family
history of disease. This finding was replicated by others, confirming HOXB13 as a
PC risk gene. The HOXB13 protein plays diverse biological roles in embryonic
development and terminally differentiated tissue. In tumor cell lines, HOXB13
participates in a number of biological functions, including coactivation and
localization of the androgen receptor and FOXA1. However, no consensus role has
emerged and many questions remain. All HOXB13 variants with a proposed role in PC
risk are predicted to damage the protein and lie in domains that are highly
conserved across species. The G84E variant has the strongest epidemiological
support and lies in a highly conserved MEIS protein-binding domain, which binds
cofactors required for activation. On the basis of epidemiological and biological
data, the G84E variant likely modulates the interaction between the HOXB13
protein and the androgen receptor, as well as affecting FOXA1-mediated
transcriptional programming. However, further studies of the mutated protein are 
required to clarify the mechanisms by which this translates into PC risk.

PMCID: PMC4157396
PMID: 25206306  [PubMed]


40. Oncologist. 2014 Oct;19(10):1019-27. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0124. Epub
2014 Sep 3.

Genome-based risk prediction for early stage breast cancer.

Adaniel C(1), Jhaveri K(1), Heguy A(1), Esteva FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, and
Genome Technology Center, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York,
New York, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Laura and Isaac Perlmutter
Cancer Center, and Genome Technology Center, New York University Langone Medical 
Center, New York, New York, USA francisco.esteva@nyumc.org.

Tests to better characterize tumor genomic architecture are quickly becoming a
standard of care in oncology. For breast cancer, the use of gene expression
assays for early stage disease is already common practice. These tests have found
a place in risk stratifying the heterogeneous group of stage I-II breast cancers 
for recurrence, for predicting chemotherapy response, and for predicting breast
cancer-related mortality. In the last 5 years, more assays have become available 
to the practicing oncologist. Given the rapidity with which this field has
evolved, it is prudent to review the tests, their indications, and the studies
from which they have been validated. We present a comprehensive review of the
available gene expression assays for early stage breast cancer. We review data
for several individual tests and comparative studies looking at risk prediction
and cost-effectiveness.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4200995
PMID: 25187476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genome Res. 2014 Nov;24(11):1854-68. doi: 10.1101/gr.175034.114. Epub 2014 Aug
13.

Unbiased analysis of potential targets of breast cancer susceptibility loci by
Capture Hi-C.

Dryden NH(1), Broome LR(1), Dudbridge F(2), Johnson N(1), Orr N(1), Schoenfelder 
S(3), Nagano T(3), Andrews S(4), Wingett S(4), Kozarewa I(1), Assiotis I(1),
Fenwick K(1), Maguire SL(1), Campbell J(1), Natrajan R(1), Lambros M(1), Perrakis
E(1), Ashworth A(1), Fraser P(3), Fletcher O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research,
London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom; (2)Department of Non-communicable Disease
Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT,
United Kingdom; (3)Nuclear Dynamics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge 
CB22 3AT, United Kingdom; (4)Babraham Bioinformatics, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom. (5)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research
Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom;
Olivia.Fletcher@icr.ac.uk.

Genome-wide association studies have identified more than 70 common variants that
are associated with breast cancer risk. Most of these variants map to
non-protein-coding regions and several map to gene deserts, regions of several
hundred kilobases lacking protein-coding genes. We hypothesized that gene deserts
harbor long-range regulatory elements that can physically interact with target
genes to influence their expression. To test this, we developed Capture Hi-C
(CHi-C), which, by incorporating a sequence capture step into a Hi-C protocol,
allows high-resolution analysis of targeted regions of the genome. We used CHi-C 
to investigate long-range interactions at three breast cancer gene deserts
mapping to 2q35, 8q24.21, and 9q31.2. We identified interaction peaks between
putative regulatory elements ("bait fragments") within the captured regions and
"targets" that included both protein-coding genes and long noncoding (lnc) RNAs
over distances of 6.6 kb to 2.6 Mb. Target protein-coding genes were IGFBP5,
KLF4, NSMCE2, and MYC; and target lncRNAs included DIRC3, PVT1, and CCDC26. For
one gene desert, we were able to define two SNPs (rs12613955 and rs4442975) that 
were highly correlated with the published risk variant and that mapped within the
bait end of an interaction peak. In vivo ChIP-qPCR data show that one of these,
rs4442975, affects the binding of FOXA1 and implicate this SNP as a putative
functional variant.

© 2014 Dryden et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4216926
PMID: 25122612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Jul;68(6):699-707. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.07.014.
Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Differential DNA methylation status between breast carcinomatous and normal
tissues.

Wang F(1), Yang Y(2), Fu Z(1), Xu N(3), Chen F(1), Yin H(1), Lu X(4), Shen R(1), 
Lu C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
the Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)First Clinical Medicine College, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine,
Nanjing, China. (4)Jinling High School, Nanjing, China. (5)Department of Breast
Surgery, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: xianqu1981@126.com.

Breast cancer has been considered to be a multifactorial disease with a wide
array of well-characterized gene mutations and chromosomal abnormalities.
However, it is becoming evident that the onset or development of breast cancer
also depends on epigenetic factors, although the mechanisms have not been fully
elucidated. We performed a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation of breast
carcinomatous tissues and paired normal tissues to examine the differences in
methylation between them. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP)
was used to validate the hypermethylated genes screened out by DNA methylation
microarray. We found that hypomethylation and hypermethylation occurred in 2753
and 1795 genes, respectively, in breast carcinomatous tissues. Meanwhile, gene
ontology analysis and ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the function and
pathway of several genes whose methylation status was altered in breast
carcinomatous tissues. In addition, we investigated the promoter methylation
status of four genes in breast carcinomatous tissue and paired normal tissues
(n=30) by MSP. Promoter hypermethylation of CRABP1, HOXB13, IFNGR2, and PIK3C3
was found in 37% (11/30), 23% (7/30), 17% (5/30), and 2% (2/30) of the
carcinomas, respectively. Mutation of these four important genes was critical to 
many types of cancer. Our results suggest that DNA methylation mechanisms may be 
involved in regulating the occurrence and development of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25070394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 May 15;7(6):2925-33. eCollection 2014.

High-level expression of HOXB13 is closely associated with tumor angiogenesis and
poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhu JY(1), Sun QK(1), Wang W(2), Jia WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatic Surgery, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical
University Hefei 230001, P. R. China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Anhui
Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical University Hefei 230001, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Hepatic Surgery, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Anhui Medical
University Hefei 230001, P. R. China ; Anhui Province Key Laboratory of
Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Hefei 230001, PR. China.

Homeobox B13 (HOXB13) is generally considered as a crucial regulator of terminal 
cellular differentiation. More recently, the absent or aberrant expression of
HOXB13 has been increasingly implicated in cancer development and metastasis.
However, the expression of HOXB13 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its
correlation with tumor angiogenesis and prognosis still remain unclear. The aim
of the study was to evaluate the expression of HOXB13 in patients with HCC and
explore the relationship of HOXB13 expression with clinicopathologic factors,
tumor angiogenesis and prognosis. Immunohistochemistry was performed to determine
the expression of HOXB13 in HCC and corresponding paracarcinomatous tissues from 
72 patients. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and CD31 were only
examined in tissues of HCC patients mentioned above. The results showed that
HOXB13 expression was significantly (P <0.001) higher in HCC (69.4%) than that in
surrounding non-tumor tissues (26.4%), positively correlated with tumor VEGF (P
<0.001) and microvessel density (MVD) (P = 0.013). Besides, it was associated
with tumor capsula (P <0.001), vascular invasion (P <0.001), Edmondson grade (P
<0.001), AFP (P = 0.007) and TNM stage (P <0.001). Univariate analysis showed
poorer overall survival (OS) rate and disease free survival (DFS) rate in
patients expressing higher levels of HOXB13. HOXB13 was also found to be an
independent poor prognostic factor of OS and DFS in multivariate analysis. Taken 
together, our results suggest that increased HOXB13 expression is associated with
tumor angiogenesis and progression in HCC and may function as a promising
biomarker for unfavorable prognosis of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4097233
PMID: 25031711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Aug;92(8):811-23. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1181-y. Epub
2014 Jul 5.

HOX genes and their role in the development of human cancers.

Bhatlekar S(1), Fields JZ, Boman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Cancer Research, Helen F. Graham Cancer Center and
Research Institute, University of Delaware, 4701 Ogletown-Stanton Road, Newark,
DE, 19713, USA.

In this review, we summarize published findings on the involvement of HOX genes
in oncogenesis. HOX genes are developmental genes--they code for proteins that
function as critical master regulatory transcription factors during
embryogenesis. Many reports have shown that the protein products of HOX genes
also play key roles in the development of cancers. Based on our review of the
literature, we found that the expression of HOX genes is not only up- or
downregulated in most solid tumors but also that the expression of specific HOX
genes in cancers tends to differ based on tissue type and tumor site. It was also
observed that HOXC family gene expression is upregulated in most solid tumor
types, including colon, lung, and prostate cancer. The two HOX genes that were
reported to be most commonly altered in solid tumors were HOXA9 and HOXB13. HOXA 
were often reported to have altered expression in breast and ovarian cancers,
HOXB genes in colon cancers, HOXC genes in prostate and lung cancers, and HOXD
genes in colon and breast cancers. It was found that HOX genes are also regulated
at the nuclear-cytoplasmic transport level in carcinomas. Tumors arising from
tissue having similar embryonic origin (endodermal), including colon, prostate,
and lung, showed relatively similar HOXA and HOXB family gene expression patterns
compared to breast tumors arising from mammary tissue, which originates from the 
ectoderm. The differential expression of HOX genes in various solid tumors thus
provides an opportunity to advance our understanding of cancer development and to
develop new therapeutic agents.

PMID: 24996520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Breast Care (Basel). 2014 May;9(2):97-100. doi: 10.1159/000362482.

Late recurrences in early breast cancer: for whom and how long is endocrine
therapy beneficial?

Knauer M(1), Filipits M(2), Dubsky P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Center St. Gallen, Switzerland. (2)Institute of Cancer Research,
Department of Medicine I, Medical University Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of
Surgery, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University Vienna, Austria.

During the last decade, besides the well-established clinical-pathological
predictors for the risk of late recurrence in breast cancer, such as estrogen
receptor status, and T and N stage, a variety of multigene assays have been shown
to improve prognostication and prediction in this setting. Several clinical
trials have evaluated the role of extended endocrine therapy with tamoxifen
(ATLAS) or aromatase inhibitors (MA.17, NSABP-B33 and ABCSG 6a), and other
randomized studies are still ongoing. However, among this patient population, it 
is still not clear who could benefit from extended therapy and what the optimal
treatment duration should be. New multigene assays such as EndoPredict, PAM50
ROR-score, HOXB13/IL17BR ratio and Breast Cancer Index provide significant and
relevant prognostic information concerning the likelihood of recurrence beyond 5 
years after surgery. The identified low-risk subgroups not only show a very
favorable prognosis, they also seem to have only little benefit from extended
aromatase inhibitor therapy. Many of these reverse transcriptase/polymerase chain
reaction-based techniques have been validated in archived tumor material from
large phase III trials, and will soon be available to routine pathology
laboratories as an aid in clinical decision-making for patients.

PMCID: PMC4038313
PMID: 24944551  [PubMed]


46. Int J Oncol. 2014 Aug;45(2):869-76. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2485. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

HOXB13 regulates the prostate-derived Ets factor: implications for prostate
cancer cell invasion.

Kim IJ(1), Kang TW(2), Jeong T(1), Kim YR(1), Jung C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju
501-746, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Urology, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju 501-746, Republic of Korea.

HOXB13 has been shown to enhance the invasive potential of breast and endometrial
tumors. HOXB13 is also abundant in castration-resistant prostate tumors. To
determine the invasive potential of HOXB13 in prostate tumors, highly metastatic 
PC3 prostate cancer cells were manipulated to express HOXB13 and/or the
prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF). The PDEF is believed to reduce the invasive
potential of various tumors, including prostate tumors. To further demonstrate
the functional correlation between HOXB13 and PDEF, transwell invasion and
gelatin zymography assays were performed. In addition, the western blot analysis 
was used to demonstrate the expression of PDEF target proteins involved in cancer
cell migration and invasion, MMP-9 and survivin. According to the results, HOXB13
promoted PC3 cell migration and invasion. The DNA microarray analysis
demonstrated that HOXB13 significantly suppressed the expression of the PDEF.
Accordingly, the expression of MMP-9 and survivin was regulated by HOXB13. In
addition, HOXB13 promoted the invasive potential of PC3 cells while inhibiting
the PDEF. The coexpression of HOXB13 and the PDEF led to moderate retardation of 
the number of invasive cells, indicating that HOXB13 functionally counteracted
cell invasion by reducing PDEF expression. The western blot analysis demonstrated
that HOXB13 counteracted the PDEF-mediated inhibition of the expression of PDEF
target proteins such as MMP-9 and survivin. The results suggest that the
HOXB13-mediated promotion of tumor cell invasion is accomplished mainly through
the downregulation of PDEF expression.

PMID: 24898171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2014 May 27;68:653-65. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1104682.

[Hereditary prostate cancer].

[Article in Polish]

Heise M(1), Haus O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Zaklad Genetyki Klinicznej, Collegium Medicum im. Ludwika Rydygiera 
w Bydgoszczy, Uniwersytet Mikolaja Kopernika w Toruniu.

Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the most common cancers affecting men. It may soon
become the main cancer--caused mortality among men all over the world. The
genetic basis of prostate cancer is very complex and its etiology is poorly
understood. The genes associated with hereditary predisposition to prostate
cancer remain largely unknown. Family history of PC, particularly at a young age,
is a strong risk factor. Through linkage analysis, numerous prostate cancer
susceptibility chromosomal loci have been identified, including: HPC1 (1q24-25), 
PCaP (1q42.2-43), HPCX (Xq27-28), CAPB (1p36), HPC2 (17p12), HPC20 (20q13).
However, it turned out that any of these genes is not a high-risk prostate cancer
susceptibility gene. According to literature data HPC is associated with genes
involved in androgen metabolism, including androgen receptor gene--AR, SRD5A2 and
CYP17, genes involved in the DNA damage repair, including BRCA1, BRCA2, NBS1 and 
MLH1 or some developmental genes as HOXB13. Identification of PC high
predisposition susceptibility genes is very important, because the ascertainment 
of a higher risk of prostate cancer development in mutation carriers enable to
develop and implement in clinical practice suitable prophylactic programs which
could prevent the disease or detect it in an early stage. It seems that better
knowledge of the molecular pathology of prostate cancer could make it easier to
discover new drugs of chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic activity. There are
many cellular pathways associated with PC cancerogenesis, which may become a
potential goal for such drugs in the future.

PMID: 24864115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 May;38(5):615-26. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000090.

HOXB13 G84E-related familial prostate cancers: a clinical, histologic, and
molecular survey.

Smith SC(1), Palanisamy N, Zuhlke KA, Johnson AM, Siddiqui J, Chinnaiyan AM,
Kunju LP, Cooney KA, Tomlins SA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology §Internal Medicine ¶Urology Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI <U+2225>Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD.

Recent genetic epidemiologic studies identified a germline mutation in the
homeobox transcription factor, HOXB13 G84E, which is associated with markedly
increased risk for prostate cancer, particularly early-onset hereditary prostate 
cancer. The histomorphologic and molecular features of cancers arising in such
carriers have not been studied. Here, we reviewed prostatectomy specimens from 23
HOXB13 G84E mutation carriers, mapping the total cancer burden by anatomically
distinct cancer focus and evaluating morphologic features. We also assessed basic
molecular subtypes for all cancer foci (ERG/SPINK1 status) by dual
immunohistochemistry staining on full sections. The cohort showed a median age of
58 years, a median serum PSA level of 5.7 ng/mL, and a median of 6 cancer foci
(range, 1 to 14) per case. Of evaluable cases, dominant foci were Gleason score 6
in 23%, 3+4=7 in 41%, 4+3=7 in 23%, and =8 in 14%; biochemical recurrence was
observed in 1 case over a median of 36 months follow-up. Histologic review found 
a high prevalence of cases showing cancers with a spectrum of features previously
described with pseudohyperplastic carcinomas, with 45% of cases showing a
dominant focus with such features. Molecular subtyping revealed a strikingly low 
prevalence of ERG cancer with increased prevalence of SPINK1 cancer (dominant
focus ERG 17%, SPINK1 26%, ERG/SPINK1 52%, single ERG/SPINK1 focus 4%). One
ERG/SPINK1 dominant focus showed aberrant p63 immunophenotype. In summary, HOXB13
G84E variant-related prostate cancers show frequent pseudohyperplastic-type
features and markedly low prevalence of ERG cancers relative to unselected cases 
and, especially, to early-onset cohorts. These findings suggest that novel
molecular pathways may drive disease in HOXB13 G84E carriers.

PMCID: PMC3988475
PMID: 24722062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 13;10(2):e1004129. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004129.
eCollection 2014.

Fine-mapping the HOXB region detects common variants tagging a rare coding
allele: evidence for synthetic association in prostate cancer.

Saunders EJ(1), Dadaev T(1), Leongamornlert DA(1), Jugurnauth-Little S(1),
Tymrakiewicz M(1), Wiklund F(2), Al Olama AA(3), Benlloch S(3), Neal DE(4), Hamdy
FC(5), Donovan JL(6), Giles GG(7), Severi G(7), Gronberg H(2), Aly M(2), Haiman
CA(8), Schumacher F(8), Henderson BE(8), Lindstrom S(9), Kraft P(9), Hunter
DJ(9), Gapstur S(10), Chanock S(11), Berndt SI(11), Albanes D(12), Andriole
G(13), Schleutker J(14), Weischer M(15), Nordestgaard BG(15), Canzian F(16),
Campa D(17), Riboli E(18), Key TJ(19), Travis RC(19), Ingles SA(8), John EM(20), 
Hayes RB(21), Pharoah P(3), Khaw KT(22), Stanford JL(23), Ostrander EA(24),
Signorello LB(25), Thibodeau SN(26), Schaid D(26), Maier C(27), Kibel AS(28),
Cybulski C(29), Cannon-Albright L(30), Brenner H(31), Park JY(32), Kaneva R(33), 
Batra J(34), Clements JA(34), Teixeira MR(35), Xu J(36), Mikropoulos C(1), Goh
C(1), Govindasami K(1), Guy M(1), Wilkinson RA(1), Sawyer EJ(1), Morgan A(1);
COGS-CRUK GWAS-ELLIPSE (Part of GAME-ON) Initiative; UK Genetic Prostate Cancer
Study Collaborators; UK ProtecT Study Collaborators; PRACTICAL Consortium, Easton
DF(3), Muir K(37), Eeles RA(1), Kote-Jarai Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Strangeways Laboratory, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (4)Surgical Oncology (Uro-Oncology: S4), University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge and Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (5)Nuffield
Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, and Faculty of
Medical Science, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (6)School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol,
Bristol, United Kingdom. (7)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, The Cancer Council
Victoria, Carlton, Victoria, Australia and Centre for Molecular, Environmental,
Genetic and Analytic Epidemiology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia. (8)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (9)Program in Genetic
Epidemiology and Statistical Genetics, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School
of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(10)Epidemiology Research Program, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, Georgia,
United States of America. (11)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(12)Nutritional Epidemiology Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, EPS-3044,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (13)Division of Urologic Surgery,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of
America. (14)Department of Medic Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku, 
Turku and Institute of Biomedical Technology and BioMediTech, University of
Tampere and FimLab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland. (15)Department of Clinical
Biochemistry, Herlev Hospital, Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.
(16)Genomic Epidemiology Group, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (17)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (18)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics,
School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(19)Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (20)Cancer Prevention Institute of 
California, Fremont, California, United States of America, and Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.
(21)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Population Health, NYU Langone
Medical Center, NYU Cancer Institute, New York, New York, United States of
America. (22)Clinical Gerontology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. (23)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health,
University of Washington and Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(24)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (25)International Epidemiology
Institute, Rockville, Maryland, and Division of Epidemiology, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America. (26)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.
(27)Department of Urology, University Hospital Ulm and Institute of Human
Genetics University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany. (28)Division of Urologic Surgery,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (29)International Hereditary Cancer
Center, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University,
Szczecin, Poland. (30)Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medicine,
University of Utah School of Medicine and George E. Wahlen Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(31)Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (32)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, Florida, United States of America. (33)Molecular
Medicine Center and Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical
University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. (34)Australian Prostate Cancer Research
Centre-Qld, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation and School of
Biomedical Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia. (35)Biomedical Sciences Institute (ICBAS), Porto University, Porto,
and Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.
(36)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States of America. (37)Warwick Medical
School, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.

The HOXB13 gene has been implicated in prostate cancer (PrCa) susceptibility. We 
performed a high resolution fine-mapping analysis to comprehensively evaluate the
association between common genetic variation across the HOXB genetic locus at
17q21 and PrCa risk. This involved genotyping 700 SNPs using a custom Illumina
iSelect array (iCOGS) followed by imputation of 3195 SNPs in 20,440 PrCa cases
and 21,469 controls in The PRACTICAL consortium. We identified a cluster of
highly correlated common variants situated within or closely upstream of HOXB13
that were significantly associated with PrCa risk, described by rs117576373 (OR
1.30, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.62×10(-14)). Additional genotyping, conditional regression and
haplotype analyses indicated that the newly identified common variants tag a
rare, partially correlated coding variant in the HOXB13 gene (G84E, rs138213197),
which has been identified recently as a moderate penetrance PrCa susceptibility
allele. The potential for GWAS associations detected through common SNPs to be
driven by rare causal variants with higher relative risks has long been proposed;
however, to our knowledge this is the first experimental evidence for this
phenomenon of synthetic association contributing to cancer susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3923678
PMID: 24550738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Feb;11(2):64. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2014.8. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

HOXB13 and a SNP collaborate to increase risk.

Payton S.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2014 Feb;46(2):126-35.

PMID: 24473413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Genet. 2014 Feb;46(2):94-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2881.

HOXB13, RFX6 and prostate cancer risk.

Mills IG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Prostate Cancer Research Group, Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway (NCMM),
University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospitals, Oslo, Norway, and with the
Departments of Cancer Prevention and Urology, Institute of Cancer Research and
Oslo University Hospitals, Oslo, Norway.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2014 Feb;46(2):126-35.

A new study shows that HOXB13 is preferentially recruited to the risk allele of a
prostate cancer-associated SNP, enhancing the expression of RFX6, a driver of
prostate cancer cell migration and predictor of disease progression. The work
illustrates how a single risk locus contributes both to prostate cancer incidence
and, through functional follow-up, to disease progression.

PMID: 24473320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int Braz J Urol. 2013 Nov-Dec;39(6):875-83. doi:
10.1590/S1677-5538.IBJU.2013.06.15.

Five-alpha reductase inhibitor influences expression of androgen receptor and
HOXB13 in human hyperplastic prostate tissue.

Jung C(1), Park Y, Kim YR, Ryu SB, Kang TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Department of Anatomy Research Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Five-alpha reductase inhibitors (5ARIs) are known as chemopreventive 
agents in prostate cancer with a risk of high-grade disease. This study evaluated
the effects of 5ARI on androgen receptor (AR) and proteins involved in prostate
cell growth such as HOXB13 expression in human prostate tissue and LNCaP prostate
cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively selected 21 patients who underwent TURP
between March 2007 and February 2010 for previously confirmed BPH by prostate
biopsy. They were grouped into control (group 1, n = 9) and 5ARI treatment (group
2, n = 12) before TURP. AR and HOXB13 expression in prostate tissue was evaluated
by immunohistochemical staining. We tested the effect of 5ARI on the expression
of AR, prostate specific antigen (PSA) and HOXB13 in LNCaP cells. Cells were
assessed by Western blot analysis, MTT in vitro proliferation assay, and ELISA.
RESULTS: Group 2 showed stronger reactivity for AR and HOXB13 than those of the
group 1. MTT assay showed death of LNCaP cells at 25uM of 5ARI. At the same time,
ELISA assay for PSA showed that 5ARI inhibited secretion of PSA in LNCaP cells.
Western blot analysis showed that 5ARI did not greatly alter AR expression but it
stimulated the expression of HOXB13.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated that 5ARI influences AR and HOXB13
expression in both LNCaP cells and human prostate tissue. In order to use 5ARI in
chemoprevention of prostate cancer, we still need to clarify the influence of
5ARI in ARs and oncogenic proteins and its regulation pathway.

PMID: 24456780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Genet. 2014 Feb;46(2):126-35. doi: 10.1038/ng.2862. Epub 2014 Jan 5.

A prostate cancer susceptibility allele at 6q22 increases RFX6 expression by
modulating HOXB13 chromatin binding.

Huang Q(1), Whitington T(2), Gao P(3), Lindberg JF(4), Yang Y(3), Sun J(5),
Väisänen MR(6), Szulkin R(4), Annala M(7), Yan J(8), Egevad LA(9), Zhang K(3),
Lin R(3), Jolma A(10), Nykter M(7), Manninen A(3), Wiklund F(4), Vaarala MH(11), 
Visakorpi T(7), Xu J(5), Taipale J(10), Wei GH(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. [2] Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, University 
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. [3]. (2)1] Department of Biosciences and Nutrition,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. [2] Department of Medical Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. [3]. (3)1] Biocenter
Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. [2] Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Oulu,
Finland. (4)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Fudan Institute of Urology, Huashan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (6)Department of Pathology, Oulu University
Hospital, Oulu, Finland. (7)Prostate Cancer Research Center, Institute of
Biomedical Technology and BioMediTech, University of Tampere and Tampere
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. (8)Department of Biosciences and
Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (9)Department of Pathology
and Cytology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (10)1]
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. [2] Genome-Scale Biology Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. (11)1] Department of Pathology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.
[2] Medical Research Center, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2014 Feb;46(2):94-5.
    Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Feb;11(2):64.

Genome-wide association studies have identified thousands of SNPs associated with
predisposition to various diseases, including prostate cancer. However, the
mechanistic roles of these SNPs remain poorly defined, particularly for noncoding
polymorphisms. Here we find that the prostate cancer risk-associated SNP rs339331
at 6q22 lies within a functional HOXB13-binding site. The risk-associated T
allele at rs339331 increases binding of HOXB13 to a transcriptional enhancer,
conferring allele-specific upregulation of the rs339331-associated gene RFX6.
Suppression of RFX6 diminishes prostate cancer cell proliferation, migration and 
invasion. Clinical data indicate that RFX6 upregulation in human prostate cancers
correlates with tumor progression, metastasis and risk of biochemical relapse.
Finally, we observe a significant association between the risk-associated T
allele at rs339331 and increased RFX6 mRNA levels in human prostate tumors.
Together, our results suggest that rs339331 affects prostate cancer risk by
altering RFX6 expression through a functional interaction with the prostate
cancer susceptibility gene HOXB13.

PMID: 24390282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Mar 5;383(1-2):38-47. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.12.003.
Epub 2013 Dec 8.

HOXB13 contributes to G1/S and G2/M checkpoint controls in prostate.

Hamid SM(1), Cicek S(1), Karamil S(1), Ozturk MB(1), Debelec-Butuner B(2),
Erbaykent-Tepedelen B(1), Varisli L(1), Gonen-Korkmaz C(3), Yorukoglu K(4),
Korkmaz KS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Cancer Biology Laboratory and Faculty of
Pharmacy, Ege University, Faculty of Engineering, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Cancer Biology Laboratory and Faculty of
Pharmacy, Ege University, Faculty of Engineering, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey;
Department of Biotechnology, Ege University, Faculty of Engineering, Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey. (4)Dokuz
Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Inciralti, Izmir,
Turkey. (5)Department of Bioengineering, Cancer Biology Laboratory and Faculty of
Pharmacy, Ege University, Faculty of Engineering, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey.
Electronic address: ks_korkmaz@yahoo.com.

HOXB13 is a homeobox protein that is expressed in normal adult prostate and colon
tissues; however, its deregulated expression was evidenced in various
malignancies. To characterize the putative role of HOXB13 in cell cycle
progression, we performed overexpression and siRNA-mediated knockdown studies in 
PC-3 and LNCaP cells. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses were also performed
using formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues containing normal, H-PIN and PCa 
sections from 20 radical prostatectomy specimens. Furthermore, when the role of
HOXB13 during cell cycle progression, association with cyclins, cell growth and
colony formation using real-time cell proliferation were assessed, we observed
that ectopic expression of HOXB13 accumulated cells at G1 through decreasing the 
cyclin D1 level by promoting its ubiquitination and degradation. This loss slowed
S phase entry in both cell lines examined, with an associated decrease in
pRb((S780) and (S795)) phosphorylations. Contrary, siRNA-mediated depletion of
HOXB13 expression noticeably increased cyclin levels, stabilized E2F1 and CDC25C,
subsequent to increased pRb phosphorylations. This increase in Cyclin B1 and
CDC25C both together facilitated activation of cyclin B complex via
dephosphorylating CDK1((T14Y15)), and resumed the G2/M transition after
nocodazole synchronization. Despite an increase in the total expression level and
cytoplasmic retention of HOXB13 in H-PIN and PCa samples that were observed via
IHC evaluation of prostate tissues, HOXB13 depletion facilitated to an increase
in PC-3 and LNCaP cell proliferation. Thus, we suggest that HOXB13 expression is 
required for cell cycle regulation, and increases by an unknown mechanism
consequent to its functional loss in cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24325868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Genet Couns. 2014 Jun;23(3):371-6. doi: 10.1007/s10897-013-9672-5. Epub 2013
Dec 7.

Prevalence of the HOXB13 G84E mutation among unaffected men with a family history
of prostate cancer.

Handorf E(1), Crumpler N, Gross L, Giri VN.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.

HOXB13 (G84E) was reported to significantly increase risk for prostate cancer.
The goal of the current analysis was to assess the prevalence of G84E in
ethnically-diverse high-risk men undergoing prostate cancer screening and place
the carrier frequency within the context of prevalence estimates from reported
studies to gain insight into the future role of this mutation in genetic
counseling. PRAP is a prostate cancer screening program for unaffected men ages
35-69 with a family history of prostate cancer or African descent. HOXB13 G84E
was genotyped by pyrosequencing in 649 PRAP participants with available DNA.
Prevalence of the mutation was calculated for PRAP and for reported studies and
exact binomial confidence intervals were generated. Prevalence of the G84E
mutation in non-African PRAP men was 0.73 %. When placed in context of the
literature, this was higher than reported controls. One G84E mutation carrier was
notably of Hispanic background. While the HOXB13 G84E mutation may be rare, there
may be a future role in genetic testing for this mutation after further studies
of clinical utility in assessing prostate cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC4028414
PMID: 24310616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Tumour Biol. 2014 Apr;35(4):3113-7. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1403-x. Epub 2013 Nov
22.

Two-gene expression ratio as predictor for breast cancer treated with tamoxifen: 
evidence from meta-analysis.

Zhao L(1), Zhu S, Gao Y, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)International Medical School, Tianjin Medical University, 300070, Tianjin,
China.

A HOXB13-to-IL17BR expression ratio was previously identified to predict a
clinical outcome of breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen. A
large number of studies were addressed to confirm its function as a predictor of 
breast cancer outcome treated with tamoxifen. However, conflicting results were
got. In this study, a systematic search of databases was carried out, and other
relevant papers were also identified. Then, the analyses were conducted according
to the PRISMA and MOOSE guidelines. After full review, 11 studies with a total of
2,958 participants were deemed eligible and were included in the study. Pooled
results revealed that women with higher HOXB13-to-IL17BR expression ratio had
significantly worse outcomes in breast patients treated with tamoxifen,
especially for those who are negative of node.

PMID: 24264313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Toxicol Sci. 2013;38(6):821-2.

Knockdown of the gene for homeobox protein HOXB13 reduces toxicity of
oxidative-stress inducers in HEK293 cells.

Nakano R(1), Takahashi T, Naganuma A, Hwang GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Biochemical Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University.

HEK293 cells transfected with a double-stranded siRNA to suppress expression of
the homeobox gene HOXB13 were highly resistant to oxidative stress-inducing
agents, such as hydrogen peroxide, N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), and paraquat. This
finding suggests that HOXB13 might enhance cell injury caused by oxidative
stress.

PMID: 24213000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BJU Int. 2014 May;113(5):830-5. doi: 10.1111/bju.12522. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Prevalence of the HOXB13 G84E prostate cancer risk allele in men treated with
radical prostatectomy.

Beebe-Dimmer JL(1), Isaacs WB, Zuhlke KA, Yee C, Walsh PC, Isaacs SD, Johnson AM,
Ewing CE, Humphreys EB, Chowdhury WH, Montie JE, Cooney KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA; Barbara Ann 
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Population Studies and Disparities Research Program,
Detroit, MI, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence and clinical correlates of the G84E
mutation in the homeobox transcription factor, or HOXB13, gene using DNA samples 
from 9559 men with prostate cancer undergoing radical prostatectomy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DNA samples from men treated with radical prostatectomy at 
the University of Michigan and John Hopkins University were genotyped for G84E
and this was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The frequency and distribution of
this allele was determined according to specific patient characteristics (family 
history, age at diagnosis, pathological Gleason grade and stage).
RESULTS: Of 9559 patients, 128 (1.3%) were heterozygous carriers of G84E.
Patients who possessed the variant were more likely to have a family history of
prostate cancer than those who did not (46.0 vs 35.4%; P = 0.006). G84E carriers 
were also more likely to be diagnosed at a younger age than non-carriers (55.2
years vs 58.1 years; P < 0.001). No difference in the proportion of patients
diagnosed with high grade or advanced stage tumours according to carrier status
was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, carriers of the rare G84E variant in HOXB13
were both younger at the time of diagnosis and more likely to have a family
history of prostate cancer compared with homozygotes for the wild-type allele. No
significant differences in allele frequency were detected according to selected
clinical characteristics of prostate cancer. Further investigation is required to
evaluate the role of HOXB13 in prostate carcinogenesis.

© 2013 The Authors. BJU International © 2013 BJU International.

PMCID: PMC3984347
PMID: 24148311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Virchows Arch. 2013 Dec;463(6):803-9. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1495-0. Epub 2013
Oct 22.

HOXB13 is a sensitive and specific marker of prostate cells, useful in
distinguishing between carcinomas of prostatic and urothelial origin.

Varinot J(1), Cussenot O, Roupret M, Conort P, Bitker MO, Chartier-Kastler E,
Cheng L, Compérat E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Oncotype Urologie-GRC UPMC-05, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière,
Paris, France, justinevarinot@hotmail.com.

The origin of a primary or metastatic carcinoma in the pelvic area is sometimes
difficult to establish, in particular the distinction between those originating
in the bladder and the prostate. A candidate marker is the HOXB13 gene, essential
for prostate development. Some studies have shown expression of HOXB13 protein by
immunohistochemistry in the nuclear compartment of benign prostate luminal
epithelium and prostate carcinoma. Forty-two cases of biopsies and resection
specimens of the prostate and urinary bladder, metastatic lymph nodes, and pelvic
masses were retrieved from our databases. In all cases, doubt persisted regarding
prostatic versus urothelial origin. All cases were stained for CK7, p63, p504s,
PSA, CK20, and HOXB13. Chromogranin A, CD56, and synaptophysin were used when
neuroendocrine differentiation was suspected. HOXB13 staining was negative or
only weakly positive in all carcinomas of urothelial origin. Three of four
carcinomas with neuroendocrine differentiation did not express HOXB13. The fourth
carcinoma, in a patient with a history of prostate carcinoma, was positive. In
two cases with a synchronous prostatic and urothelial carcinoma, HOXB13 was
exclusively expressed in the prostatic carcinoma. Our results demonstrate that
HOXB13 expression identifies prostatic origin of a carcinoma with good
sensitivity (89 %) and very good specificity (100 %). HOXB13 is a specific and
sensitive marker for prostate cells and a valuable diagnostic tool, especially
when poorly differentiated or neuroendocrine tumors are encountered. These
results justify testing of HOXB13 as a prostate-specific carcinoma marker in
larger cohorts for a more thorough evaluation of its sensitivity and specificity.

PMID: 24146108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncogene. 2014 Sep 11;33(37):4558-67. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.404. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

HOXB13 downregulates intracellular zinc and increases NF-<U+03BA>B signaling to promote 
prostate cancer metastasis.

Kim YR(1), Kim IJ(1), Kang TW(2), Choi C(3), Kim KK(4), Kim MS(5), Nam KI(1),
Jung C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju,
Korea. (2)Department of Urology, Chonnam National University Medical School,
Gwangju, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Chonnam National University Medical
School, Gwangju, Korea. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Chonnam National
University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea. (5)Department of Statistics, College
of Natural Sciences, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Korea.

Characteristically, prostate cancer (PCa) cells exhibit marked decrease in
intracellular zinc; however, the mechanism responsible is not clearly understood.
HOXB13 is involved in PCa progression and is overexpressed in
castration-resistant PCa. DNA microarray analysis of LNCaP Pca cells showed that 
ZnT zinc output transporters were strikingly upregulated among
androgen-independent HOXB13 target genes. Furthermore, exogenous HOXB13 caused
intracellular zinc concentrations to fall in PCa cells, stimulated NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated
signaling by reducing inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B alpha (I<U+03BA>Ba) and enhanced the nuclear
translocation of RelA/p65. Human prostate tumors also exhibited strong inverse
correlation between the protein expressions of HOXB13 and I<U+03BA>Ba. Consequently,
HOXB13 stimulated PCa cell invasion, and this was inhibited by the suppression of
ZnT4. In addition, studies in a PC3 orthotopic mouse model of PCa metastasis
showed that HOXB13 is a strong metastatic stimulator. Taken together, these
results show that HOXB13 promotes PCa invasion and metastasis by decreasing
intracellular zinc levels, thus stimulating NF-<U+03BA>B signals, and suggest that
HOXB13 acts as a modulator of intracellular zinc levels that promotes the
malignant characteristics of PCa.

PMID: 24096478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Gene. 2013 Dec 15;532(2):173-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.079. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

A common nonsense mutation of the BLM gene and prostate cancer risk and survival.

Antczak A(1), Kluzniak W, Wokolorczyk D, Kashyap A, Jakubowska A, Gronwald J,
Huzarski T, Byrski T, Debniak T, Masojc B, Górski B, Gromowski T, Nagorna A,
Golab A, Sikorski A, Slojewski M, Gliniewicz B, Borkowski T, Borkowski A,
Przybyla J, Sosnowski M, Malkiewicz B, Zdrojowy R, Sikorska-Radek P, Matych J,
Wilkosz J, Rózanski W, Kis J, Bar K, Domagala P, Stawicka M, Milecki P, Akbari
MR, Narod SA, Lubinski J, Cybulski C; Polish Hereditary Prostate Cancer
Consortium; Other members of the Polish Hereditary Prostate Cancer Consortium,
Bryniarski P, Paradysz A, Jersak K, Niemirowicz J, Slupski P, Jarzemski P,
Skrzypczyk M, Dobruch J, Domagala W, Chosia M, van de Wetering T,
Serrano-Fernández P, Puszynski M, Soczawa M, Switala J, Archimowicz S, Kordowski 
M, Zyczkowski M, Borówka A, Baginska J, Krajka K, Szwiec M, Haus O, Janiszewska
H, Stembalska A, Sasiadek MM.

Collaborators: Bryniarski P, Paradysz A, Jersak K, Niemirowicz J, Slupski P,
Jarzemski P, Skrzypczyk M, Dobruch J, Domagala W, Chosia M, van de Wetering T,
Serrano-Fernández P, Puszynski M, Soczawa M, Switala J, Archimowicz S, Kordowski 
M, Zyczkowski M, Borówka A, Baginska J, Krajka K, Szwiec M, Haus O, Janiszewska
H, Stembalska A, Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Urology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Germline mutations of BRCA2 and NBS1 genes cause inherited recessive 
chromosomal instability syndromes and predispose to prostate cancer of poor
prognosis. Mutations of the BLM gene cause another chromosomal instability
clinical syndrome, called Bloom syndrome. Recently, a recurrent truncating
mutation of BLM (Q548X) has been associated with a 6-fold increased risk of
breast cancer in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine, but its role in prostate cancer
etiology and survival has not been investigated yet.
METHODS: To establish whether the Q548X allele of the BLM gene is present in
Poland, and whether this allele predisposes to poor prognosis prostate cancer, we
genotyped 3337 men with prostate cancer and 2604 controls.
RESULTS: Q548X was detected in 13 of 3337 (0.4%) men with prostate cancer
compared to 15 of 2604 (0.6%) controls (OR=0.7; 95% CI 0.3-1.4). A positive
family history of any cancer in a first- or second-degree relative was seen only 
in 4 of the 13 (30%) mutation positive families, compared to 49% (1485/3001) of
the non-carrier families (p=0.3). The mean follow-up was 49months. Survival was
similar among carriers of Q548X and non-carriers (HR=1.1; p=0.9). The 5-year
survival for men with a BLM mutation was 83%, compared to 72% for
mutation-negative cases.
CONCLUSIONS: BLM Q548X is a common founder mutation in Poland. We found no
evidence that this mutation predisposes one to prostate cancer or affect prostate
cancer survival. However, based on the observed 0.6% population frequency of the 
Q548X allele, we estimate that one in 100,000 children should be affected by
Bloom syndrome in Poland.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Tumour Biol. 2014 Feb;35(2):1177-82. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1157-5. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

G84E mutation in HOXB13 is firmly associated with prostate cancer risk: a
meta-analysis.

Huang H(1), Cai B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, 32500, China.

The rare but recurrent germline G84E mutation in HOXB13 was recently found to be 
associated with a significantly increased risk of familial prostate cancer (PCa).
However, epidemiologic findings have been inconsistent. In an attempt to confirm 
and expand the findings that the PCa risk increased in men carrying G84E, we
therefore performed a meta-analysis to clarify the association between the
germline G84E mutation and PCa risk. We also aim to verify the increased PCa risk
with respect to diagnostic age, family history, and disease aggressiveness.
Comprehensive search of databases was carried out, and other relevant articles
were also identified. Then, the meta-analyses were conducted according to the
standard guidelines. A total of 11 studies with 120,167 participants were
included on the basis of inclusion criteria. The G84E allele carrier frequencies 
ranged from 0.1 to 4.9 % in the patients with PCa, as compared with 0 to 1.4 % in
control subjects. Men with the HOXB13 G84E variant had a 4.51-fold higher
relative risk of PCa compared with non-carriers (95 % CI 3.28-6.20). The much
higher risks were observed in individuals with early onset (odds ratio (OR)<U+2009>=
9.73, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 6.57-14.39), more than two affected relatives
(OR = 7.27, 95 % CI 4.02-13.15), and highly aggressive disease (OR = 5.81, 95 %
CI 3.72-9.08). Our findings provide further evidences that the rare mutation in
HOXB13 contributes to both hereditary and sporadic PCa risk. Despite the low G84E
carrier rate, biological and clinical implications of the mutation in subjects
with early onset, more than two affected relatives, and highly aggressive disease
remain important in continued investigation.

PMID: 24026887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur Urol. 2014 Jun;65(6):1191-7. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2013.07.006. Epub 2013 Jul
26.

Analytic and clinical validation of a prostate cancer-enhanced messenger RNA
detection assay in whole blood as a prognostic biomarker for survival.

Danila DC(1), Anand A(2), Schultz N(3), Heller G(4), Wan M(5), Sung CC(5), Dai
C(2), Khanin R(3), Fleisher M(5), Lilja H(6), Scher HI(7).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. (2)Genitourinary Oncology Service,
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. (3)Department of Computational Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (5)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Urology
Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY, USA; Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. (7)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: scherh@mskcc.org.

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers based on detecting prostate cancer (PCa)-specific
transcripts in blood are associated with inferior outcomes, but their validation 
in a clinical context is lacking.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether detecting enhanced transcripts for PCa in whole
blood using an analytically valid assay has prognostic significance relative to
circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The detection of KLK3, KLK2, HOXB13, GRHL2,
and FOXA1 in whole blood by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was studied in 97 men with metastatic castration-resistant PCa (mCRPC)
as a prognostic factor for overall survival.
INTERVENTION: The 2.5 ml of blood was collected in PAXgene tubes for total RNA
extraction and 7.5 ml for CTC enumeration from patients with progressive mCRPC.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: PCa-enriched genes were detected
using a sensitive RT-PCR assay in whole blood from patients with mCRPC.
Analytical validity of the assay was established in a clinical laboratory
environment. The frequency of detecting transcripts was compared to CTC
enumeration using CellSearch in an independent data set and survival associations
were explored by concordance probability estimate (CPE).
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: Two or more genes were detected by PCR in 53% of
patients (51 of 97; 95% confidence interval [CI], 43-63%), and unfavorable CTC
counts (five of more cells) were seen in 46% (45 of 97; 95% CI, 36-56%).
Importantly, transcripts were detectable in 11 of 52 patients with favorable CTC 
counts (21%; 95% CI, 8-35%). Transcript detection predicted overall survival in a
proportional hazards model. Significantly, the predictive accuracy of RT-PCR
detection in combination with CTC enumeration had a CPE of 0.752 (standard error:
0.038), although this was limited by the number of patients evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: This validated RT-PCR assay detecting prostate-specific RNA in whole
blood is prognostic for survival and may assess patient risk in tandem with
CellSearch CTC enumeration. Its clinical utility is being prospectively explored.

Copyright © 2013 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4113474
PMID: 23954088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;73(17):5449-58. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1178. Epub
2013 Jul 5.

HOXB13 mediates tamoxifen resistance and invasiveness in human breast cancer by
suppressing ERa and inducing IL-6 expression.

Shah N(1), Jin K, Cruz LA, Park S, Sadik H, Cho S, Goswami CP, Nakshatri H, Gupta
R, Chang HY, Zhang Z, Cimino-Mathews A, Cope L, Umbricht C, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology, Surgery, and Pathology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA. nshahnb@gmail.com

Most breast cancers expressing the estrogen receptor a (ERa) are treated
successfully with the receptor antagonist tamoxifen (TAM), but many of these
tumors recur. Elevated expression of the homeodomain transcription factor HOXB13 
correlates with TAM-resistance in ERa-positive (ER+) breast cancer, but little is
known regarding the underlying mechanism. Our comprehensive evaluation of HOX
gene expression using tiling microarrays, with validation, showed that distant
metastases from TAM-resistant patients also displayed high HOXB13 expression,
suggesting a role for HOXB13 in tumor dissemination and survival. Here we show
that HOXB13 confers TAM resistance by directly downregulating ERa transcription
and protein expression. HOXB13 elevation promoted cell proliferation in vitro and
growth of tumor xenografts in vivo. Mechanistic investigations showed that HOXB13
transcriptionally upregulated interleukin (IL)-6, activating the mTOR pathway via
STAT3 phosphorylation to promote cell proliferation and fibroblast recruitment.
Accordingly, mTOR inhibition suppressed fibroblast recruitment and proliferation 
of HOXB13-expressing ER+ breast cancer cells and tumor xenografts, alone or in
combination with TAM. Taken together, our results establish a function for HOXB13
in TAM resistance through direct suppression of ERa and they identify the IL-6
pathways as mediator of disease progression and recurrence.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3967590
PMID: 23832664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013 Jul 17;105(14):1036-42. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt146. Epub
2013 Jun 28.

Prediction of late disease recurrence and extended adjuvant letrozole benefit by 
the HOXB13/IL17BR biomarker.

Sgroi DC(1), Carney E, Zarrella E, Steffel L, Binns SN, Finkelstein DM,
Szymonifka J, Bhan AK, Shepherd LE, Zhang Y, Schnabel CA, Erlander MG, Ingle JN, 
Porter P, Muss HB, Pritchard KI, Tu D, Rimm DL, Goss PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Molecular Pathology Unit, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. dsgroi@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers to optimize extended adjuvant endocrine therapy for women 
with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer are limited. The HOXB13/IL17BR
(H/I) biomarker predicts recurrence risk in ER-positive, lymph node-negative
breast cancer patients. H/I was evaluated in MA.17 trial for prognostic
performance for late recurrence and treatment benefit from extended adjuvant
letrozole.
METHODS: A prospective-retrospective, nested case-control design of 83
recurrences matched to 166 nonrecurrences from letrozole- and placebo-treated
patients within MA.17 was conducted. Expression of H/I within primary tumors was 
determined by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction with a prespecified
cutpoint. The predictive ability of H/I for ascertaining benefit from letrozole
was determined using multivariable conditional logistic regression including
standard clinicopathological factors as covariates. All statistical tests were
two-sided.
RESULTS: High H/I was statistically significantly associated with a decrease in
late recurrence in patients receiving extended letrozole therapy (odds ratio [OR]
= 0.35; 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.16 to 0.75; P = .007). In an adjusted
model with standard clinicopathological factors, high H/I remained statistically 
significantly associated with patient benefit from letrozole (OR = 0.33; 95% CI =
0.15 to 0.73; P = .006). Reduction in the absolute risk of recurrence at 5 years 
was 16.5% for patients with high H/I (P = .007). The interaction between H/I and 
letrozole treatment was statistically significant (P = .03).
CONCLUSIONS: In the absence of extended letrozole therapy, high H/I identifies a 
subgroup of ER-positive patients disease-free after 5 years of tamoxifen who are 
at risk for late recurrence. When extended endocrine therapy with letrozole is
prescribed, high H/I predicts benefit from therapy and a decreased probability of
late disease recurrence.

PMCID: PMC3888138
PMID: 23812955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Br J Cancer. 2013 Jun 25;108(12):2601-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.261. Epub 2013 May
30.

A personalised approach to prostate cancer screening based on genotyping of risk 
founder alleles.

Cybulski C(1), Wokolorczyk D, Kluzniak W, Kashyap A, Golab A, Slojewski M,
Sikorski A, Puszynski M, Soczawa M, Borkowski T, Borkowski A, Antczak A, Przybyla
J, Sosnowski M, Malkiewicz B, Zdrojowy R, Domagala P, Piotrowski K, Menkiszak J, 
Krzystolik K, Gronwald J, Jakubowska A, Górski B, Debniak T, Masojc B, Huzarski
T, Muir KR, Lophatananon A, Lubinski J, Narod SA; Polish Hereditary Prostate
Cancer Consortium.

Collaborators: Byrski T, Sikorska-Radek P, Matych J, Wilkosz J, Rózanski W, Kis
J, Bar K, Slupski P, Jarzemski P, Bryniarski P, Paradysz A, Jersak K, Niemirowicz
J, Skrzypczyk M, Dobruch J, Switala J, Kwias Z, Borówka A, Domagala W, Chosia M, 
Kordowski M, Baginska J, Krajka K, Archimowicz S, Szwiec M, Zyczkowski M, van de 
Wetering T, Stawicka M, Haus O, Janiszewska H, Stembalska A, Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, International Hereditary Cancer Center, 
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. cezarycy@sci.pam.szczecin.pl

BACKGROUND: To evaluate whether genotyping for 18 prostate cancer founder
variants is helpful in identifying high-risk individuals and for determining
optimal screening regimens.
METHODS: A serum PSA level was measured and a digital rectal examination (DRE)
was performed on 2907 unaffected men aged 40-90. Three hundred and twenty-three
men with an elevated PSA (=4 ng ml<U+207B>¹) or an abnormal DRE underwent a prostate
biopsy. All men were genotyped for three founder alleles in BRCA1 (5382insC,
4153delA and C61G), for four alleles in CHEK2 (1100delC, IVS2+1G>A, del5395 and
I157T), for one allele in NBS1 (657del5), for one allele in HOXB13 (G84E), and
for nine low-risk single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
RESULTS: On the basis of an elevated PSA or an abnormal DRE, prostate cancer was 
diagnosed in 135 of 2907 men (4.6%). In men with a CHEK2 missense mutation I157T,
the cancer detection rate among men with an elevated PSA or an abnormal DRE was
much higher (10.2%, P=0.0008). The cancer detection rate rose with the number of 
SNP risk genotypes observed from 1.2% for men with no variant to 8.6% for men who
carried six or more variants (P=0.04). No single variant was helpful on its own
in predicting the presence of prostate cancer, however, the combination of all
rare mutations and SNPs improved predictive power (area under the curve=0.59;
P=0.03).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that testing for germline CHEK2 mutations
improves the ability to predict the presence of prostate cancer in screened men, 
however, the clinical utility of incorporating DNA variants in the screening
process is marginal.

PMCID: PMC3694242
PMID: 23722471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013 Aug;37(4):424-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2013.03.003. Epub
2013 Mar 26.

Germline HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation and risk of colorectal cancer.

Akbari MR(1), Anderson LN, Buchanan DD, Clendenning M, Jenkins MA, Win AK, Hopper
JL, Giles GG, Nam R, Narod S, Gallinger S, Cleary SP.

Author information: 
(1)Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: The HOXB13 pGly84Glu mutation has recently been associated with an 
increased risk of prostate cancer but the association of other cancer sites with 
this allele has not been assessed. Data has suggested that HOXB13 expression
levels are decreased in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines indicating this gene
may be involved in colorectal tumourigenesis.
METHODS: To evaluate a potential association of this mutation with CRC, we
genotyped the mutation in 2695 CRC cases and 4593 controls from population-based 
registries in Canada and Australia.
RESULTS: The HOXB13 pGly84Glu mutation was more common in CRC cases than controls
(0.48% vs. 0.17%, P=0.02) indicating a significant association between the HOXB13
variant and CRC risk (OR=2.8; 95%CI: 1.2-6.8). This association was attenuated
but remained significant with the inclusion of previously published and publicly 
available genotype data. Pedigree analysis of cases and controls revealed that
7/21 HOXB13 mutation carriers had a family history of prostate cancer.
DISCUSSION: This report is the first to suggest a risk of CRC associated with
mutations in the HOXB13 gene. These findings require further validation but may
be of importance in the screening and genetic counseling of families known to
carry the HOXB13 pGly84Glu mutation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3684005
PMID: 23541221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Eur Urol. 2013 Jul;64(1):173-6. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2013.03.007. Epub 2013 Mar 
14.

Germline homeobox B13 (HOXB13) G84E mutation and prostate cancer risk in European
descendants: a meta-analysis of 24,213 cases and 73, 631 controls.

Shang Z, Zhu S, Zhang H, Li L, Niu Y.

PMID: 23518396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 14;15(2):R24. doi: 10.1186/bcr3402.

HOXB13:IL17BR and molecular grade index and risk of breast cancer death among
patients with lymph node-negative invasive disease.

Habel LA, Sakoda LC, Achacoso N, Ma XJ, Erlander MG, Sgroi DC, Fehrenbacher L,
Greenberg D, Quesenberry CP Jr.

INTRODUCTION: Studies have shown that a two-gene ratio (HOXB13:IL17BR) and a
five-gene (BUB1B, CENPA, NEK2, RACGAP1, RRM2) molecular grade index (MGI) are
predictive of clinical outcomes among early-stage breast cancer patients. In an
independent population of lymph node-negative breast cancer patients from a
community hospital setting, we evaluated the performance of two risk classifiers 
that have been derived from these gene signatures combined, MGI+HOXB13:IL17BR and
the Breast Cancer Index (BCI).
METHODS: A case-control study was conducted among 4,964 Kaiser Permanente
patients diagnosed with node-negative invasive breast cancer from 1985 to 1994
who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. For 191 cases (breast cancer deaths)
and 417 matched controls, archived tumor tissues were available and analyzed for 
expression levels of the seven genes of interest and four normalization genes by 
RT-PCR. Logistic regression methods were used to estimate the relative risk (RR) 
and 10-year absolute risk of breast cancer death associated with prespecified
risk categories for MGI+HOXB13:IL17BR and BCI.
RESULTS: Both MGI+HOXB13:IL17BR and BCI classified over half of all ER-positive
patients as low risk. The 10-year absolute risks of breast cancer death for
ER-positive, tamoxifen-treated patients classified in the low-, intermediate-,
and high-risk groups were 3.7% (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.9% to 5.4%), 5.9% 
(95% CI 3.0% to 8.6%), and 12.9% (95% CI 7.9% to 17.6%) by MGI+HOXB13:IL17BR and 
3.5% (95% CI 1.9% to 5.1%), 7.0% (95% CI 3.8% to 10.1%), and 12.9% (95% CI 7.1%
to 18.3%) by BCI. Those for ER-positive, tamoxifen-untreated patients were 5.7%
(95% CI 4.0% to 7.4%), 13.8% (95% CI 8.4% to 18.9%), and 15.2% (95% CI 9.4% to
20.5%) by MGI+HOXB13:IL17BR and 5.1% (95% CI 3.6% to 6.6%), 18.6% (95% CI 10.8%
to 25.7%), and 17.5% (95% CI 11.1% to 23.5%) by BCI. After adjusting for tumor
size and grade, the RRs of breast cancer death comparing high- versus low-risk
categories of both classifiers remained elevated but were attenuated for
tamoxifen-treated and tamoxifen-untreated patients.
CONCLUSION: Among ER-positive, lymph node-negative patients not treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy, MGI+HOXB13:IL17BR and BCI were associated with risk of
breast cancer death. Both risk classifiers appeared to provide risk information
beyond standard prognostic factors.

PMCID: PMC3672697
PMID: 23497539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Fam Cancer. 2013 Dec;12(4):597-600. doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9618-y.

Prevalence of HOXB13 mutation in a population of Ashkenazi Jewish men treated for
prostate cancer.

Alanee S(1), Shah S, Vijai J, Schrader K, Hamilton R, Rau-Murthy R, Sarrel K,
Manschreck C, Eastham J, Offit K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Urology Service, and Department of Medicine, Clinical
Genetics Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

We performed a retrospective analysis of germline DNA samples from Ashkenazi
Jewish men and a comparison group of non-Ashkenazi men treated for prostate
cancer at our institution to determine the prevalence of HOXB13 G84E mutation in 
prostate cancer patients of Ashkenazi Jewish heritage, an ethnic group common to 
the New York City area. Patients were genotyped for G84E using a TaqMan assay
(Applied Biosystems). Positive cases were confirmed using Sanger sequencing.
Median age at prostate cancer diagnosis was 68 years for 889 Ashkenazi Jewish
patients, 64 years for 920 non-Ashkenazi Jewish patients. The median follow up
was 9 years for Ashkenazi Jewish patients and 8.8 years for non-Ashkenazi Jewish 
patients. Only 4 patients were found to be heterozygous carriers of G84E. They
were all of non-Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry and were diagnosed at 70, 66, 78, and
49 years of age. Two of them presented with high-risk prostate cancer. The
prevalence of G84E in the non-Ashkenazi sample was 0.4%. HOXB13 G84E mutation was
not observed in prostate cancer patients of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry treated at 
our institution. Screening for G84E, therefore, may be unnecessary in Ashkenazi
Jewish men if these results are validated by other studies.

PMID: 23475555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e54727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054727. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Population-based estimate of prostate cancer risk for carriers of the HOXB13
missense mutation G84E.

MacInnis RJ(1), Severi G, Baglietto L, Dowty JG, Jenkins MA, Southey MC, Hopper
JL, Giles GG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria, Victoria, Australia.

The HOXB13 missense mutation G84E (rs138213197) is associated with increased risk
of prostate cancer, but the current estimate of increased risk has a wide
confidence interval (width of 95% confidence interval (CI) >200-fold) so the
point estimate of 20-fold increased risk could be misleading. Population-based
family studies can be more informative for estimating risks for rare variants,
therefore, we screened for mutations in an Australian population-based series of 
early-onset prostate cancer cases (probands). We found that 19 of 1,384 (1.4%)
probands carried the missense mutation, and of these, six (32%) had a family
history of prostate cancer. We tested the 22 relatives of carriers diagnosed from
1998 to 2008 for whom we had a DNA sample, and found seven more carriers and one 
obligate carrier. The age-specific incidence for carriers was estimated to be, on
average, 16.4 (95% CI 2.5-107.2) times that for the population over the time
frame when the relatives were at risk prior to baseline. We then estimated the
age and birth year- specific cumulative risk of prostate cancer (penetrance) for 
carriers. For example, the penetrance for an unaffected male carrier born in 1950
was 19% (95% CI 5-46%) at age 60 years, 44% (95% CI 18-74%) at age 70 years and
60% (95% CI 30-85%) at age 80 years. Our study has provided a population-based
estimate of the average risk of prostate cancer for HOXB13 missense mutation G84E
carriers that can be used to guide clinical practice and research. This study has
also shown that the majority of hereditary prostate cancers due to the HOXB13
missense mutation are 'sporadic' in the sense that unselected cases with the
missense mutation do not typically report having a family history of prostate
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3574137
PMID: 23457453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013 Apr;22(4):675-80. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-1154. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

HOXB13 mutation and prostate cancer: studies of siblings and aggressive disease.

Witte JS(1), Mefford J, Plummer SJ, Liu J, Cheng I, Klein EA, Rybicki BA, Casey
G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology & Biostatistics and Urology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. jwitte@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent work detected for the first time a high-risk prostate cancer
mutation, in homeobox B13 (HOXB13) among European-Americans.
METHODS: We further evaluated this G84E missense mutation (rs138213197) in two
genetic association studies of prostate cancer: a family-based study of brothers 
and a case-control study of more aggressive disease (N = 2,665 total). We then
calculated overall impact of this mutation by pooling all published studies of
European-Americans.
RESULTS: In our studies, the mutation was found exclusively among men with
prostate cancer (carrier frequency = 1.48%) or unaffected brothers of cases
carrying the mutation (frequency = 0.34%), and carrying the mutation gave an OR
for disease = 4.79 (P = 0.01). The G84E mutation was more common among men with
an earlier age of onset (=55 years) or a family history of prostate cancer. We
also observed for the first time an African-American case carrying the G84E
mutation, although at HOXB13 both of his chromosomes were of European-American
ancestry. The pooled analysis also indicated that carrying the G84E mutation
results in an almost five-fold increase in risk of prostate cancer (P = 3.5 ×
10(-17)), and this risk is even higher among cases with an early age of prostate 
cancer onset (=55 years) or a family history of disease: a test of heterogeneity 
across these strata gives P < 1 × 10(-5).
CONCLUSIONS: The HOXB13 mutation substantially increases risk of early onset,
familial prostate cancer in European-American men.
IMPACT: Testing for the G84E mutation in men with a positive family history may
help distinguish those who merit more regular screening for prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3617049
PMID: 23396964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Jun;34(6):1260-4. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt055. Epub 2013 Feb 
7.

The G84E mutation of HOXB13 is associated with increased risk for prostate
cancer: results from the REDUCE trial.

Chen Z(1), Greenwood C, Isaacs WB, Foulkes WD, Sun J, Zheng SL, Condreay LD, Xu
J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

A novel rare mutation, homeobox B13 (HOXB13) G84E, was reported to co-segregate
with prostate cancer (PCa) in hereditary PCa families and associate with PCa risk
in unrelated cases and controls. In this study, we aim to compare the G84E
mutation frequency among subjects of different races/ethnicities from various
geographic regions in the world and to assess its risk for developing PCa, in the
Reduction by Dutasteride of Prostate Cancer Events (REDUCE) trial. All the 3508
subjects had initial negative prostate biopsy and were biopsied at Year 2 and 4
for detection of PCa. The G84E mutation was detected only in Caucasians, with the
highest carrier frequency in Northern Europe (1.06%), followed by Western Europe 
(0.60%) and North America (0.31%). No mutation carrier was observed in Southern
Europe, Eastern Europe, Latin America, Australia and South Africa. In Caucasians,
the G84E mutation frequency was 0.99% and 0.24% in positive and negative biopsy
subjects, respectively (P = 0.01). In positive biopsy subjects, the frequency was
significantly higher in subjects with a positive family history than those
without (4.31% versus 0.34%, P = 0.002). In the 4 year follow-up, the PCa
detection rate was 53.8% among the 13 mutation carriers and 22.0% among 3186
non-carriers, relative risk = 2.45 (95% confidence interval: 1.48-4.07). All
mutation carriers shared a common haplotype, suggesting a founder effect. In
Finland, the G84E mutation was estimated to occur in the year 1792 (95% credible 
interval: 1735-1831). In conclusion, the G84E mutation of HOXB13, a relatively
recent mutation that likely occurred in Northern Europe, significantly increases 
risk for PCa.

PMCID: PMC3670258
PMID: 23393222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biosci. 2013 Mar;38(1):105-12.

Regulation of DU145 prostate cancer cell growth by Scm-like with four mbt domains
2.

Lee K(1), Na W, Maeng JH, Wu H, Ju BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea.

Mammalian SFMBTs have been considered to be polycomb group repressors. However,
molecular mechanisms underlying mammalian SFMBTs-mediated gene regulation and
their biological function have not been characterized. In the present study, we
identified YY1 and methylated histones as interacting proteins of human SFMBT2.
We also found that human SFMBT2 binds preferentially to methylated histone H3 and
H4 that are associated with transcriptional repression. Using DU145 prostate
cancer cells as a model, we showed that SFMBT2 has a transcriptional repression
activity on HOXB13 gene expression. In addition, occupancy of SFMBT2 coincided
with enrichment of diand tri-methylated H3K9 and H4K20 as well as tri-methylated 
H3K27 at the HOXB13 gene promoter. When SFMBT2 was depleted by siRNA in DU145
prostate cancer cells, significant up-regulation of HOXB13 gene expression and
decreased cell growth were observed. Collectively, our findings indicate that
human SFMBT2 may regulate cell growth via epigenetic regulation of HOXB13 gene
expression in DU145 prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 23385818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Mar;5(3):413-29. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201553. Epub 2013 Jan
22.

Alterations in cardiac DNA methylation in human dilated cardiomyopathy.

Haas J(1), Frese KS, Park YJ, Keller A, Vogel B, Lindroth AM, Weichenhan D,
Franke J, Fischer S, Bauer A, Marquart S, Sedaghat-Hamedani F, Kayvanpour E,
Köhler D, Wolf NM, Hassel S, Nietsch R, Wieland T, Ehlermann P, Schultz JH, Dösch
A, Mereles D, Hardt S, Backs J, Hoheisel JD, Plass C, Katus HA, Meder B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.

Dilated cardiomyopathies (DCM) show remarkable variability in their age of onset,
phenotypic presentation, and clinical course. Hence, disease mechanisms must
exist that modify the occurrence and progression of DCM, either by genetic or
epigenetic factors that may interact with environmental stimuli. In the present
study, we examined genome-wide cardiac DNA methylation in patients with
idiopathic DCM and controls. We detected methylation differences in pathways
related to heart disease, but also in genes with yet unknown function in DCM or
heart failure, namely Lymphocyte antigen 75 (LY75), Tyrosine kinase-type cell
surface receptor HER3 (ERBB3), Homeobox B13 (HOXB13) and Adenosine receptor A2A
(ADORA2A). Mass-spectrometric analysis and bisulphite-sequencing enabled
confirmation of the observed DNA methylation changes in independent cohorts.
Aberrant DNA methylation in DCM patients was associated with significant changes 
in LY75 and ADORA2A mRNA expression, but not in ERBB3 and HOXB13. In vivo studies
of orthologous ly75 and adora2a in zebrafish demonstrate a functional role of
these genes in adaptive or maladaptive pathways in heart failure.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3598081
PMID: 23341106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Prostate. 2013 Apr;73(5):542-8. doi: 10.1002/pros.22594. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

The G84E mutation in the HOXB13 gene is associated with an increased risk of
prostate cancer in Poland.

Kluzniak W(1), Wokolorczyk D, Kashyap A, Jakubowska A, Gronwald J, Huzarski T,
Byrski T, Debniak T, Golab A, Gliniewicz B, Sikorski A, Switala J, Borkowski T,
Borkowski A, Antczak A, Wojnar L, Przybyla J, Sosnowski M, Malkiewicz B, Zdrojowy
R, Sikorska-Radek P, Matych J, Wilkosz J, Rózanski W, Kis J, Bar K, Bryniarski P,
Paradysz A, Jersak K, Niemirowicz J, Slupski P, Jarzemski P, Skrzypczyk M,
Dobruch J, Domagala P, Akbari MR, Lubinski J, Narod SA, Cybulski C; Polish
Hereditary Prostate Cancer Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)International Hereditary Cancer Center, Department of Genetics and Pathology, 
Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The G84E mutation in the HOXB13 gene has been associated with a high 
lifetime risk of prostate cancer in North America (about 20-fold). The
geographical and ethnic extent of this recurrent allele has not yet been
determined.
METHODS: We assayed for the presence of the G84E mutation in 3,515 prostate
cancer patients and 2,604 controls from Poland and estimated the odds ratio for
prostate cancer associated with the allele.
RESULTS: The G84E mutation was detected in 3 of 2,604 (0.1%) individuals from the
general population in Poland and in 20 of 3,515 (0.6%) men with prostate cancer
(Odds ratio [OR]<U+2009>=<U+2009>5.0; 95% CI: 1.5-16.7; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008). The allele was present in 4
of 416 (1.0%) men with familial prostate cancer (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.4, 95% CI: 1.9-37.7;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: The G84E mutation predisposes to prostate cancer in Poland, but
accounts for only a small proportion of cases. We expect that the G84E founder
mutation might be present in other Slavic populations.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23334858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Urol. 2013 Mar;189(3):853. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.09.190. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

Editorial comment.

Kibel AS.

Comment on
    J Urol. 2013 Mar;189(3):849-53.

PMID: 23332542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nat Rev Urol. 2013 Feb;10(2):116-22. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2012.257. Epub 2013 Jan 
15.

Familial prostate cancer: the damage done and lessons learnt.

Taherian N(1), Hamel N, Bégin LR, Bismar TA, Goldgar DE, Feng BJ, Foulkes WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Research Institute of McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, QC H3G 1A4, Canada.

BACKGROUND: A 51-year-old French Canadian man presented to his family physician
owing to an extensive family history of prostate cancer in five brothers, his
father and two paternal uncles. His serum PSA level was 4.9 ng/ml and a six-core 
biopsy revealed the presence of a prostate adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of
7 (3+4). He was treated with radical prostatectomy. Repeat PSA tests revealed a
gradual rise in PSA levels despite androgen deprivation therapy with bicalutamide
and goserelin over the course of 3 years. Genetic evaluation was undertaken in
view of his personal and family history. The proband died at the age of 58 years 
of widespread metastasis.
INVESTIGATIONS: PSA testing, six-core biopsy, genetic counselling and mutation
analysis for French Canadian founder mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes,
histopathological review of tumour tissue from family members, examination of
loss of heterozygosity at the BRCA2 gene locus, immunohistochemistry to determine
the expression of the ERG nuclear oncoprotein in prostate tumours, genotyping
with eight selected risk-associated single nucleotide polymorphisms, Doppler
ultrasonography of the leg, CT of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous and
oral contrast, chest CT with intravenous contrast for the assessment of
metastatic prostate cancer, genetic testing for the G84E variant in the HOXB13
gene.
DIAGNOSIS: Early-onset and aggressive prostate cancer associated with a nonsense 
French Canadian BRCA2 founder mutation, c.5857G>T (p.Glu1953(*)).
MANAGEMENT: Radical prostatectomy, hormone therapy with bicalutamide and
goserelin, palliative chemotherapy initially with docetaxel plus prednisone then 
with mitoxantrone plus prednisone, as well as genetic counselling and testing for
the proband and his family members.

PMCID: PMC3913476
PMID: 23318356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Urol. 2013 Feb;189(2):528. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.10.124. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Re: association between germline HOXB13 G84E mutation and risk of prostate
cancer.

Taneja SS.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Aug 22;104(16):1260-2.

PMID: 23312158  [PubMed]


80. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013 Mar;22(3):452-60. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-1000-T. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

HOXB13 G84E mutation in Finland: population-based analysis of prostate, breast,
and colorectal cancer risk.

Laitinen VH(1), Wahlfors T, Saaristo L, Rantapero T, Pelttari LM, Kilpivaara O,
Laasanen SL, Kallioniemi A, Nevanlinna H, Aaltonen L, Vessella RL, Auvinen A,
Visakorpi T, Tammela TL, Schleutker J.

Author information: 
(1)Johanna Schleutker, Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Institute of
Biomedicine, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FI-20014 University of Turku, Finland.
Johanna.Schleutker@utu.fi

BACKGROUND: A recently identified germline mutation G84E in HOXB13 was shown to
increase the risk of prostate cancer. In a family-based analysis by The
International Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics (ICPCG), the G84E mutation 
was most prevalent in families from the Nordic countries of Finland (22.4%) and
Sweden (8.2%).
METHODS: To further investigate the importance of G84E in the Finns, we
determined its frequency in more than 4,000 prostate cancer cases and 5,000
controls. In addition, 986 breast cancer and 442 colorectal cancer (CRC) cases
were studied. Genotyping was conducted using TaqMan, MassARRAY iPLEX, and
sequencing. Statistical analyses were conducted using Fisher exact test, and
overall survival was analyzed using Cox modeling.
RESULTS: The frequency of the G84E mutation was significantly higher among
patients with prostate cancer and highest among patients with a family history of
the disease, hereditary prostate cancer [8.4% vs. 1.0% in controls; OR 8.8; 95%
confidence interval (CI), 4.9-15.7]. The mutation contributed significantly to
younger age (=55 years) at onset and high prostate-specific antigen (PSA; =20
ng/mL) at diagnosis. An association with increased prostate cancer risk in
patients with prior benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) diagnosis was also
revealed. No statistically significant evidence for a contribution in CRC risk
was detected, but a suggestive role for the mutation was observed in familial
BRCA1/2-negative breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm an increased cancer risk associated with the 
G84E mutation in the Finnish population, particularly for early-onset prostate
cancer and cases with substantially elevated PSA.
IMPACT: This study confirms the overall importance of the HOXB13 G84E mutation in
prostate cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 23292082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Med Chem. 2013 Feb 1;20(6):833-9.

Deregulation of HOX B13 expression in urinary bladder cancer progression.

Marra L(1), Cantile M, Scognamiglio G, Perdonà S, La Mantia E, Cerrone M,
Gigantino V, Cillo C, Caraglia M, Pignata S, Facchini G, Botti G, Chieffi S,
Chieffi P, Franco R.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Unit, National Cancer Institute G. Pascale, Naples, Italy.

Urinary bladder cancer is a common malignancy in industrialized countries. More
than 90% of bladder cancer originates in the transitional cells. Bladder
transitional cancer prognosis is, according to the most recent definition related
to the level of tumor infiltration, characterized by two main phenotypes, Non
Muscle Invasive Bladder Transitional Cancer (NMIBC) and Muscle Invasive Bladder
Transitional Cancer (MIBC). The genetic profile and the clinical course of the
two subtypes are completely different, however among NMIBC the prognosis is not
completely predictable, since 20% of the cases experience a relapse, even in the 
form of MIBC. It has recently been reported that the chromosomal region 12q13-15,
containing crucial cancer genes such as MDM2, CDK4, GLI and an entire cluster of 
HOX genes, is amplified in bladder cancer. HOX genes codify for transcriptionl
factor, involved in embryonal development and cancer progression, with main
nuclear expression. Particularly it was also described the strong involvement of 
HOX B13 in several tumors of urogenital system. In this study we have been
investigated, by immunohistochemisty and quantitative Real Time PCR, the HOX B13 
expression in bladder cancer evolution and progression, evaluating its ability to
discriminate between NMIBC and MBCI phenotypes. Cytoplasmic HOX B13
delocalization significantly relates with muscle invasion (p 0.004). In addition 
in the series of NMIBC nuclear HOX B13 expression loss is significantly
associated to shorter disease free survival (p-value=0.038) defining a potential 
prognostic role. Overexpression of HOX B13 in more aggressive phenotype is also
demonstrate at gene level by quantitative RT-PCR. The de-regulation and
delocalization of HOX B13 in urinary bladder cancer supports again the important 
role of HOX genes in tumor evolution and represents a starting point to establish
an integrated analysis, in which HOX genes represent important prognostic and
predictive markers for bladder cancer.

PMID: 23276138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2012 Sep;33(195):163-7.

[Epidemiology and risk factors of the prostate cancer].

[Article in Polish]

Stasiewicz D(1), Staroslawska E, Brzozowska A, Mocarska A, Losicki M, Szumilo J, 
Burdan F.

Author information: 
(1)St. John's Cancer Center, Lublin, Poland.

Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy of male genital organs. The
etiology of the disease is complex and remains mainly unclear. The only
established risk factors are advancing age, ethnicity and genetics, including
changing in expression of ELAC2, RNASEL, MSR1 and HOXB13 genes as well as low
number of CAG repeats in the androgen receptor gene. There are number of
coexisting environmental risk factors, such as eating habits mostly diet reach in
animal fats. An early sexual initiation and sexually transmitted infections, both
viral (HSV-2, HPV-18 and -16, CMV) and bacterial (Neisseria gonorrhoea, Treponema
pallidum, Chlamydia trachomatis) were also included. The etiology of prostate
cancer also involves the influence of hormones - androgens and estrogens, as well
as chronic inflammation of the prostate. In contrast to the incidence rate, which
varies significantly depending on the geographic region, the incidence of the
malignancy at autopsy is similar.

PMID: 23157136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Urol. 2012 Dec;188(6):2227-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.09.069. Epub 2012 Oct
22.

Re: A population-based assessment of germline HOXB13 G84E mutation and prostate
cancer risk.

Walsh PC.

PMID: 23141226  [PubMed]


84. Prostate. 2013 May;73(6):634-41. doi: 10.1002/pros.22604. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

HOXB13 mutations in a population-based, case-control study of prostate cancer.

Stott-Miller M(1), Karyadi DM, Smith T, Kwon EM, Kolb S, Stanford JL, Ostrander
EA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PC) is the most frequently diagnosed non-skin
malignancy in men in the Western world, yet few disease-associated mutations have
been found. Recently, a low frequency recurring mutation in the HOXB13 gene was
reported among both hereditary PC families and men from the general population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We determined the distribution and frequency of the G84E
HOXB13 variant in 1,310 incipient PC cases and 1,259 age-mated controls from a
population-based, case-control study of PC.
RESULTS: The G84E mutation was more frequent in cases than controls (1.3% vs.
0.4%, respectively), and men with the HOXB13 G84E variant had a 3.3-fold higher
relative risk of PC compared with noncarriers (95% CI, 1.21-8.96). There was a
stronger association between the G84E variant and PC among men with no
first-degree relative with PC (OR, 4.04; 95% CI, 1.12-14.51) compared to men with
a family history of PC (OR, 1.49; 95% CI, 0.30-7.50; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.36 for interaction).
We observed some evidence of higher risk estimates associated with the variant
for men with higher versus lower Gleason score (OR, 4.13; 95% CI, 1.38-12.38 vs. 
OR, 2.71; 95% CI, 0.88-8.30), and advanced versus local stage (OR, 4.47; 95% CI, 
1.28-15.57 vs. OR, 2.98; 95% CI, 1.04-8.49), however these differences were not
statistically different.
CONCLUSIONS: These results confirm the association of a rare HOXB13 mutation with
PC in the general population and suggest that this variant may be associated with
features of more aggressive disease.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3612366
PMID: 23129385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1326-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2437. Epub 2012 Oct 28.

A study based on whole-genome sequencing yields a rare variant at 8q24 associated
with prostate cancer.

Gudmundsson J(1), Sulem P, Gudbjartsson DF, Masson G, Agnarsson BA,
Benediktsdottir KR, Sigurdsson A, Magnusson OT, Gudjonsson SA, Magnusdottir DN,
Johannsdottir H, Helgadottir HT, Stacey SN, Jonasdottir A, Olafsdottir SB,
Thorleifsson G, Jonasson JG, Tryggvadottir L, Navarrete S, Fuertes F, Helfand BT,
Hu Q, Csiki IE, Mates IN, Jinga V, Aben KK, van Oort IM, Vermeulen SH, Donovan
JL, Hamdy FC, Ng CF, Chiu PK, Lau KM, Ng MC, Gulcher JR, Kong A, Catalona WJ,
Mayordomo JI, Einarsson GV, Barkardottir RB, Jonsson E, Mates D, Neal DE,
Kiemeney LA, Thorsteinsdottir U, Rafnar T, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. julius@decode.is

In Western countries, prostate cancer is the most prevalent cancer of men and one
of the leading causes of cancer-related death in men. Several genome-wide
association studies have yielded numerous common variants conferring risk of
prostate cancer. Here, we analyzed 32.5 million variants discovered by
whole-genome sequencing 1,795 Icelanders. We identified a new low-frequency
variant at 8q24 associated with prostate cancer in European populations,
rs188140481[A] (odds ratio (OR) = 2.90; P(combined) = 6.2 × 10(-34)), with an
average risk allele frequency in controls of 0.54%. This variant is only very
weakly correlated (r(2) = 0.06) with previously reported risk variants at 8q24,
and its association remains significant after adjustment for all known
risk-associated variants. Carriers of rs188140481[A] were diagnosed with prostate
cancer 1.26 years younger than non-carriers (P = 0.0059). We also report results 
for a previously described HOXB13 variant (rs138213197[T]), confirming it as a
prostate cancer risk variant in populations from across Europe.

PMCID: PMC3562711
PMID: 23104005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Dec;136(3):907-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2295-y.
Epub 2012 Oct 26.

The HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation is not associated with the risk of breast cancer.

Akbari MR(1), Kluzniak W, Rodin R, Li S, Wokolorczyk D, Royer R, Kashyap A,
Menkiszak J, Lubinski J, Narod SA, Cybulski C.

Author information: 
(1)Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Recently, the HOXB13 gene has been shown to be a susceptibility gene for prostate
cancer. HOXB13 is overexpressed in breast cancer tissues and HOXB13 expression in
combination with low expression of IL17BR is predictive for a tamoxifen response 
in ER-positive breast cancers. Based on observations, we hypothesized that the
HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation might be associated with breast cancer risk. We
genotyped this mutation in the germline DNA of 4,037 women with breast cancer
(including 1,082 familial cases) and in 2,762 controls from Canada and Poland.
Seven heterozygous carriers of the HOXB13 p.Gly84Glu mutation were found in the
cases (0.17 %) compared to four carriers among the controls (0.14 %; OR = 1.2, 95
% CI = 0.34-4.1, p = 1.0). Only one of the seven carriers had a family history of
breast cancer. This study does not support the hypothesis that women who carry
the HOXB13 Gly84Glu mutation are at increased risk of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3511696
PMID: 23099437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;132(1):5-14. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1229-4. Epub 2012 Oct
12.

HOXB13 is a susceptibility gene for prostate cancer: results from the
International Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics (ICPCG).

Xu J(1), Lange EM, Lu L, Zheng SL, Wang Z, Thibodeau SN, Cannon-Albright LA,
Teerlink CC, Camp NJ, Johnson AM, Zuhlke KA, Stanford JL, Ostrander EA, Wiley KE,
Isaacs SD, Walsh PC, Maier C, Luedeke M, Vogel W, Schleutker J, Wahlfors T,
Tammela T, Schaid D, McDonnell SK, DeRycke MS, Cancel-Tassin G, Cussenot O,
Wiklund F, Grönberg H, Eeles R, Easton D, Kote-Jarai Z, Whittemore AS, Hsieh CL, 
Giles GG, Hopper JL, Severi G, Catalona WJ, Mandal D, Ledet E, Foulkes WD, Hamel 
N, Mahle L, Moller P, Powell I, Bailey-Wilson JE, Carpten JD, Seminara D, Cooney 
KA, Isaacs WB; International Consortium for Prostate Cancer Genetics.

Author information: 
(1)Data Coordinating Center for the ICPCG, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

Comment in
    Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;132(1):1-4.

Prostate cancer has a strong familial component but uncovering the molecular
basis for inherited susceptibility for this disease has been challenging.
Recently, a rare, recurrent mutation (G84E) in HOXB13 was reported to be
associated with prostate cancer risk. Confirmation and characterization of this
finding is necessary to potentially translate this information to the clinic. To 
examine this finding in a large international sample of prostate cancer families,
we genotyped this mutation and 14 other SNPs in or flanking HOXB13 in 2,443
prostate cancer families recruited by the International Consortium for Prostate
Cancer Genetics (ICPCG). At least one mutation carrier was found in 112 prostate 
cancer families (4.6 %), all of European descent. Within carrier families, the
G84E mutation was more common in men with a diagnosis of prostate cancer (194 of 
382, 51 %) than those without (42 of 137, 30 %), P = 9.9 × 10(-8) [odds ratio
4.42 (95 % confidence interval 2.56-7.64)]. A family-based association test found
G84E to be significantly over-transmitted from parents to affected offspring (P =
6.5 × 10(-6)). Analysis of markers flanking the G84E mutation indicates that it
resides in the same haplotype in 95 % of carriers, consistent with a founder
effect. Clinical characteristics of cancers in mutation carriers included
features of high-risk disease. These findings demonstrate that the HOXB13 G84E
mutation is present in ~5 % of prostate cancer families, predominantly of
European descent, and confirm its association with prostate cancer risk. While
future studies are needed to more fully define the clinical utility of this
observation, this allele and others like it could form the basis for early,
targeted screening of men at elevated risk for this common, clinically
heterogeneous cancer.

PMCID: PMC3535370
PMID: 23064873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;58(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.118. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

HOX gene methylation status analysis in patients with hereditary breast cancer.

Pilato B(1), Pinto R, De Summa S, Lambo R, Paradiso A, Tommasi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Research Centre, Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari,
Italy.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to
aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical
for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in 
cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the
possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role
in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of 
HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in
patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA
mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10
has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy
subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of 
all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with 
absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13,
HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1=10%,
P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible
involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify 
high-risk patients.

PMID: 23051705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Urol. 2013 Mar;189(3):849-53. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.09.117. Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Testing for the recurrent HOXB13 G84E germline mutation in men with clinical
indications for prostate biopsy.

Schroeck FR(1), Zuhlke KA, Siddiqui J, Siddiqui R, Cooney KA, Wei JT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Services Research, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Mar;189(3):853.

PURPOSE: The G84E variant of HOXB13 was recently found to be associated with a
significantly increased risk of prostate cancer in a case control study. We
estimated the prevalence of this mutation in a clinical population of men at risk
for prostate cancer who were scheduled to undergo prostate biopsy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We prospectively collected clinical information and DNA
samples from men who underwent diagnostic prostate biopsy between June 2005 and
October 2011. We genotyped samples for HOXB13 G84E using the MassARRAY® system.
We determined the prevalence of the G84E variant in the overall cohort, among
patients with a positive family history and among men age 55 years or younger.
RESULTS: A total of 1,175 subjects underwent biopsy, of whom 948 had a DNA sample
for analysis. The G84E variant was detected in 4 patients (prevalence 0.42%, 95% 
CI 0.12-1.08), of whom 3 had prostate cancer on biopsy. None of 301 patients with
a positive family history (prevalence 0.00%, 95% CI 0.00-1.22) and 1 of 226
patients age 55 years or younger tested positive (prevalence 0.44%, 95% CI
0.01-2.44).
CONCLUSIONS: The HOXB13 G84E variant is rare in this cohort, even among those
with a positive family history. Our findings question the utility of testing for 
this variant among unselected men presenting for a diagnostic prostate biopsy.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4193792
PMID: 23036981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;132(1):1-4. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1226-7. Epub 2012 Sep 22.

Familial prostate cancer and HOXB13 founder mutations: geographic and
racial/ethnic variations.

Lynch HT, Shaw TG.

Comment on
    Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;132(1):5-14.

PMID: 23001594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. BJU Int. 2012 Dec;110(11 Pt C):E809-18. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2012.11450.x.
Epub 2012 Sep 14.

Prostate cancer: germline prediction for a commonly variable malignancy.

Bambury RM(1), Gallagher DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital and St
James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. richardbambury@me.com

What's known on the subject? and What does the study add? Prostate cancer is a
heterogeneous disease and biomarkers to predict its incidence and subsequent
clinical behaviour are needed to tailor screening, prevention and therapeutic
strategies. Rare mutations in genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2 and HOXB13 can affect
prostate cancer incidence and/or clinical behaviour. Genome wide association
studies (GWAS) have identified more common genetic variations that explain an
estimated 20% of familial prostate cancer risk. In this review, we focus on the
potential of germline genetic variation to provide biomarkers for prostate cancer
screening, prevention and management. We discuss how germline genetics may have a
role in treatment selection if reliable pharmacogenetic predictors of efficacy
and toxicity can be identified. We have outlined possible mechanisms for
including germline investigation in future prostate cancer clinical
trials.OBJECTIVES:  Prostate cancer is a heterogeneous disease and biomarkers to
predict its incidence and subsequent clinical behaviour are needed to tailor
screening, prevention and therapeutic strategies.  In this review we focus on
the potential of germline genetic variation to provide these biomarkers.
METHODS:  We review the published literature on germline genetics in prostate
cancer and examine the possibility of including germline genetic biomarkers in
future prostate cancer clinical trials.
RESULTS:  Rare mutations in genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2 and HOXB13 can affect
prostate cancer incidence and/or clinical behaviour.  Genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) have identified more common genetic variations that explain an
estimated 20% of familial prostate cancer risk.  Germline genetics may have a
role in treatment selection, if reliable pharmacogenetic predictors of efficacy
and toxicity can be identified.
CONCLUSION:  This rapidly emerging area of prostate cancer research may provide 
answers to current clinical conundrums in the prostate cancer treatment paradigm.
We have outlined possible mechanisms for including germline investigation in
future prostate cancer clinical trial design.

© 2012 THE AUTHORS. BJU INTERNATIONAL © 2012 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 22974436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 15;371(2):246-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.016. Epub 2012 
Aug 30.

Wnt signaling though beta-catenin is required for prostate lineage specification.

Simons BW(1), Hurley PJ, Huang Z, Ross AE, Miller R, Marchionni L, Berman DM,
Schaeffer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Comparative Pathobiology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. simons@jhmi.edu

Androgens initiate a complex network of signals within the UGS that trigger
prostate lineage commitment and bud formation. Given its contributions to
organogenesis in other systems, we investigated a role for canonical Wnt
signaling in prostate development. We developed a new method to achieve complete 
deletion of beta-catenin, the transcriptional coactivator required for canonical 
Wnt signaling, in early prostate development. Beta-catenin deletion abrogated
canonical Wnt signaling and yielded prostate rudiments that exhibited
dramatically decreased budding and failed to adopt prostatic identity. This
requirement for canonical Wnt signaling was limited to a brief critical period
during the initial molecular phase of prostate identity specification. Deletion
of beta-catenin in the adult prostate did not significantly affect organ
homeostasis. Collectively, these data establish that beta-catenin and Wnt
signaling play key roles in prostate lineage specification and bud outgrowth.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3472417
PMID: 22960283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. N Engl J Med. 2012 Aug 2;367(5):480-1. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1205138.

Association of a HOXB13 variant with breast cancer.

Alanee S, Couch F, Offit K.

PMCID: PMC3926433
PMID: 22853031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur Urol. 2014 Jan;65(1):169-76. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.07.027. Epub 2012 Jul
20.

A population-based assessment of germline HOXB13 G84E mutation and prostate
cancer risk.

Karlsson R(1), Aly M, Clements M, Zheng L, Adolfsson J, Xu J, Grönberg H, Wiklund
F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: robert.karlsson@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: A rare but recurrent missense mutation (G84E, rs138213197) in the
gene homeobox B13 (HOXB13) was recently reported to be associated with hereditary
prostate cancer.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the prevalence and penetrance of HOXB13 G84E in a general
population.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: G84E and 14 additional HOXB13 polymorphisms
were genotyped in two population-based, Swedish, case-control samples (Cancer of 
the Prostate in Sweden [CAPS] and Stockholm-1) comprising 4693 controls and 5003 
prostate cancer cases. CAPS collected data on patients and population controls
nationally between 2001 and 2003. Stockholm-1 collected data on biopsy-positive
patients and biopsy-negative controls in the Stockholm area between 2005 and
2007.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: The outcome was pathologically
verified prostate cancer. Relative and absolute risks among HOXB13 G84E mutation 
carriers were explored, as was the combined impact on disease risk of G84E and a 
polygenic score based on 33 established, common, low-risk variants.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: HOXB13 G84E was observed in 1.3% of population controls 
and was strongly associated with prostate cancer risk (CAPS: odds ratio [OR]:
3.4; 95% confidence interval [CI], 2.2-5.4; Stockholm-1: OR: 3.5; 95% CI,
2.4-5.2). The strongest association was observed for young-onset (OR: 8.6; 95%
CI, 5.1-14.0) and hereditary (OR: 6.6; 95% CI, 3.3-12.0) prostate cancer.
Haplotype analyses supported that G84E is a founder mutation. G84E carriers have 
an estimated 33% (95% CI, 23-46) cumulative risk to age 80 yr of prostate cancer,
compared to 12% (95% CI, 11-13) among noncarriers. For G84E carriers within the
top quartile of a polygenic score of established susceptibility variants, the
cumulative risk was estimated at 48% (95% CI, 36-64).
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB13 G84E is prevalent in >1% of the Swedish population and is
associated with a 3.5-fold increased risk of prostate cancer. One-third of G84E
carriers will be diagnosed with prostate cancer, which has implications for
surveillance in mutation carriers.

Copyright © 2012 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22841674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040943. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

ATRA inhibits the proliferation of DU145 prostate cancer cells through reducing
the methylation level of HOXB13 gene.

Liu Z(1), Ren G, Shangguan C, Guo L, Dong Z, Li Y, Zhang W, Zhao L, Hou P, Zhang 
Y, Wang X, Lu J, Huang B.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University,
Changchun, China.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has been widely investigated for treatments of
many cancers including prostate cancer. HOXB13, silenced in androgen
receptor-negative (AR(-)) prostate cancer cells, plays a role in AR(-) prostate
cancer cell growth arrest. In this study we intended to elucidate the mechanisms 
that are involved in the proliferation inhibition of AR(-) prostate cancer cells 
triggered by ATRA. We discovered that ATRA was able to induce the growth arrest
and to increase HOXB13 expression in AR(-) prostate cancer cells. Both EZH2 and
DNMT3b participated in the repression of HOXB13 expression through an epigenetic 
mechanism involving DNA and histone methylation modifications. Specifically, EZH2
recruited DNMT3b to HOXB13 promoter to form a repression complex. Moreover, ATRA 
could upregulate HOXB13 through decreasing EZH2 and DNMT3b expressions and
reducing their interactions with the HOXB13 promoter. Concurrently, the
methylation level of the HOXB13 promoter was reduced upon the treatment of ATRA. 
Results from this study implicated a novel effect of ATRA in inhibition of the
growth of AR(-) resistant human prostate cancer cells through alteration of
HOXB13 expression as a result of epigenetic modifications.

PMCID: PMC3396626
PMID: 22808286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012 Aug 22;104(16):1260-2. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djs288. Epub
2012 Jul 9.

Association between germline HOXB13 G84E mutation and risk of prostate cancer.

Akbari MR(1), Trachtenberg J, Lee J, Tam S, Bristow R, Loblaw A, Narod SA, Nam
RK.

Author information: 
(1)Women's College Research Institute, Women's College Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Feb;189(2):528.

Recently, a G84E mutation in HOXB13, a gene involved in prostate development, was
shown to be strongly associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer. To
confirm this association in a screening setting, we conducted a case-control
study and sequenced germline DNA from peripheral leukocytes of 1843 men diagnosed
with prostate cancer (case subjects) and 2225 men without prostate cancer
(control subjects) for mutations in HOXB13. Subjects (aged 40-94 years) were
prescreened and underwent a prostate biopsy at two tertiary care centers in
Canada. The frequency of HOXB13 variants was determined in case subjects and
control subjects by race, and odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were based
on 2×2 table analysis. All statistical tests were two-sided. Twelve men of white 
race were identified to be carriers of the G84E mutation. The G84E mutation was
more frequent among white case subjects than among white control subjects (10 of 
1525 [0.7%] vs 2 of 1757 [0.1%], P = .01) and was associated with an increased
risk of prostate cancer (unadjusted odds ratio = 5.8, 95% confidence interval =
1.3 to 26.5, P = .01).

PMID: 22781434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Prostate. 2013 Jan;73(2):169-75. doi: 10.1002/pros.22552. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

A novel germline mutation in HOXB13 is associated with prostate cancer risk in
Chinese men.

Lin X(1), Qu L, Chen Z, Xu C, Ye D, Shao Q, Wang X, Qi J, Chen Z, Zhou F, Wang M,
Wang Z, He D, Wu D, Gao X, Yuan J, Wang G, Xu Y, Wang G, Dong P, Jiao Y, Yang J, 
Ou-Yang J, Jiang H, Zhu Y, Ren S, Zhang Z, Yin C, Wu Q, Zheng Y, Turner AR, Tao
S, Na R, Ding Q, Lu D, Shi R, Sun J, Liu F, Zheng SL, Mo Z, Sun Y, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Fudan-VARI Center for Genetic Epidemiology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: A rare mutation G84E in HOXB13 was recently identified to be
associated with prostate cancer (PCa) in Caucasians. The goal of this study is to
test association between HOXB13 genetic variants and PCa risk in Chinese men.
METHODS: All study subjects were part of the Chinese Consortium for Prostate
Cancer Genetics (ChinaPCa). In the first stage, we screened for mutations by
sequencing the HOXB13 coding region in 96 unrelated PCa patients. In stage 2,
G84E and novel mutations found in stage 1 were genotyped in 671 PCa patients and 
1,536 controls. In stage 3, mutation status in 751 additional PCa patients was
imputed via haplotype.
RESULTS: The G84E mutation was not detected in this study. However, a novel
mutation, G135E, was identified among 96 patients in stage 1. It was also
observed twice in 575 additional PCa patients but not in 1,536 control subjects
of stage 2. The frequency of G135E was significantly different between cases and 
controls, with a P-value of 0.027, based on Fisher's exact test. Haplotype
estimation showed that G135E mutation carriers shared a unique haplotype that was
not observed in other subjects. In stage 3, two more PCa patients were predicted 
to carry the G135E mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel rare mutation in the HOXB13 gene, G135E, which
appears to be a founder mutation. This mutation is associated with increased PCa 
risk in Chinese men. Consistent with a previous report, our findings provide
further evidence that rare mutations in HOXB13 contribute to PCa risk.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3755486
PMID: 22718278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2012 Aug;21(8):1348-53. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-0495. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Confirmation of the HOXB13 G84E germline mutation in familial prostate cancer.

Breyer JP(1), Avritt TG, McReynolds KM, Dupont WD, Smith JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt- Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

BACKGROUND: A recent study of familial and early onset prostate cancer reported a
recurrent rare germline mutation of HOXB13 among men of European descent. The
gene resides within the 17q21 hereditary prostate cancer linkage interval.
METHODS: We evaluated the G84E germline mutation (rs138213197) of HOXB13 in a
case-control study of familial prostate cancer at Vanderbilt University
(Nashville, TN) to independently evaluate the association of the mutation with
familial prostate cancer. We genotyped 928 familial prostate cancer probands and 
930 control probands without a personal or family history of prostate cancer.
RESULTS: Our study confirmed the association between the G84E mutation of HOXB13 
and risk of prostate cancer among subjects of European descent. We observed the
mutation in 16 familial cases and in two controls, each as heterozygotes. The
odds ratio (OR) for prostate cancer was 7.9 [95% confidence interval, (CI)
1.8-34.5, P = 0.0062] among carriers of the mutation. The carrier rate was 1.9%
among all familial case probands and 2.7% among probands of pedigrees with =3
affected. In a separate case series of 268 probands of European descent with no
additional family history of prostate cancer, the carrier rate was 1.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: The germline mutation G84E of HOXB13 is a rare but recurrent
mutation associated with elevated risk of prostate cancer in men of European
descent, with an effect size that is greater than observed for previously
validated risk variants of genome wide association studies.
IMPACT: This study independently confirms the association of a germline HOXB13
mutation with familial prostate cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3415588
PMID: 22714738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2012 Jun;9(6):646-53. doi: 10.3171/2012.2.PEDS11285.

Spinal cord ependymomas and myxopapillary ependymomas in the first 2 decades of
life: a clinicopathological and immunohistochemical characterization of 19 cases.

Stephen JH(1), Sievert AJ, Madsen PJ, Judkins AR, Resnick AC, Storm PB, Rushing
EJ, Santi M.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Neurosurgery, Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, USA.

OBJECT: Primary spinal cord ependymomas (EPNs) are rare in children, comprising
classical WHO Grade II and III tumors and Grade I myxopapillary ependymomas
(MEPNs). Despite their benign histology, recurrences and neural-axis
dissemination have been reported in up to 33% MEPNs in the pediatric population. 
Treatment options beyond resection are limited, and little is known about their
tumorigenesis. The purpose of this study was to explore the tumor biology and
outcomes in a consecutive series of pediatric patients treated at a single
institution.
METHODS: The authors performed a retrospective clinicopathological review of 19
patients at a tertiary referral children's hospital for resection of a spinal
cord ependymoma. The population included 8 patients with a pathological diagnosis
of MEPN and 11 patients with a pathological diagnosis of spinal EPN (10 cases
were Grade II and 1 case was Grade III). The upregulation of the following genes 
HOXB13, NEFL, PDGFRa, EGFR, EPHB3, AQP1, and JAGGED 1 was studied by
immunohistochemistry from archived paraffin-embedded tumor samples of the entire 
cohort to compare the expression in MEPN versus EPN.
RESULTS: Gross-total resection was achieved in 75% of patients presenting with
MEPNs and in 100% of those with EPNs. The average follow-up period was 79 months 
for the MEPN subset and 53 months for Grade II/III EPNs. Overall survival for
both subsets was 100%. However, event-free survival was only 50% for patients
with MEPNs. Of note, in all cases involving MEPNs that recurred, the patients had
undergone gross-total resection on initial surgery. In contrast, there were no
tumor recurrences in patients with EPNs. Immunohistochemistry revealed no
significant differences in protein expression between the two tumor types with
the exception of EPHB3, which demonstrates a tendency to be positive in MEPNs (6 
reactive tumors of 9) rather than in EPN (2 reactive tumors of 10).
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' experience shows that, following a gross-total
resection, MEPNs are more likely to recur than their higher-grade counterpart,
EPNs. This supports the recommendation for close long-term radiological follow-up
of pediatric patients with MEPNs to monitor for recurrence, despite the tumor's
low-grade histological feature. No significant difference in the protein
expression of HOXB13, NEFL, PDGFRa, EGFR, EPHB3, AQP1, and JAGGED 1 was present
in this selected cohort of pediatric patients.

PMID: 22656257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eur Urol. 2012 May;61(5):1062. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.02.010.

Words of wisdom. Re: Germline mutations in HOXB13 and prostate-cancer risk.

Bessede T(1), Patard JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Urology Department, Paris-South Universitary Hospital of Bicetre, 78 rue du
General Leclerc, 94270 Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 12;366(2):141-9.

PMID: 22469413  [PubMed]


101. J Urol. 2012 Apr;187(4):1266-7. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.01.003. Epub 2012 Feb
14.

Re: Germline mutations in HOXB13 and prostate cancer risk.

Walsh PC.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 12;366(2):141-9.

PMID: 22423909  [PubMed]


102. Prostate. 2012 Jul 1;72(10):1045-51. doi: 10.1002/pros.22490. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

A Hoxb13-driven reverse tetracycline transactivator system for conditional gene
expression in the prostate.

Rao V(1), Heard JC, Ghaffari H, Wali A, Mutton LN, Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genetically engineered mouse models play important roles in analyses 
of prostate development and pathobiology. While constitutive genetic gain- and
loss-of-function models have contributed significantly to our understanding of
molecular events driving these processes, the availability of a tightly regulated
inducible expression system could extend the utility of transgenic approaches.
Here, we describe the development of a Tet-regulatory system that employs Hoxb13 
transcriptional control elements to direct reverse tetracycline transactivator
(rtTA) expression in the prostate.
METHODS: Using recombineering technology, the rtTA gene was placed under Hoxb13
cis-regulatory transcriptional control in the context of a 218-kb bacterial
artificial chromosome. F(1) offspring carrying the Hoxb13-rtTA transgene were
bred to a Tetracycline operator-Histone 2B-Green Fluorescent Protein
(TetO-H2BGFP) responder line. Detailed reporter gene expression analyses,
including doxycycline (Dox) induction and withdrawal kinetics, were performed in 
Hoxb13-rtTA|TetO-H2BGFP double transgenic adult mice and embryos.
RESULTS: Dox-dependent GFP expression was observed exclusively in the prostate
and distal colon epithelia of double transgenic mice. Reporter gene mRNA was
detected in the prostate within 6 hr of Dox exposure, and was extinguished within
24 hr after Dox withdrawal. Furthermore, Dox-induced reporter gene expression
persisted after castration.
CONCLUSIONS: The Hoxb13-rtTA transgenic system provides a powerful tool for
conditional Tet operator-driven transgene expression in the normal prostate and
during disease progression. Used in conjunction with other prostate pathology
models, these mice will enable precise, temporally controlled analyses of gene
function and can provide opportunities for detailed analyses of molecular events 
underlying prostate diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4133984
PMID: 22297979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Apr;5(4):901-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.769. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Evaluation of HOXB13 as a molecular marker of recurrent prostate cancer.

Jeong TO(1), Oh KJ, Xuan Nguyen NT, Kim YR, Kim MS, Lee SD, Ryu SB, Jung C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University Medical School and Research
Institute of Medical Sciences, Gwangju 501-190, Republic of Korea.

Many patients with prostate cancer have disease recurrence following surgical
removal of tumors and fail to respond to androgen ablation therapy. Despite the
existence of a number of clinical/pathological factors, it is not possible to
predict which patients will fall into this category. The results of our previous 
studies demonstrated that the HOXB13 homeodomain protein plays a key role in the 
development of prostate cancer and the progression of this malignancy. In
addition, HOXB13 has been reported to predict estrogen-resistant breast cancer
tumors. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether HOXB13 could be used
as a molecular marker to predict prostate cancer recurrence. To examine the role 
of HOXB13 as a molecular marker with clinical/pathological data, the expression
of HOXB13 was compared using immunohistochemistry in 57 organ-confined prostate
cancer tumors obtained by radical prostatectomy. There was no significant
correlation between the expression of HOXB13 and most clinical/pathological
parameters, including tumor margin, invasion, pathological stage and risk level. 
The HOXB13 expression levels correlated with the Gleason score and there was a
positive correlation with the pre-operative prostate specific antigen (PSA)
levels. Accordingly, the tumor specimens from 4 patients who ultimately had
biochemical failure (PSA >0.2 ng/ml), all showed a high expression of HOXB13,
while their risk levels were either intermediate or high. This is the first study
to report that HOXB13, together with other clinical/pathological factors, can be 
used as a molecular marker to predict the progression of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3493085
PMID: 22293681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 12;366(2):141-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1110000.

Germline mutations in HOXB13 and prostate-cancer risk.

Ewing CM(1), Ray AM, Lange EM, Zuhlke KA, Robbins CM, Tembe WD, Wiley KE, Isaacs 
SD, Johng D, Wang Y, Bizon C, Yan G, Gielzak M, Partin AW, Shanmugam V, Izatt T, 
Sinari S, Craig DW, Zheng SL, Walsh PC, Montie JE, Xu J, Carpten JD, Isaacs WB,
Cooney KA.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University and the James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute,
Baltimore, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar;9(3):127.
    J Urol. 2012 Apr;187(4):1266-7.
    Eur Urol. 2012 May;61(5):1062.

BACKGROUND: Family history is a significant risk factor for prostate cancer,
although the molecular basis for this association is poorly understood. Linkage
studies have implicated chromosome 17q21-22 as a possible location of a
prostate-cancer susceptibility gene.
METHODS: We screened more than 200 genes in the 17q21-22 region by sequencing
germline DNA from 94 unrelated patients with prostate cancer from families
selected for linkage to the candidate region. We tested family members,
additional case subjects, and control subjects to characterize the frequency of
the identified mutations.
RESULTS: Probands from four families were discovered to have a rare but recurrent
mutation (G84E) in HOXB13 (rs138213197), a homeobox transcription factor gene
that is important in prostate development. All 18 men with prostate cancer and
available DNA in these four families carried the mutation. The carrier rate of
the G84E mutation was increased by a factor of approximately 20 in 5083 unrelated
subjects of European descent who had prostate cancer, with the mutation found in 
72 subjects (1.4%), as compared with 1 in 1401 control subjects (0.1%)
(P=8.5x10(-7)). The mutation was significantly more common in men with
early-onset, familial prostate cancer (3.1%) than in those with late-onset,
nonfamilial prostate cancer (0.6%) (P=2.0x10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: The novel HOXB13 G84E variant is associated with a significantly
increased risk of hereditary prostate cancer. Although the variant accounts for a
small fraction of all prostate cancers, this finding has implications for
prostate-cancer risk assessment and may provide new mechanistic insights into
this common cancer. (Funded by the National Institutes of Health and others.).

PMCID: PMC3779870
PMID: 22236224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012 Jan;66(1):1-10; quiz 11-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaad.2011.05.055.

Cutaneous scarring: Pathophysiology, molecular mechanisms, and scar reduction
therapeutics Part I. The molecular basis of scar formation.

Profyris C(1), Tziotzios C, Do Vale I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Burns, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London,
United Kingdom.

Cutaneous scarring is often the epicenter of patient-related concerns, and the
question "Will there be a scar?" is one that is all too familiar to the everyday 
clinician. In approaching this topic, we have reviewed the pathology, the
embryology, and the molecular biology of cutaneous scarring.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22177631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 14;13(5):R98. doi: 10.1186/bcr3038.

Prognostic utility of the breast cancer index and comparison to Adjuvant! Online 
in a clinical case series of early breast cancer.

Jankowitz RC(1), Cooper K, Erlander MG, Ma XJ, Kesty NC, Li H, Chivukula M,
Brufsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, UPMC, University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, 300 Halket Street, Suite 4628, Pittsburgh, PA 15213,
USA. jankowitzr@upmc.edu

INTRODUCTION: Breast Cancer Index (BCI) combines two independent biomarkers,
HOXB13:IL17BR (H:I) and the 5-gene molecular grade index (MGI), that assess
estrogen-mediated signalling and tumor grade, respectively. BCI stratifies
early-stage estrogen-receptor positive (ER+), lymph-node negative (LN-) breast
cancer patients into three risk groups and provides a continuous assessment of
individual risk of distant recurrence. Objectives of the current study were to
validate BCI in a clinical case series and to compare the prognostic utility of
BCI and Adjuvant!Online (AO).
METHODS: Tumor samples from 265 ER+LN- tamoxifen-treated patients were identified
from a single academic institution's cancer research registry. The BCI assay was 
performed and scores were assigned based on a pre-determined risk model. Risk was
assessed by BCI and AO and correlated to clinical outcomes in the patient cohort.
RESULTS: BCI was a significant predictor of outcome in a cohort of 265 ER+LN-
patients (median age: 56-y; median follow-up: 10.3-y), treated with adjuvant
tamoxifen alone or tamoxifen with chemotherapy (32%). BCI categorized 55%, 21%,
and 24% of patients as low, intermediate and high-risk, respectively. The 10-year
rates of distant recurrence were 6.6%, 12.1% and 31.9% and of breast
cancer-specific mortality were 3.8%, 3.6% and 22.1% in low, intermediate, and
high-risk groups, respectively. In a multivariate analysis including
clinicopathological factors, BCI was a significant predictor of distant
recurrence (HR for 5-unit increase = 5.32 [CI 2.18-13.01; P = 0.0002]) and breast
cancer-specific mortality (HR for a 5-unit increase = 9.60 [CI 3.20-28.80; P <
0.0001]). AO was significantly associated with risk of recurrence. In a separate 
multivariate analysis, both BCI and AO were significantly predictive of outcome. 
In a time-dependent (10-y) ROC curve accuracy analysis of recurrence risk, the
addition of BCI+AO increased predictive accuracy in all patients from 66% (AO
only) to 76% (AO+BCI) and in tamoxifen-only treated patients from 65% to 81%.
CONCLUSIONS: This study validates the prognostic performance of BCI in ER+LN-
patients. In this characteristically low-risk cohort, BCI classified high versus 
low-risk groups with ~5-fold difference in 10-year risk of distant recurrence and
breast cancer-specific death. BCI and AO are independent predictors with BCI
having additive utility beyond standard of care parameters that are encompassed
in AO.

PMCID: PMC3262211
PMID: 21999244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Feb;132(1):143-51. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1555-6. 
Epub 2011 May 15.

Keratin 15, transcobalamin I and homeobox gene Hox-B13 expression in breast
phyllodes tumors: novel markers in biological classification.

Chong LY(1), Cheok PY, Tan WJ, Thike AA, Allen G, Ang MK, Ooi AS, Tan P, Teh BT, 
Tan PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, Singapore
169608, Singapore.

Breast phyllodes tumors are rare neoplasms which present challenges for
histological classification. Microscopic features are not always predictive of
clinical behavior, and scarce data exist on the prognostic role of biological
markers. Our study evaluated a series of 145 phyllodes tumors diagnosed at the
Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital between 2006 and 2009,
incorporating 91 (62.8%) benign, 40 (27.6%) borderline, and 14 (9.7%) malignant
phyllodes tumors. Antibodies to keratin 15 (KRT15), transcobalamin I (TCN1), and 
homeobox gene Hox-B13 (HOXB13) were applied to sections cut from tissue
microarray blocks. KRT15 and TCN1 positivity was defined when there was
reactivity of 1% or more stromal cells, while HOXB13 positivity was defined using
a H-score of 100 and above. Positive immunohistochemical expression for KRT15,
TCN1, and HOXB13 was seen in 21 (14.5%), 96 (66.2%), and 66 (45.5%) of tumors,
respectively. Stromal expression of KRT15, TCN1, and HOXB13 was significantly
correlated with tumor grade (P < 0.001, P < 0.001, P = 0.012), stromal
hypercellularity (P = 0.005, P < 0.001, P = 0.023), mitotic activity (P < 0.001),
and microscopic borders (P = 0.006, P < 0.001, P = 0.011). Co-expression of TCN1 
and HOXB13 was seen in 21 of 91 (23.1%) benign, 18 of 40 (45.0%) borderline, and 
11 of 14 (78.6%) malignant tumors, suggesting that the dual-marker panels of TCN1
and HOXB13 might be helpful in classifying borderline and malignant tumors.
Although expression of TCN1 alone was present in all malignant and 34 of 40
(85.0%) borderline tumors, a combined panel with HOXB13 excluded some benign
cases and was a better discriminant for a significant proportion of borderline
and malignant tumors.

PMID: 21574054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Br J Cancer. 2011 May 24;104(11):1762-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.145. Epub 2011 May
10.

Prognostic utility of HOXB13:IL17BR and molecular grade index in early-stage
breast cancer patients from the Stockholm trial.

Jerevall PL(1), Ma XJ, Li H, Salunga R, Kesty NC, Erlander MG, Sgroi DC, Holmlund
B, Skoog L, Fornander T, Nordenskjöld B, Stål O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of Oncology,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, SE58185, Sweden.
piiha-lotta.jerevall@liu.se

BACKGROUND: A dichotomous index combining two gene expression assays,
HOXB13:IL17BR (H:I) and molecular grade index (MGI), was developed to assess risk
of recurrence in breast cancer patients. The study objective was to demonstrate
the prognostic utility of the combined index in early-stage breast cancer.
METHODS: In a blinded retrospective analysis of 588 ER-positive tamoxifen-treated
and untreated breast cancer patients from the randomised prospective Stockholm
trial, H:I and MGI were measured using real-time RT-PCR. Association with patient
outcome was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazard
regression. A continuous risk index was developed using Cox modelling.
RESULTS: The dichotomous H:I+MGI was significantly associated with distant
recurrence and breast cancer death. The >50% of tamoxifen-treated patients
categorised as low-risk had <3% 10-year distant recurrence risk. A continuous
risk model (Breast Cancer Index (BCI)) was developed with the tamoxifen-treated
group and the prognostic performance tested in the untreated group was 53% of
patients categorised as low risk with an 8.3% 10-year distant recurrence risk.
CONCLUSION: Retrospective analysis of this randomised, prospective trial cohort
validated the prognostic utility of H:I+MGI and was used to develop and test a
continuous risk model that enables prediction of distant recurrence risk at the
patient level.

PMCID: PMC3111159
PMID: 21559019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Anat Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;43(4):284-93. doi: 10.5115/acb.2010.43.4.284. Epub 2010 
Dec 31.

HOXB13 is co-localized with androgen receptor to suppress androgen-stimulated
prostate-specific antigen expression.

Kim SD(1), Park RY, Kim YR, Kim IJ, Kang TW, Nam KI, Ahn KY, Bae CS, Kim BY, Park
SS, Jung C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju,
Korea.

During the prostate cancer (PCa) development and its progression into hormone
independency, androgen receptor (AR) signals play a central role by triggering
the regulation of target genes, including prostate-specific antigen. However, the
regulation of these AR-mediated target genes is not fully understood. We have
previously demonstrated a unique role of HOXB13 homeodomain protein as an AR
repressor. Expression of HOXB13 was highly restricted to the prostate and its
suppression dramatically increased hormone-activated AR transactivation,
suggesting that prostate-specific HOXB13 was a highly potent transcriptional
regulator. In this report, we demonstrated the action mechanism of HOXB13 as an
AR repressor. HOXB13 suppressed androgen-stimulated AR activity by interacting
with AR. HOXB13 did neither bind to AR responsive elements nor disturb nuclear
translocation of AR in response to androgen. In PCa specimen, we also observed
mutual expression pattern of HOXB13 and AR. These results suggest that HOXB13 not
only serve as a DNA-bound transcription factor but play an important role as an
AR-interacting repressor to modulate hormone-activated androgen receptor signals.
Further extensive studies will uncover a novel mechanism for regulating
AR-signaling pathway to lead to expose new role of HOXB13 as a non-DNA-binding
transcriptional repressor.

PMCID: PMC3026180
PMID: 21267402  [PubMed]


110. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Jan 26;11:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-25.

A general scenario of Hox gene inventory variation among major sarcopterygian
lineages.

Liang D(1), Wu R, Geng J, Wang C, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the 
Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou
510275, China.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes are known to play a key role in shaping the body plan of
metazoans. Evolutionary dynamics of these genes is therefore essential in
explaining patterns of evolutionary diversity. Among extant sarcopterygians
comprising both lobe-finned fishes and tetrapods, our knowledge of the Hox genes 
and clusters has largely been restricted in several model organisms such as
frogs, birds and mammals. Some evolutionary gaps still exist, especially for
those groups with derived body morphology or occupying key positions on the tree 
of life, hindering our understanding of how Hox gene inventory varied along the
sarcopterygian lineage.
RESULTS: We determined the Hox gene inventory for six sarcopterygian groups:
lungfishes, caecilians, salamanders, snakes, turtles and crocodiles by
comprehensive PCR survey and genome walking. Variable Hox genes in each of the
six sarcopterygian group representatives, compared to the human Hox gene
inventory, were further validated for their presence/absence by PCR survey in a
number of related species representing a broad evolutionary coverage of the
group. Turtles, crocodiles, birds and placental mammals possess the same 39 Hox
genes. HoxD12 is absent in snakes, amphibians and probably lungfishes. HoxB13 is 
lost in frogs and caecilians. Lobe-finned fishes, amphibians and squamate
reptiles possess HoxC3. HoxC1 is only present in caecilians and lobe-finned
fishes. Similar to coelacanths, lungfishes also possess HoxA14, which is only
found in lobe-finned fishes to date. Our Hox gene variation data favor the
lungfish-tetrapod, turtle-archosaur and frog-salamander relationships and imply
that the loss of HoxD12 is not directly related to digit reduction.
CONCLUSIONS: Our newly determined Hox inventory data provide a more complete
scenario for evolutionary dynamics of Hox genes along the sarcopterygian lineage.
Limbless, worm-like caecilians and snakes possess similar Hox gene inventories to
animals with less derived body morphology, suggesting changes to their body
morphology are likely due to other modifications rather than changes to Hox gene 
numbers. Furthermore, our results provide basis for future sequencing of the
entire Hox clusters of these animals.

PMCID: PMC3038165
PMID: 21266090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Toxicol Sci. 2010 Dec;35(6):941-4.

Silencing of the gene for homeobox protein HOXB13 by siRNA confers resistance to 
methylmercury on HEK293 cells.

Hwang GW(1), Ryoke K, Takahashi T, Naganuma A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Biochemical Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Miyagi, Japan.

Methylmercury is an environmental pollutant that causes severe central nervous
system disorders. We searched for transcription factors involved in the
development of methylmercury toxicity and found that the decreased expression of 
a homeobox protein, HOXB13, in HEK293 cells conferred strong resistance to
methylmercury.

PMID: 21139345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Sep;129(2):319-29. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1204-5. 
Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Molecular classification of breast phyllodes tumors: validation of the histologic
grading scheme and insights into malignant progression.

Ang MK(1), Ooi AS, Thike AA, Tan P, Zhang Z, Dykema K, Furge K, Teh BT, Tan PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, National Cancer Center Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore.

Phyllodes tumors of the breast are rare fibroepithelial neoplasms with a
potential for recurrence. Current histological classification is not always
predictive of clinical behavior. The aim of this study was to identify genetic
changes associated with the development of borderline and malignant phyllodes
tumors in an Asian population, and to assess if genetic data supported the
categorization of these tumors into the existing three grades of benign,
borderline, and malignant. Expression profiling of 21 phyllodes tumors (6 benign,
10 borderline, 5 malignant) was performed using Affymetrix U133Plus 2.0
GeneChips(®). Gene expression among benign, borderline, and malignant tumors was 
compared and a 29 gene list was able to classify them according to their
histologic grade. Among these 29 genes are those responsible for matrix
formation, cell adhesion, epidermis formation, and cell proliferation.
Comparative genomic microarray analysis showed that the most common chromosomal
alteration associated with borderline and malignant tumors was 1q gain, and an
increasing number of chromosomal changes was noted with increasing histological
grade. Upregulation of HOXB13 was seen in malignant relative to borderline
phyllodes tumors and further investigated by immunohistochemistry in a
corresponding set of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumors. HOXB13 protein
overexpression was found to be correlated with stromal hypercellularity and
atypia (P = 0.03, P = 0.039, respectively) and may be implicated in the
development of malignant phyllodes tumors.

PMID: 20945089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Dec;38(22):8269-76. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq720. Epub 2010
Aug 16.

Autonomous zinc-finger nuclease pairs for targeted chromosomal deletion.

Söllü C(1), Pars K, Cornu TI, Thibodeau-Beganny S, Maeder ML, Joung JK, Heilbronn
R, Cathomen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) have been successfully used for rational genome
engineering in a variety of cell types and organisms. ZFNs consist of a
non-specific FokI endonuclease domain and a specific zinc-finger DNA-binding
domain. Because the catalytic domain must dimerize to become active, two ZFN
subunits are typically assembled at the cleavage site. The generation of obligate
heterodimeric ZFNs was shown to significantly reduce ZFN-associated cytotoxicity 
in single-site genome editing strategies. To further expand the application range
of ZFNs, we employed a combination of in silico protein modeling, in vitro
cleavage assays, and in vivo recombination assays to identify autonomous ZFN
pairs that lack cross-reactivity between each other. In the context of ZFNs
designed to recognize two adjacent sites in the human HOXB13 locus, we
demonstrate that two autonomous ZFN pairs can be directed simultaneously to two
different sites to induce a chromosomal deletion in ~ 10% of alleles. Notably,
the autonomous ZFN pair induced a targeted chromosomal deletion with the same
efficacy as previously published obligate heterodimeric ZFNs but with
significantly less toxicity. These results demonstrate that autonomous ZFNs will 
prove useful in targeted genome engineering approaches wherever an application
requires the expression of two distinct ZFN pairs.

PMCID: PMC3001086
PMID: 20716517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(4):R53. doi: 10.1186/bcr2612. Epub 2010 Jul 22.

Predictive relevance of HOXB13 protein expression for tamoxifen benefit in breast
cancer.

Jerevall PL(1), Jansson A, Fornander T, Skoog L, Nordenskjöld B, Stål O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of Oncology,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, SE-58185 Linköping, Sweden.
piiha-lotta.jerevall@liu.se

INTRODUCTION: The HOXB13:IL17BR index has been identified to predict clinical
outcome in the setting of adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy of breast cancer.
Further studies have shown that HOXB13 in particular can indicate benefit of
prolonged tamoxifen treatment. Patients with high-expressing tumors did not
benefit from prolonged treatment, suggesting that HOXB13 might be involved in
tamoxifen resistance. No studies have been made regarding the HOXB13 protein
levels in breast cancer. The aim of our study was to investigate whether
tamoxifen benefit can be correlated to different levels of HOXB13 protein
expression.
METHODS: We used immunohistochemistry to analyze protein levels of HOXB13 in
tumor samples from 912 postmenopausal node-negative breast cancer patients
randomized to adjuvant tamoxifen therapy or no endocrine treatment.
RESULTS: Tamoxifen-treated patients with estrogen receptor-positive tumors
expressing none or low levels of HOXB13 had a clear benefit from tamoxifen in
terms of longer distant recurrence-free survival (DRFS) (hazard ratio = 0.38, 95%
confidence interval = 0.23 to 0.60, P = 0.000048). However, for patients with a
high or intermediate HOXB13 tumor expression, tamoxifen did not prolong the DRFS 
compared with the untreated patients (hazard ratio = 0.88, 95% confidence
interval = 0.47 to 1.65, P = 0.69). Interaction between HOXB13 expression and
benefit from tamoxifen was statistically significant for DRFS (P = 0.035). No
prognostic value could be ascribed to HOXB13 among systemically untreated
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: A high HOXB13 expression was associated with decreased benefit from 
tamoxifen, which indicates that HOXB13 protein level may be used as a predictive 
marker for tamoxifen treatment.

PMCID: PMC2949642
PMID: 20649975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 27;9:124. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-124.

HOXB13 promotes androgen independent growth of LNCaP prostate cancer cells by the
activation of E2F signaling.

Kim YR(1), Oh KJ, Park RY, Xuan NT, Kang TW, Kwon DD, Choi C, Kim MS, Nam KI, Ahn
KY, Jung C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju,
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Androgen signaling plays a critical role in the development of
prostate cancer and its progression. However, androgen-independent prostate
cancer cells emerge after hormone ablation therapy, resulting in significant
clinical problems. We have previously demonstrated that the HOXB13 homeodomain
protein functions as a prostate cancer cell growth suppressor by inhibiting
androgen-mediated signals. However, the role of the HOXB13 in
androgen-independent growth of prostate cancer cells remains unexplained.
RESULTS: In this report, we first demonstrated that HOXB13 was highly
overexpressed in hormone-refractory tumors compared to tumors without
prostate-specific antigen after initial treatment. Functionally, in an
androgen-free environment minimal induction of HOXB13 in LNCaP prostate cancer
cells, to the level of the normal prostate, markedly promoted cell proliferation 
while suppression inhibited cell proliferation. The HOXB13-mediated cell growth
promotion in the absence of androgen, appears to be mainly accomplished through
the activation of RB-E2F signaling by inhibiting the expression of the p21waf
tumor suppressor. Indeed, forced expression of HOXB13 dramatically decreased
expression of p21waf; this inhibition largely affected HOXB13-mediated promotion 
of E2F signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of this study demonstrated the presence 
of a novel pathway that helps understand androgen-independent survival of
prostate cancer cells. These findings suggest that upregulation of HOXB13 is
associated with an additive growth advantage of prostate cancer cells in the
absence of or low androgen concentrations, by the regulation of p21-mediated E2F 
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2890607
PMID: 20504375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biomark Med. 2009 Apr;3(2):99-102. doi: 10.2217/bmm.09.2.

The HOXB13:IL17BR gene-expression ratio: a biomarker providing information above 
and beyond tumor grade.

Sgroi DC.

PMID: 20477500  [PubMed]


117. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 29;5(4):e10338. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010338.

HOXB13, a target of DNMT3B, is methylated at an upstream CpG island, and
functions as a tumor suppressor in primary colorectal tumors.

Ghoshal K(1), Motiwala T, Claus R, Yan P, Kutay H, Datta J, Majumder S, Bai S,
Majumder A, Huang T, Plass C, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. kalpana.ghoshal@osumc.edu

BACKGROUND: A hallmark of cancer cells is hypermethylation of CpG islands (CGIs),
which probably arises from upregulation of one or more DNA methyltransferases.
The purpose of this study was to identify the targets of DNMT3B, an essential DNA
methyltransferase in mammals, in colon cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNMT3B
specific antibody followed by CGI microarray identified genes with or without
CGIs, repeat elements and genomic contigs in RKO cells. ChIP-Chop analysis showed
that the majority of the target genes including P16, DCC, DISC1, SLIT1,
CAVEOLIN1, GNA11, TBX5, TBX18, HOXB13 and some histone variants, that harbor CGI 
in their promoters, were methylated in multiple colon cancer cell lines but not
in normal colon epithelial cells. Further, these genes were reactivated in RKO
cells after treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a DNA hypomethylating agent.
COBRA showed that the CGIs encompassing the promoter and/or coding region of DCC,
TBX5, TBX18, SLIT1 were methylated in primary colorectal tumors but not in
matching normal colon tissues whereas GNA11 was methylated in both. MassARRAY
analysis demonstrated that the CGI located approximately 4.5 kb upstream of
HOXB13 +1 site was tumor-specifically hypermethylated in primary colorectal
cancers and cancer cell lines. HOXB13 upstream CGI was partially hypomethylated
in DNMT1(-/-) HCT cells but was almost methylation free in cells lacking both
DNMT1 and DNMT3B. Analysis of tumor suppressor properties of two aberrantly
methylated transcription factors, HOXB13 and TBX18, revealed that both inhibited 
growth and clonogenic survival of colon cancer cells in vitro, but only HOXB13
abolished tumor growth in nude mice.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first report that identifies several
important tumor suppressors and transcription factors as direct DNMT3B targets in
colon cancer and as potential biomarkers for this cancer. Further, this study
shows that methylation at an upstream CGI of HOXB13 is unique to colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2861599
PMID: 20454457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 5;107(1):98-103. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0902001107.
Epub 2009 Dec 14.

A FOXA1-binding enhancer regulates Hoxb13 expression in the prostate gland.

McMullin RP(1), Dobi A, Mutton LN, Orosz A, Maheshwari S, Shashikant CS,
Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.

Hoxb13 is robustly transcribed in derivatives of posterior endoderm including the
colon, rectum, and the prostate gland. Transcriptional activity in the prostate
persists unabated under conditions of androgen deprivation and throughout the
course of disease progression in a mouse prostate cancer model. To elucidate the 
molecular basis of prostate-restricted transcriptional activation of Hoxb13, a
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-based reporter gene deletion analysis was
performed in transgenic mice. Two regions downstream of the Hoxb13 coding region 
were found to be required to support transcriptional activity in the prostate but
were completely dispensable for expression in the colon and rectum. Bioinformatic
analyses of one region identified a 37-bp element conserved in mammals. This
element, which bears two potential binding sites for Forkhead class transcription
factors, is occupied by FOXA1 in a human prostate cancer cell line. Precise
replacement of this enhancer with an extended LoxP site in the context of a
218,555-bp BAC reporter nearly extinguished Hoxb13-mediated transcriptional
activity in the mouse prostate. These data demonstrate that FOXA1 directly
regulates HOXB13 in human prostate epithelial cells, and show that this
prostate-specific regulatory mechanism is conserved in mice.

PMCID: PMC2806740
PMID: 20018680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Int J Oncol. 2010 Jan;36(1):141-9.

Overexpression of HOXB7 homeobox gene in oral cancer induces cellular
proliferation and is associated with poor prognosis.

De Souza Setubal Destro MF(1), Bitu CC, Zecchin KG, Graner E, Lopes MA, Kowalski 
LP, Coletta RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.

A growing body of evidence has confirmed the involvement of dysregulated
expression of HOX genes in cancer. HOX genes are a family of 39 transcription
factors, divided in 4 clusters (HOXA to HOXD), that during normal development
regulate cell proliferation and specific cell fate. In the present study it was
investigated whether genes of the HOXB cluster play a role in oral cancer. We
showed that most of the genes in the HOXB network are inactive in oral tissues,
with exception of HOXB2, HOXB7 and HOXB13. Expression of HOXB7 was significantly 
higher in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) compared to normal oral mucosas.
We further demonstrated that HOXB7 overexpression in HaCAT human epithelial cell 
line promoted proliferation, whereas downregulation of HOXB7 endogenous levels in
human oral carcinoma cells (SCC9 cells) decreased proliferation. In OSCCs,
expression of HOXB7 and Ki67, a marker of proliferation, correlate strongly with 
each other (rs=0.79, p<0.006). High immunohistochemical expression of HOXB7 was
correlated with T stage (p=0.06), N stage (p=0.07), disease stage (p=0.09) and
Ki67 expression (p=0.01), and patients with tumors showing high number of
HOXB7-positive cells had shorter overall survival (p=0.08) and shorter
disease-free survival after treatment (p=0.10) compared with patients with tumors
exhibiting low amount of HOXB7-positive cells. Our data suggest that HOXB7 may
contribute to oral carcinogenesis by increasing tumor cell proliferation, and
imply that HOXB7 may be an important determinant of OSCC patient prognosis.

PMID: 19956843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell. 2009 Nov 13;36(3):405-16. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.10.020.

The homeodomain protein HOXB13 regulates the cellular response to androgens.

Norris JD(1), Chang CY, Wittmann BM, Kunder RS, Cui H, Fan D, Joseph JD,
McDonnell DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

HOXB13 is a member of the homeodomain family of sequence-specific transcription
factors and, together with the androgen receptor (AR), plays a critical role in
the normal development of the prostate gland. We demonstrate here that, in
prostate cancer cells, HOXB13 is a key determinant of the response to androgens. 
Specifically, it was determined that HOXB13 interacts with the DNA-binding domain
of AR and inhibits the transcription of genes that contain an androgen-response
element (ARE). In contrast, the AR:HOXB13 complex confers androgen responsiveness
to promoters that contain a specific HOXB13-response element. Further, HOXB13 and
AR synergize to enhance the transcription of genes that contain a HOX element
juxtaposed to an ARE. The profound effects of HOXB13 knockdown on
androgen-regulated proliferation, migration, and lipogenesis in prostate cancer
cells highlight the importance of the observed changes in gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2788777
PMID: 19917249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Brain Pathol. 2010 May;20(3):560-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00333.x. Epub 
2009 Sep 10.

Unique molecular characteristics of pediatric myxopapillary ependymoma.

Barton VN(1), Donson AM, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Birks DK, Handler MH, Foreman
NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Anschutz Medical Campus, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Valerie.Barton@ucdenver.edu

Myxopapillary ependymoma (MEPN) generally can be cured by gross total surgical
resection and usually manifest a favorable prognosis. However, surgery is less
curative in tumors that are large, multifocal or extend outside the thecal sac.
Late recurrences may occur, particularly in pediatric patients. The role of
adjuvant therapy is unclear in the clinical management of recurrent tumors.
Clinical trial design requires a better understanding of tumor biology. Unique
molecular features of MEPN were investigated by using microarray technology to
compare the gene expression of five pediatric MEPN to 24 pediatric intracranial
ependymoma (EPN). The upregulation of three genes of interest, homeobox B13
(HOXB13), neurofilament, light polypeptide (NEFL) and PDGFR alpha, was further
studied by immunohistochemistry in a larger cohort that included adult MEPN and
EPN specimens. Protein expression in MEPN was compared to subependymoma, spinal
EPN, intracranial EPN and normal fetal and adult ependyma. Immunoreactivity for
HOXB13, NEFL and PDGFR alpha was strongest in MEPN and virtually absent in
subependymoma. Spinal and intracranial EPN generally expressed weak or focal
staining. MEPN manifests unique gene and protein expression patterns compared to 
other EPNs. Aberrant expression of HOXB13 suggests possible recapitulation of
developmental pathways in MEPN tumorigenesis. PDGFR alpha may be a potential
therapeutic target in recurrent MEPN.

PMCID: PMC2871180
PMID: 19793339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Invest Dermatol. 2010 Mar;130(3):856-65. doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.305. Epub 2009
Sep 17.

Persistent inflammation and angiogenesis during wound healing in K14-directed
Hoxb13 transgenic mice.

Mack JA(1), Maytin EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. mackj@ccf.org

Chronic, nonhealing wounds and inadequate tissue repair characterized by
excessive fibrosis continue to have a considerable negative effect on health and 
quality of life. Understanding the molecular events required for adequate
healing, including the transcriptional control of wound repair, will be important
for the development of future therapies. We previously showed that loss of Hoxb13
from murine skin results in enhanced cutaneous wound healing, suggesting that
Hoxb13 has a negative effect on wound repair. To test this, we generated
skin-specific Hoxb13 transgenic (TG) mice that overexpress Hoxb13 in the basal
layer of the epidermis by the human keratin 14 promoter. Using these mice, we
evaluated the effects of Hoxb13 overexpression on cutaneous wound healing.
Transgenic wounds were characterized by persistence of the fibrin clot and
prolonged inflammation. Notably, neutrophils, which had cleared from wild-type
wounds, were still pronounced in TG wounds. Marked epidermal hyperplasia was
observed at TG wound edges, and dermal vessels were grossly abnormal compared
with wild-type mice. Both vascular endothelial growth factor and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha were upregulated in Hoxb13 TG skin. Together, our results identify
Hoxb13 as a potential important clinical target in wound healing and other
pathologies characterized by abnormal or excessive inflammation, angiogenesis, or
epidermal proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2820144
PMID: 19759546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Diagn Ther. 2009;13(2):73-90. doi: 10.2165/01250444-200913020-00002.

Genomic predictors of outcome and treatment response in breast cancer.

Dunn L(1), Demichele A.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Despite advances in breast cancer treatment and outcome over the last two
decades, women continue to relapse and die of advanced disease. Historically,
estrogen and progesterone receptor expression, HER2 overexpression and
clinico-pathologic parameters have guided therapeutic decision making. However,
there are limits to the risk estimation provided by these parameters, leading to 
potential overtreatment of low-risk disease and undertreatment of poor-risk
disease. Genomic technologies now provide the opportunity to refine our
therapeutic approach by individualizing treatment to patients' individual tumor
profiles. Gene profiles or signatures are groupings of genes that are
differentially expressed between tumors, reflecting differences in biologic
behavior. Prognostic gene signatures stratify breast cancer patients by tumor
natural history, regardless of the treatment employed. Currently, there are three
commercially available prognostic gene signatures: Oncotype DX (Genomic Health,
Inc.), MammaPrint (Agendia BV), and the HOXB13/IL17BR (H/I) ratio; (Theros H/ISM;
bioTheranostics). Others under development include the Intrinsic Gene Set, the
Rotterdam Signature, the Wound Response Indicator, and the Invasive Gene
Signature. Predicative signatures classify patients based on responsiveness to
specific therapies. Of the prognostic signatures, Oncotype DX has been shown to
have predictive value for the incremental benefit of chemotherapy when added to a
hormonal therapy regimen. Additional genetic profiles under development predict
response to specific hormonal therapies, anthracyclines, and taxanes. Gene
signatures have the potential to transform breast cancer treatment as it becomes 
tailored to each patient's tumor expression profile and significantly improve the
outcomes of this disease.

PMID: 19537843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(1):R14. doi: 10.1186/bcr2233. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Methylation of homeobox genes is a frequent and early epigenetic event in breast 
cancer.

Tommasi S(1), Karm DL, Wu X, Yen Y, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA 91010, USA. stommasi@coh.org

INTRODUCTION: Aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and
occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. However, its impact on tumor
development is not fully determined, and its potential as a diagnostic biomarker 
remains to be validated. Methylation profiling of invasive breast carcinoma has
been largely explored. Conversely, very little and sparse information is
available on early-stage breast cancer. To gain insight into the epigenetic
switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events
during breast carcinogenesis, we have analyzed the DNA methylation profile of
ductal carcinoma in situ, a premalignant breast lesion with a great potential to 
progress toward invasive carcinoma.
METHODS: We have utilized a comprehensive and sensitive array-based DNA mapping
technique, the methylated-CpG island recovery assay, to profile the DNA
methylation pattern in ductal carcinoma in situ. Differential methylation of CpG 
islands was compared genome-wide in tumor DNA versus normal DNA utilizing a
statistical linear model in the LIMMA software package.
RESULTS: Using this approach, we have identified 108 significant CpG islands that
undergo aberrant DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ and stage I breast
tumors, with methylation frequencies greater than or comparable with those of
more advanced invasive carcinoma (50% to 93%). A substantial fraction of these
hypermethylated CpG islands (32% of the annotated CpG islands) is associated with
several homeobox genes, such as the TLX1, HOXB13, and HNF1B genes. Fifty-three
percent of the genes hypermethylated in early-stage breast cancer overlap with
known Polycomb targets and include homeobox genes and other developmental
transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a series of new potential methylation biomarkers 
that may help elucidate the underlying mechanisms of breast tumorigenesis. More
specifically, our results are suggestive of a critical role of homeobox gene
methylation in the insurgence and/or progression of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2687719
PMID: 19250546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dev Dyn. 2009 Mar;238(3):664-72. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21870.

Hoxb13 regulatory elements mediate transgene expression during prostate
organogenesis and carcinogenesis.

McMullin RP(1), Mutton LN, Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore, Maryland 21250, USA.

The prostate requires androgens for development and homeostasis. Prostate cancer 
shares this dependence, however progression to androgen-independence is common
after androgen deprivation. There is considerable interest in achieving
therapeutic gene expression after androgen ablation using prostate-specific
promoters. Paradoxically, known prostate-restricted cis-regulatory elements are
androgen dependent. Hoxb13 expression is restricted in adults to the prostate and
colon, and robust Hoxb13 expression persists after castration. To locate
regulatory elements conferring this expression pattern, a lacZ reporter was
inserted into the Hoxb13 locus on a mouse genomic bacterial artificial
chromosome. In transgenic mice, this construct recapitulated the Hoxb13
expression pattern, including expression after castration. Reporter gene activity
was maintained during carcinogenesis in a prostate cancer model. Hoxb13
cis-regulatory elements provide a powerful tool to achieve androgen-independent
transgene expression in the prostate and distal colon-specific expression in the 
gastrointestinal tract. These data establish a framework for high-resolution
analyses of factors regulating Hoxb13.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3386847
PMID: 19191217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2008 Sep;30(9):641-3.

[Molecular classification of breast cancers].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen XS, Chen SJ, Shen KW.

PMID: 19173901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 May;41(5):1094-101. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2008.10.015. Epub 2008 Nov 1.

Recruitment of HDAC4 by transcription factor YY1 represses HOXB13 to affect cell 
growth in AR-negative prostate cancers.

Ren G(1), Zhang G, Dong Z, Liu Z, Li L, Feng Y, Su D, Zhang Y, Huang B, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun
130024, PR China.

HOXB13 is a homeodomain protein implicated to play a role in growth arrest in AR 
(androgen receptor)-negative prostate cancer cells. Expression of HOXB13 is
restricted to the AR-expressing prostate cells. In this report, we demonstrate
that the HDAC inhibitor NaB (sodium butyrate) was able to induce cell growth
arrest and to increase HOXB13 expression in AR-negative prostate cancer cells. We
also show that both HDAC4 and YY1 participated in the repression of HOXB13
expression through an epigenetic mechanism involving histone acetylation
modification. Specifically, co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that HDAC4 and
YY1 formed a complex. The chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays verified
that HDAC4 was recruited to HOXB13 promoter by YY1. Moreover, promoter truncation
and point mutation studies determined that the two proximal YY1 binding sites on 
the HOXB13 promoter were essential for the recruitments of YY1 and HDAC4. Data
presented in this report suggest that YY1 and HDAC4 affected cell growth by
repressing transcriptional regulation of HOXB13 through an epigenetic
modification of histones.

PMID: 19013255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;14(18):5864-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0619.

Cytochrome P450 2D6 and homeobox 13/interleukin-17B receptor: combining inherited
and tumor gene markers for prediction of tamoxifen resistance.

Goetz MP(1), Suman VJ, Couch FJ, Ames MM, Rae JM, Erlander MG, Ma XJ, Sgroi DC,
Reynolds CA, Lingle WL, Weinshilboum RM, Flockhart DA, Desta Z, Perez EA, Ingle
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 
55905, USA. goetz.matthew@mayo.edu

PURPOSE: Genetic variation in cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) and the gene
expression ratio of the homeobox 13 (HOXB13) to interleukin-17B receptor (IL17BR)
are associated with tamoxifen resistance. We sought to determine the combined
effect of inherited (CYP2D6) and somatic (HOXB13/IL17BR) gene variation in
tamoxifen-treated breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Retrospective analysis of women with node-negative breast
cancer randomized to receive 5 years of tamoxifen (North Central Cancer Treatment
Group 89-30-52). CYP2D6 metabolism (extensive or decreased) was based on CYP2D6*4
genotype and presence/absence of a CYP2D6 inhibitor. Reverse transcription-PCR
profiles for HOXB13 and IL17BR and the cut point separating patients into high-
and low-risk categories according to disease-free survival (DFS) were used. A
risk factor (CYP2D6:HOXB13/IL17BR) representing the four categories of combining 
CYP2D6 metabolism (extensive or decreased) and HOXB13/IL17BR (low or high) was
created. The association between CYP2D6:HOXB13/IL17BR and DFS and overall
survival (OS) was assessed using the log-rank test and proportional hazards
modeling.
RESULTS: CYP2D6 metabolism and HOXB13/IL17BR gene ratio was available in 110 of
160 (69%) patients. The combined CYP2D6:HOXB13/IL17BR risk factor was
significantly associated with DFS (log-rank P = 0.004) and OS (P = 0.009).
Relative to women with extensive CYP2D6 metabolism and low HOXB13/IL17BR, those
with either decreased metabolism or a high HOXB13/IL17BR ratio had significantly 
worse OS (adjusted hazard ratio, 2.41; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-5.37; P =
0.031), whereas women with both decreased metabolism and high HOXB13/IL17BR ratio
had the shortest survival (adjusted hazard ratio, 3.15; 95% CI, 1.17-8.52; P =
0.024).
CONCLUSIONS: An index composed of inherited (CYP2D6) and tumor (HOXB13/IL17BR)
gene variation identifies patients with varying degrees of resistance to
tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC2596658
PMID: 18794098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Cell. 2008 Jul 25;31(2):294-301. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.016.

Rapid "open-source" engineering of customized zinc-finger nucleases for highly
efficient gene modification.

Maeder ML(1), Thibodeau-Beganny S, Osiak A, Wright DA, Anthony RM, Eichtinger M, 
Jiang T, Foley JE, Winfrey RJ, Townsend JA, Unger-Wallace E, Sander JD,
Müller-Lerch F, Fu F, Pearlberg J, Göbel C, Dassie JP, Pruett-Miller SM, Porteus 
MH, Sgroi DC, Iafrate AJ, Dobbs D, McCray PB Jr, Cathomen T, Voytas DF, Joung JK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Unit and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Custom-made zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs) can induce targeted genome modifications
with high efficiency in cell types including Drosophila, C. elegans, plants, and 
humans. A bottleneck in the application of ZFN technology has been the generation
of highly specific engineered zinc-finger arrays. Here we describe OPEN
(Oligomerized Pool ENgineering), a rapid, publicly available strategy for
constructing multifinger arrays, which we show is more effective than the
previously published modular assembly method. We used OPEN to construct 37 highly
active ZFN pairs which induced targeted alterations with high efficiencies
(1%-50%) at 11 different target sites located within three endogenous human genes
(VEGF-A, HoxB13, and CFTR), an endogenous plant gene (tobacco SuRA), and a
chromosomally integrated EGFP reporter gene. In summary, OPEN provides an
"open-source" method for rapidly engineering highly active zinc-finger arrays,
thereby enabling broader practice, development, and application of ZFN technology
for biological research and gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC2535758
PMID: 18657511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008 Oct;21(5):545-58. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2008.00484.x. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Identification of novel epigenetically modified genes in human melanoma via
promoter methylation gene profiling.

Liu S(1), Ren S, Howell P, Fodstad O, Riker AI.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA.

The inactivation of tumor-related genes through the aberrant methylation of
promoter CpG islands is thought to contribute to tumor initiation and
progression. We therefore investigated promoter methylation events involved in
cutaneous melanoma by screening 30 genes of interest for evidence of promoter
hypermethylation, examining 20 melanoma cell lines and 40 freshly procured
melanoma samples. Utilizing quantitative methylation-specific PCR, we identified 
five genes (SOCS1, SOCS2, RAR-beta 2, TNFSF10C, and TNFSF10D) with
hypermethylation frequencies ranging from 50% to 80% in melanoma cell lines as
well as freshly procured tissue samples. Eighteen genes (LOX, RASSF1A, WFDC1, TM,
APC, TFPI2, TNFSF10A, CDKN2A, MGMT, TIMP3, ASC, TPM1, IRF8, CIITA-PIV, CDH1, SYK,
HOXB13, and DAPK1) were methylated at lower frequencies (2-30%). Two genes
(CDKN1B and PTEN), previously reported as methylated in melanoma, and five other 
genes (RECK, IRF7, PAWR, TNFSF10B, and Rb) were not methylated in the samples
screened here. Daughter melanoma cell lines showed identical methylation patterns
when compared with original samples from which they were derived, as did
synchronous metastatic lesions from the same patient. We identified four genes
(TNFSF10C, TNFSF10D, LOX, and TPM1) that have never before been identified as
hypermethylated in melanoma, with an overall methylation frequency of 60, 80, 50,
and 10%, respectively, hypothesizing that these genes may play an important role 
in melanoma progression.

PMID: 18627528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Gut. 2008 Oct;57(10):1398-405. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.148395. Epub 2008 Jun 3.

Regional variation in gene expression in the healthy colon is dysregulated in
ulcerative colitis.

Noble CL(1), Abbas AR, Cornelius J, Lees CW, Ho GT, Toy K, Modrusan Z, Pal N,
Zhong F, Chalasani S, Clark H, Arnott ID, Penman ID, Satsangi J, Diehl L.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, EH4 2XU, UK. noblecolin@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate differential intestinal gene expression in patients
with ulcerative colitis and in controls.
DESIGN: Genome-wide expression study (41,058 expression sequence tags, 215
biopsies).
SETTING: Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK, and Genentech, San Francisco,
USA.
PATIENTS: 67 patients with ulcerative colitis and 31 control subjects (23 normal 
subjects and 8 patients with inflamed non-inflammatory bowel disease biopsies).
INTERVENTIONS: Paired endoscopic biopsies were taken from 5 specific anatomical
locations for RNA extraction and histology. The Agilent microarray platform was
used and confirmation of results was undertaken by real time polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In healthy control biopsies, cluster analysis showed differences in gene
expression between the right and left colon. (chi(2) = 25.1, p<0.0001).
Developmental genes, homeobox protein A13 (HOXA13), (p = 2.3x10(-16)), HOXB13
(p<1x10(-45)), glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1) (p = 4.0x10(-24)), and GLI3 (p
= 2.1x10(-28)) primarily drove this separation. When all ulcerative colitis
biopsies and control biopsies were compared, 143 sequences had a fold change of
>1.5 in the ulcerative colitis biopsies (0.01>p>10(-45)) and 54 sequences had a
fold change of <-1.5 (0.01>p>10(-20)). Differentially upregulated genes in
ulcerative colitis included serum amyloid A1 (SAA1) (p<10(-45)) the alpha
defensins 5 and 6 (DEFA5 and 6) (p = 0.00003 and p = 6.95x10(-7), respectively), 
matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3) (p = 5.6x10(-10)) and MMP7 (p = 2.3x10(-7)).
Increased DEFA5 and 6 expression was further characterised to Paneth cell
metaplasia by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridisation. Sub-analysis of the
inflammatory bowel disease 2 (IBD2) and IBD5 loci, and the ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporter genes revealed a number of differentially regulated genes in
the ulcerative colitis biopsies.
CONCLUSIONS: Key findings are the expression gradient in the healthy adult colon 
and the involvement of novel gene families, as well as established candidate
genes in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis.

PMID: 18523026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jul;29(7):1459-65. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn115. Epub 2008 May
21.

Epigenetic repression of the estrogen-regulated Homeobox B13 gene in breast
cancer.

Rodriguez BA(1), Cheng AS, Yan PS, Potter D, Agosto-Perez FJ, Shapiro CL, Huang
TH.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.

Several studies have reported that a high expression ratio of HOXB13 to IL17BR
predicts tumor recurrence in node-negative, estrogen receptor (ER) alpha-positive
breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen. The molecular mechanisms
underlying this dysregulation of gene expression remain to be explored. Our
epigenetic analysis has found that increased promoter methylation of one of these
genes, HOXB13, correlate with the decreased expression of its transcript in
breast cancer cell lines (P < 0.005). Transcriptional silencing of this gene can 
be reversed by a demethylation treatment. HOXB13 is suppressed by the activation 
of estrogen signaling in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells. However, treatment
with 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), an antiestrogen, abrogates the ERalpha-mediated 
suppression in cancer cells. The notion that this transcriptional induction of
HOXB13 occurs in vitro with simultaneous exposure to both estrogen and 4-OHT may 
provide a biological explanation for its aberrant expression in many
node-negative patients undergoing tamoxifen therapy. Interestingly, promoter
hypermethylation of HOXB13 is more frequently observed in ERalpha-positive
patients with increased lymph node metastasis (P = 0.031) and large tumor sizes
(>5 cm) (P = 0.008). In addition, this aberrant epigenetic event is associated
with shorter disease-free survival (P = 0.029) in cancer patients. These results 
suggest that hypermethylation of HOXB13 is a late event of breast tumorigenesis
and a poor prognostic indicator of node-positive cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2899848
PMID: 18499701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 May 1;14(9):2601-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-5026.

A five-gene molecular grade index and HOXB13:IL17BR are complementary prognostic 
factors in early stage breast cancer.

Ma XJ(1), Salunga R, Dahiya S, Wang W, Carney E, Durbecq V, Harris A, Goss P,
Sotiriou C, Erlander M, Sgroi D.

Author information: 
(1)AviaraDx, Inc., San Diego, California, USA.

PURPOSE: Histologic tumor grade is a well-established prognostic factor for
breast cancer, and tumor grade-associated genes are the common denominator of
many prognostic gene signatures. The objectives of this study are as follows: (a)
to develop a simple gene expression index for tumor grade (molecular grade index 
or MGI), and (b) to determine whether MGI and our previously described
HOXB13:IL17BR index together provide improved prognostic information.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: From our previously published list of genes whose expression
correlates with both tumor grade and tumor stage progression, we selected five
cell cycle-related genes to build MGI and evaluated MGI in two publicly available
microarray data sets totaling 410 patients. Using two additional cohorts (n =
323), we developed a real-time reverse transcription PCR assay for MGI, validated
its prognostic utility, and examined its interaction with HOXB13:IL17BR.
RESULTS: MGI performed consistently as a strong prognostic factor and was
comparable with a more complex 97-gene genomic grade index in multiple data sets.
In patients treated with endocrine therapy, MGI and HOXB13:IL17BR modified each
other's prognostic performance. High MGI was associated with significantly worse 
outcome only in combination with high HOXB13:IL17BR, and likewise, high
HOXB13:IL17BR was significantly associated with poor outcome only in combination 
with high MGI.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed and validated a five-gene reverse transcription PCR
assay for MGI suitable for analyzing routine formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
clinical samples. The combination of MGI and HOXB13:IL17BR outperforms either
alone and identifies a subgroup ( approximately 30%) of early stage estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer patients with very poor outcome despite endocrine
therapy.

PMID: 18451222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Stat Methods Med Res. 2008 Dec;17(6):635-42. doi: 10.1177/0962280207084839. Epub 
2008 Mar 28.

Mistakes in validating the accuracy of a prediction classifier in
high-dimensional but small-sample microarray data.

Lee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Mathematics, Sejong University, Seoul, South Korea.
leesh@sejong.ac.kr

A major interest in gene expression microarray studies is to develop an accurate 
classifier which can be adopted in clinical practice. The usage of large numbers 
of genes with small data samples may lead to overfitting in classification, and
generate promising, but often nonreproducible results. Therefore, assessing the
reproducibility of a classifier is necessary. Appropriate methods for validating 
a developed classifier and estimating its predicting accuracy are discussed. In
addition, some mistakes that can arise in the cross validation process are
reviewed using published articles in prominent medical journals, to prevent the
indefinite results of a classifier development from leading to inappropriate
treatment.

PMID: 18375459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Jan;113(2):275-83. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-9939-y. 
Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Comparison of gene expression profiles predicting progression in breast cancer
patients treated with tamoxifen.

Kok M(1), Linn SC, Van Laar RK, Jansen MP, van den Berg TM, Delahaye LJ, Glas AM,
Peterse JL, Hauptmann M, Foekens JA, Klijn JG, Wessels LF, Van't Veer LJ, Berns
EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121,
1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Molecular signatures that predict outcome in tamoxifen treated breast
cancer patients have been identified. For the first time, we compared these
response profiles in an independent cohort of (neo)adjuvant systemic treatment
naïve breast cancer patients treated with first-line tamoxifen for metastatic
disease.
METHODS: From a consecutive series of 246 estrogen receptor (ER) positive primary
tumors, gene expression profiling was performed on available frozen tumors using 
44K oligoarrays (n = 69). A 78-gene tamoxifen response profile (formerly
consisting of 81 cDNA-clones), a 21-gene set (microarray-based Recurrence Score),
as well as the HOXB13-IL17BR ratio (Two-Gene-Index, RT-PCR) were analyzed.
Performance of signatures in relation to time to progression (TTP) was compared
with standard immunohistochemical (IHC) markers: ER, progesterone receptor (PgR) 
and HER2.
RESULTS: In univariate analyses, the 78-gene tamoxifen response profile, 21-gene 
set and HOXB13-IL17BR ratio were all significantly associated with TTP with
hazard ratios of 2.2 (95% CI 1.3-3.7, P = 0.005), 2.3 (95% CI 1.3-4.0, P = 0.003)
and 4.2 (95% CI 1.4-12.3, P = 0.009), respectively. The concordance among the
three classifiers was relatively low, they classified only 45-61% of patients in 
the same category. In multivariate analyses, the association remained significant
for the 78-gene profile and the 21-gene set after adjusting for ER and PgR.
CONCLUSION: The 78-gene tamoxifen response profile, the 21-gene set and the
HOXB13-IL17BR ratio were all significantly associated with TTP in an independent 
patient series treated with tamoxifen. The addition of multigene assays to ER
(IHC) improves the prediction of outcome in tamoxifen treated patients and
deserves incorporation in future clinical studies.

PMID: 18311582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Med Oncol. 2008;25(3):287-93. Epub 2007 Dec 28.

Functional characterization of the HOXB13 promoter region.

Cross DS(1), Burmester JK.

Author information: 
(1)Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, 1000 N. Oak Ave, Marshfield, WI
54449-5790, USA. cross.deanna@mcrf.mfldclin.edu

Homeobox (HOX) genes are crucial regulators of cell growth and differentiation.
These genes initiate and control gene expression cascades that drive development.
More recently, the absent or aberrant expression of HOX genes has been implicated
in cancer development. Despite the observance of these expression changes, the
regulation of the HOX genes in adult tissues and how these genes become
deregulated in cancerous tissues still needs much investigation. We characterized
the promoter region of the HOXB13 gene. A 3 kb region upstream of the HOXB13
gene, which included the 5'UTR, increased reporter gene expression in LNCaP cells
by approximately 99 fold over the promoterless control construct. A highly
conserved 179 base pair fragment containing only the 5'UTR of the HOXB13 gene
constituted a minimal promoter in the LNCaP cell line. Strong promoter activity
was seen in the presence or absence of testosterone, although testosterone
exposure did decrease expression in LNCaP cells by 50%. In an androgen
insensitive cell line Du145, no sensitivity to testosterone was detected and a
consistent low basal level of expression was observed. Since HOXB13 expression is
highly tissue specific, we investigated the ability of the promoter to drive
expression in tissues other than prostate. We observed highest expression in
LNCaP cells with low levels of expression in lung, retinoblastoma, and colon
cancer cells and higher expression in MCF7 breast cancer cells.

PMID: 18163187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Ai Zheng. 2007 Nov;26(11):1276-80.

[Aberrant methylation of tumor suppressor genes in renal cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Q(1), Jin J, Tao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Institute of Urology, The First Hospital, Peking
University, Beijing, 100034, PR China.

Promoter CpG methylation is a major epigenetic mechanism to inactivate the
functions of tumor suppressor genes (TSG), in addition to genetic mechanism
(point mutation and deletion), plays important roles in the pathogenesis of
various tumors. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a malignant tumor with poor
prognosis, in which aberrant methylation of TSGs has also been widely reported.
Most RCC patients are presented with advanced disease because early stage RCC
does not have apparent symptoms. The detection of TSG methylation might provide
new specific biomarkers for early non-invasive diagnosis of this disease. Because
RCC is generally insensitive to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy, using
epigenetic agents, such as azacytidine, to modulate the activities of DNA
methyltransferases and reverse the methylation status of TSGs might be an
attractive strategy for future treatment of RCC, which could be combined with
conventional therapies. We reviewed recent advances in the research on TSG
methylation in RCC, summarized the methylation profile of RCC-related genes,
including HOXB13, HAI2/SPINT2, CDH1 and CTNNG/JUP, and discussed the clinical
significance of aberrant CpG methylation for the diagnosis and treatment of RCC.

PMID: 17991333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 1;13(21):6327-34.

The prognostic biomarkers HOXB13, IL17BR, and CHDH are regulated by estrogen in
breast cancer.

Wang Z(1), Dahiya S, Provencher H, Muir B, Carney E, Coser K, Shioda T, Ma XJ,
Sgroi DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Molecular Pathology Research 
Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: We previously identified three genes, HOXB13, IL17BR, and CHDH, that
strongly predict clinical outcome in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast
cancer patients receiving tamoxifen monotherapy. The biological mechanisms
linking these genes to estrogen signaling and tamoxifen response in breast cancer
remain to be determined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In a consecutive series of 148 ER-positive and ER-negative
breast cancers, HOXB13, IL17BR, and CHDH gene expression was measured by
quantitative real-time PCR and correlated with ER, PR, and HER2 expression. The
role of estrogen and ER in the regulation of these three genes was assessed in
several ER-positive and ER-negative breast cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: In primary breast tumors, HOXB13 expression correlated negatively, and
IL17BR and CHDH expression correlated positively, with ER status, and all three
genes exhibited an ER-dependent correlation pattern with HER2 status that differs
from PR and PS2, two canonical estrogen-regulated genes. Results using breast
cancer cell lines show that these genes are regulated by estradiol in an
ER-dependent manner, and that this regulation is abrogated by tamoxifen.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB13, IL17BR, and CHDH are estrogen-regulated genes, but their
pattern of correlation with known positive (ER, PR) and negative (HER2)
predictors of tamoxifen response differs from canonical ER signature genes. These
results provide a biological rationale for the prognostic utility of these three 
genes in early-stage ER-positive breast cancer and for their potential to predict
anti-estrogen resistance.

PMID: 17975144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Feb;36(2):227-35. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

HOX gene analysis of endothelial cell differentiation in human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Chung N(1), Jee BK, Chae SW, Jeon YW, Lee KH, Rha HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) have been shown to
possess multilineage differentiation potential. HOX genes function in
transcriptional regulators, and are involved in stem cell differentiation. The
aim of the present study was to demonstrate HOX genes that are related to
angiogenesis. To identify the expression patterns of 37 HOX genes in the
endothelial cell differentiation of hMSCs, we analyzed HOX genes through
profiling with multiplex RT-PCR. The results showed that the expression patterns 
of four HOX genes, HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13, significantly changed during 
angiogenesis. The expression levels of HOXA7 and HOXB3 were dramatically
increased, whereas those of HOXA3 and HOXB13 were decreased during endothelial
cell differentiation. When further analysis of the expressions of these HOX genes
was performed with real-time PCR and an immunoblot assay, the expression patterns
were also found to be well-matched with the results of multiplex RT-PCR. Here, we
report that HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13 might be involved in the angiogenesis
of hMSCs.

PMID: 17972163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Oct 23;104(43):17093-8. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

HOXB13 promotes ovarian cancer progression.

Miao J(1), Wang Z, Provencher H, Muir B, Dahiya S, Carney E, Leong CO, Sgroi DC, 
Orsulic S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Research Unit and Center for Cancer Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Deregulated expression of HOXB13 in a subset of estrogen receptor-positive breast
cancer patients treated with tamoxifen monotherapy is associated with an
aggressive clinical course and poor outcome. Because the ovary is another
hormone-responsive organ, we investigated whether HOXB13 plays a role in ovarian 
cancer progression. We show that HOXB13 is expressed in multiple human ovarian
cancer cell lines and tumors and that knockdown of endogenous HOXB13 by RNA
interference in human ovarian cancer cell lines is associated with reduced cell
proliferation. Ectopic expression of HOXB13 is capable of transforming p53(-/-)
mouse embryonic fibroblasts and promotes cell proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth in mouse ovarian cancer cell lines that contain
genetic alterations in p53, myc, and ras. In this genetically defined cell line
model of ovarian cancer, we demonstrate that HOXB13 collaborates with activated
ras to markedly promote tumor growth in vivo and that HOXB13 confers resistance
to tamoxifen-mediated apoptosis. Taken together, our results support a
pro-proliferative and pro-survival role for HOXB13 in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2040435
PMID: 17942676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Jan;107(2):225-34. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Exploring the two-gene ratio in breast cancer--independent roles for HOXB13 and
IL17BR in prediction of clinical outcome.

Jerevall PL(1), Brommesson S, Strand C, Gruvberger-Saal S, Malmström P,
Nordenskjöld B, Wingren S, Söderkvist P, Fernö M, Stål O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Surgery, Division of Oncology, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden. piiha-lotta.Jerevall@ibk.liu.se

BACKGROUND: The two-gene expression ratio HOXB13:IL17BR has been proposed to
predict the outcome of tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients. We intended to
examine whether this ratio can predict the benefit of 5 years vs. 2 years of
tamoxifen treatment of postmenopausal patients. A further objective was to
investigate any prognostic effects of the ratio in systematically untreated
premenopausal patients. Based on the current knowledge of HOXB13 and IL17BR, we
hypothesized that these genes may have individual prognostic or predictive power.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expression of HOXB13 and IL17BR were quantified by
real-time PCR in tumors from 264 randomized postmenopausal patients and 93
systemically untreated premenopausal patients.
RESULTS: A high HOXB13:IL17BR ratio was associated with aggressive tumor
characteristics, as were low levels of IL17BR alone. The ratio and HOXB13 alone
predicted recurrence-free survival after endocrine treatment, with a benefit of
prolonged treatment in estrogen receptor-positive patients correlated to a low
ratio (recurrence rate ratio: RR = 0.39; P = 0.030), or low expression of HOXB13 
(RR = 0.37; P = 0.015). No difference in recurrence-free survival was seen for
the high ratio or high HOXB13 subgroups. The predictive value of HOXB13 and
HOXB13:IL17BR was significant in multivariate analysis. In the systemically
untreated cohort, only IL17BR showed independent prognostic significance.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the ratio or HOXB13 alone can predict the benefit of
endocrine therapy, with a high ratio or a high expression rendering patients less
likely to respond. We have also shown that IL17BR might be an independent
prognostic factor in breast cancer.

PMID: 17453342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Feb 20;25(6):662-8.

HOXB13-to-IL17BR expression ratio is related with tumor aggressiveness and
response to tamoxifen of recurrent breast cancer: a retrospective study.

Jansen MP(1), Sieuwerts AM, Look MP, Ritstier K, Meijer-van Gelder ME, van
Staveren IL, Klijn JG, Foekens JA, Berns EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC/Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.p.h.m.jansen@erasmusmc.nl

PURPOSE: A HOXB13-to-IL17BR expression ratio was previously identified to predict
clinical outcome of breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen.
However, this ratio may predict a tumor's response to tamoxifen, its intrinsic
aggressiveness, or both.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We have measured the HOXB13 and IL17BR expression levels by
real-time polymerase chain reaction in 1,252 primary breast tumor specimens.
Expression levels were normalized to housekeeper gene levels and related to
clinicopathologic factors for all patients. The primary objective of this study
was to determine the relationship of a HOXB13-to-IL17BR ratio with tumor
aggressiveness and/or with response to tamoxifen therapy in estrogen receptor
(ER) -positive disease. We selected ER-positive tumors, and clinical end points
for the HOXB13-to-IL17BR ratio were disease-free survival (DFS) in patients with 
primary breast cancer (N = 619) and progression-free survival (PFS) in patients
with recurrent breast cancer treated with first-line tamoxifen monotherapy (N =
193). The odds ratio (OR) and hazard ratio (HR) and their 95% CI were calculated,
and all P values were two-sided.
RESULTS: The HOXB13-to-IL17BR ratio was significantly associated with DFS and
PFS. In multivariate analysis, HOXB13-to-IL17BR ratio expression levels were
associated with a shorter DFS for node-negative patients only. Corrected for
traditional predictive factors, the dichotomized HOXB13-to-IL17BR ratio was the
strongest predictor in multivariate analysis for a poor response to tamoxifen
therapy (OR = 0.16; 95% CI, 0.06 to 0.45; P < .001) and a shorter PFS (HR = 2.97;
95% CI, 1.82 to 4.86; P < .001).
CONCLUSION: High HOXB13-to-IL17BR ratio expression levels associate with both
tumor aggressiveness and tamoxifen therapy failure.

PMID: 17308270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cancer. 2007 Feb 5;6:14.

Factor interaction analysis for chromosome 8 and DNA methylation alterations
highlights innate immune response suppression and cytoskeletal changes in
prostate cancer.

Schulz WA(1), Alexa A, Jung V, Hader C, Hoffmann MJ, Yamanaka M, Fritzsche S,
Wlazlinski A, Müller M, Lengauer T, Engers R, Florl AR, Wullich B, Rahnenführer
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
wolfgang.schulz@uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: Alterations of chromosome 8 and hypomethylation of LINE-1
retrotransposons are common alterations in advanced prostate carcinoma. In a
former study including many metastatic cases, they strongly correlated with each 
other. To elucidate a possible interaction between the two alterations, we
investigated their relationship in less advanced prostate cancers.
RESULTS: In 50 primary tumor tissues, no correlation was observed between
chromosome 8 alterations determined by comparative genomic hybridization and
LINE-1 hypomethylation measured by Southern blot hybridization. The discrepancy
towards the former study, which had been dominated by advanced stage cases,
suggests that both alterations converge and interact during prostate cancer
progression. Therefore, interaction analysis was performed on microarray-based
expression profiles of cancers harboring both alterations, only one, or none.
Application of a novel bioinformatic method identified Gene Ontology (GO) groups 
related to innate immunity, cytoskeletal organization and cell adhesion as common
targets of both alterations. Many genes targeted by their interaction were
involved in type I and II interferon signaling and several were functionally
related to hereditary prostate cancer genes. In addition, the interaction
appeared to influence a switch in the expression pattern of EPB41L genes encoding
4.1 cytoskeleton proteins. Real-time RT-PCR revealed GADD45A, MX1, EPB41L3/DAL1, 
and FBLN1 as generally downregulated in prostate cancer, whereas HOXB13 and
EPB41L4B were upregulated. TLR3 was downregulated in a subset of the cases and
associated with recurrence. Downregulation of EPB41L3, but not of GADD45A, was
associated with promoter hypermethylation, which was detected in 79% of carcinoma
samples.
CONCLUSION: Alterations of chromosome 8 and DNA hypomethylation in prostate
cancer probably do not cause each other, but converge during progression. The
present analysis implicates their interaction in innate immune response
suppression and cytoskeletal changes during prostate cancer progression. The
study thus highlights novel mechanisms in prostate cancer progression and
identifies novel candidate genes for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. In
particular, TLR3 expression might be useful for prostate cancer prognosis and
EPB41L3 hypermethylation for its detection.

PMCID: PMC1797054
PMID: 17280610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Endocrinology. 2007 Apr;148(4):1697-706. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

Androgen regulation of prostate morphoregulatory gene expression: Fgf10-dependent
and -independent pathways.

Pu Y(1), Huang L, Birch L, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, MC 955, University of Illinois at Chicago, 820 South
Wood Street, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Androgens are essential and sufficient for prostate gland morphogenesis; however,
the downstream gene targets that mediate this action are unclear. To identify
androgen-regulated genes involved in prostate development, we used short-term
organ culture and examined the effect of testosterone on the expression of
several critical prostate morphoregulatory genes. Rat ventral prostates (VP) and 
lateral prostates (LP) were collected at birth, and contralateral lobes were
cultured for 18 h in the presence or absence of 10 nM testosterone with or
without OH-flutamide to block residual androgens. Gene expression was quantitated
using real-time RT-PCR. Although expression of Fgf10, Nkx3.1, and Ptc was
increased in both prostate lobes, other genes were regulated by testosterone in a
lobe-specific manner. This included up-regulation of epithelial genes FgfR2iiib, 
Shh, Hoxb13, and Bmp7 in the VP specifically and down-regulation of mesenchymal
genes Wnt5a (VP) and Bmp4 (LP). Thus, in addition to stimulation of homeobox
genes and paracrine-acting growth factors, androgens may positively regulate
prostatic development through suppression of growth inhibitory genes. Because
previous studies revealed a similar gene regulation pattern in response to
exogenous Fgf10, experiments were performed to identify androgen-regulated genes 
mediated through Fgf10 signaling. Short-term VP and LP cultures with FgfR
antagonist PD173074 and Mek inhibitor U0126 identified epithelial Shh and Hoxb13 
up-regulation by androgens to be Fgf10-dependent. We propose that androgen
regulation of prostate development is mediated through positive and negative
regulation of multiple morphoregulatory genes acting in combination through
complex gene networks. Lobe-specific responses may provide a developmental basis 
for prostate gland heterogeneity.

PMCID: PMC1965265
PMID: 17218409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 1;66(23):11187-93.

Epigenetic silencing of novel tumor suppressors in malignant melanoma.

Muthusamy V(1), Duraisamy S, Bradbury CM, Hobbs C, Curley DP, Nelson B, Bosenberg
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA.

Malignant melanoma is a common and frequently lethal disease. Current therapeutic
interventions have little effect on survival, emphasizing the need for a better
understanding of the genetic, epigenetic, and phenotypic changes in melanoma
formation and progression. We identified 17 genes that were not previously known 
to be silenced by methylation in melanoma using a microarray-based screen
following treatment of melanoma cell lines with the DNA methylation inhibitor
5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Eight of these genes have not been previously shown to
undergo DNA methylation in any form of cancer. Three of the genes, QPCT, CYP1B1, 
and LXN, are densely methylated in >95% of uncultured melanoma tumor samples.
Reexpression of either of two of the silenced genes, HOXB13 and SYK, resulted in 
reduced colony formation in vitro and diminished tumor formation in vivo,
indicating that these genes function as tumor suppressors in melanoma.

PMID: 17145863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1235-45. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Posterior Hox gene expression and differential androgen regulation in the
developing and adult rat prostate lobes.

Huang L(1), Pu Y, Hepps D, Danielpour D, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 820 South Wood
Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Axis positioning and tissue determination during development involve coordinated 
expression of Hox genes throughout the body. The most posterior Hox gene clusters
are involved in prostate organogenesis. In the present study, we characterized
and compared the expression profiles of posterior (5') Hox genes in the separate 
lobes of the adult rat prostate gland, the coagulating gland, seminal vesicles,
and epididymis using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. These genes include Hoxa9-11,
Hoxa13, Hoxd13, and Hoxb13. We identified a unique Hox code for each of these
organs and propose that this contributes to the organ-specific and prostate
lobe-specific identities in the adult rat. Using the ventral prostate (VP) as a
model, we characterized the Hox genes expression patterns over time from birth
through adulthood. Expression levels of the three Hox13 genes and Hoxa10 were
significantly higher in the adult VP compared with the neonatal developing VP
suggesting an important role during adult homeostasis. In contrast, Hoxa9 and
Hoxa11 levels declined after morphogenesis suggesting a specific developmental
role. Overall, the Hoxb13 gene exhibited the most striking temporal and
organ-specific differences. Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry,
a distinct Hoxb13 anterior-to-posterior expression gradient was observed with the
highest expression levels in the VP luminal epithelial cells, moderate levels in 
the lateral prostate, and low expression in the dorsal prostate. An expression
gradient was also observed along the ductal length in all three prostate lobes
with strongest expression at the distal tips and limited expression in the
proximal ducts. After infection with a lentivirus expressing the Hoxb13 gene,
NRP-152 cells cultured under nondifferentiating conditions exhibited robust
cytokeratin 8 immunostain indicating that Hoxb13 expression drives luminal cell
differentiation in the rat epithelium. Androgen regulation of prostatic Hox gene 
expression was examined during development in vitro and after castration in the
adult rat. In the neonatal VP, all six Hox genes were significantly up-regulated 
by androgens, whereas none of the genes were affected by testosterone in the
lateral prostate. In the adult rat, castration resulted in up-regulation of Hoxa9
and Hoxa13 in the VP and down-regulation of Hoxb13 in the dorsal prostate and
lateral prostate. Taken together, we conclude that the prostatic Hox genes reach 
a destined expression level at specific developmental time points in the prostate
gland and possess differential androgenic regulation in a temporal and
lobe-specific manner. We suggest that this timely Hox code participates in
determining lobe-specific prostatic identity and cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2276874
PMID: 17138648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Oct 1;24(28):4611-9.

The HOXB13:IL17BR expression index is a prognostic factor in early-stage breast
cancer.

Ma XJ(1), Hilsenbeck SG, Wang W, Ding L, Sgroi DC, Bender RA, Osborne CK, Allred 
DC, Erlander MG.

Author information: 
(1)AviaraDx Inc, Carlsbad, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: We previously identified three genes, HOXB13, IL17BR and CHDH, and the
HOXB13:IL17BR ratio index in particular, that strongly predicted clinical outcome
in breast cancer patients receiving tamoxifen monotherapy. Confirmation in larger
independent patient cohorts was needed to fully validate their clinical utility.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expression of HOXB13, IL17BR, CHDH, estrogen receptor (ER) 
and progesterone receptor (PR) were quantified by real-time polymerase chain
reaction in 852 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary breast cancers from 566
untreated and 286 tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients. Gene expression and
clinical variables were analyzed for association with relapse-free survival (RFS)
by Cox proportional hazards regression models.
RESULTS: ER and PR mRNA measurements were in close agreement with
immunohistochemistry. In the entire cohort, expression of HOXB13 was associated
with shorter RFS (P = .008), and expression of IL17BR and CHDH was associated
with longer RFS (P < .0001 for IL17BR and P = .0002 for CHDH). In ER+ patients,
the HOXB13:IL17BR index predicted clinical outcome independently of treatment,
but more strongly in node-negative patients. In multivariate analysis of the ER+ 
node-negative subgroup including age, PR status, tumor size, S phase fraction,
and tamoxifen treatment, the two-gene index remained a significant predictor of
RFS (hazard ratio = 3.9; 95% CI, 1.5 to 10.3; P = .007).
CONCLUSION: This tumor bank study demonstrated HOXB13:IL17BR index is a strong
independent prognostic factor for ER+ node-negative patients irrespective of
tamoxifen therapy.

PMID: 17008703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 15;66(16):7939-47.

MIRA-assisted microarray analysis, a new technology for the determination of DNA 
methylation patterns, identifies frequent methylation of homeodomain-containing
genes in lung cancer cells.

Rauch T(1), Li H, Wu X, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010, USA.

We present a straightforward and comprehensive approach for DNA methylation
analysis in mammalian genomes. The methylated-CpG island recovery assay (MIRA),
which is based on the high affinity of the MBD2/MBD3L1 complex for methylated
DNA, has been used to detect cell type-dependent differences in DNA methylation
on a microarray platform. The procedure has been verified and applied to identify
a series of novel candidate lung tumor suppressor genes and potential DNA
methylation markers that contain methylated CpG islands. One gene of particular
interest was DLEC1, located at a commonly deleted area on chromosome 3p22-p21.3, 
which was frequently methylated in primary lung cancers and melanomas. Among the 
identified methylated genes, homeodomain-containing genes were unusually frequent
(11 of the top 50 hits) and were targeted on different chromosomes. These genes
included LHX2, LHX4, PAX7, HOXB13, LBX1, SIX2, HOXD3, DLX1, HOXD1, ONECUT2, and
PAX9. The data show that MIRA-assisted microarray analysis has a low
false-positive rate and has the capacity to catalogue methylated CpG islands on a
genome-wide basis. The results support the hypothesis that cancer-associated DNA 
methylation events do not occur randomly throughout the genome but at least some 
are targeted by specific mechanisms.

PMID: 16912168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006 May-Jun;16(3):1289-96.

A subgroup of HOX Abd-B gene is differentially expressed in cervical cancer.

López R(1), Garrido E, Vázquez G, Piña P, Pérez C, Alvarado I, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, CINVESTAV-IPN,Unidad de
Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de Oncología, Centro
Médico Nacional Siglo XXI-IMSS, Av. Cuauhtemoc 330, Col. Doctores, México DF
07780, Mexico.

The HOX genes are a family of transcription factors that bind to specific
sequences of DNA in target genes regulating their expression. The role of HOX
genes in adult cell differentiation is still obscure, but growing evidence
suggests that they may play an important role in the development of cancer. In
order to study the role of the HOX Abd-B genes in cervical cancer, we analyzed
their expression in cervical tissues. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and RNA in situ hybridization were used to detect HOX Abd-B messenger
RNA expression in nine normal cervical tissues and ten cervical carcinomas. The
normal tissues were human papillomavirus (HPV) negative, whereas all invasive
carcinomas included were HPV16 positive. In this study, we show that HOXA9, A10, 
A11, A13, B9, D11, and D13 genes are expressed in both the epithelium of normal
tissues and neoplastic cells from squamous cervical carcinomas. Interestingly,
the HOXC10 and D12 genes were not expressed in any cervical tissues; however,
HOXB13, C9, C11, C12, C13, D9, and D10 genes were expressed only in the tumoral
tissues but not in the normal cervix. Our findings suggest that the expression of
HOXB13, D9, D10, and HOXC cluster (HOXC9, C11-C13) genes might be an important
step involved in cervical cancer.

PMID: 16803519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Oral Dis. 2006 Jul;12(4):424-7.

The homeobox HOXB13 is expressed in human minor salivary gland.

Cazal C(1), Sobral AP, de Almeida FC, das Graças Silva-Valenzuela M, Durazzo MD, 
Nunes FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, University of São Paulo. São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox are a family of developmental genes involved in
morphogenesis and cellular differentiation. Participation of homeobox within
normal and malignant tissue has been recently discussed in the literature.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the presence of HOXB13 transcript expression in human minor
salivary gland.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ten-micrometer sections from frozen samples were evaluated 
employing non-radioactive in situ hybridization technique and HOXB13 mRNA probes.
RESULTS: HOXB13 was found to be expressed in ducts and mucous acini but not in
serous acini.
CONCLUSIONS: RESULTS suggest that HOXB13 transcripts are differently expressed in
normal mucous and serous acini, and it may possibly reflect a different role in
salivary gland carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16792730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;12(7 Pt 1):2080-7.

A two-gene expression ratio of homeobox 13 and interleukin-17B receptor for
prediction of recurrence and survival in women receiving adjuvant tamoxifen.

Goetz MP(1), Suman VJ, Ingle JN, Nibbe AM, Visscher DW, Reynolds CA, Lingle WL,
Erlander M, Ma XJ, Sgroi DC, Perez EA, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA. goetz.matthew@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;12(7 Pt 1):1954-5.

PURPOSE: In the adjuvant treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast
cancer, additional markers are needed to identify women at high risk for
recurrence.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined the association between the ratio of the
homeobox 13 (HOXB13) to interleukin-17B receptor (IL-17BR) expression and the
clinical outcomes of relapse and survival in women with ER-positive breast cancer
enrolled onto a North Central Cancer Treatment Group adjuvant tamoxifen trial
(NCCTG 89-30-52).
RESULTS: Tumor blocks were obtained from 211 of 256 eligible patients, and
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR profiles for HOXB13 and IL-17BR were
obtained from 206 patients. The cut point for the two-gene log 2(expression
ratio) that best discriminated clinical outcome (recurrence and survival) was
selected and identified women with significantly worse relapse-free survival
(RFS), disease-free survival (DFS), and overall survival (OS), independent of
standard prognostic markers. The cut point differed as a function of nodal status
[node negative (59th percentile) versus node positive (90th percentile)]. In the 
node-positive cohort (n = 86), the HOXB13/IL-17BR ratio was not associated with
relapse or survival. In contrast, in the node-negative cohort (n = 130), a high
HOXB13/IL-17BR ratio was associated with significantly worse RFS [hazard ratio
(HR), 1.98; P = 0.031], DFS (HR, 2.03; P = 0.015), and OS (HR, 2.4; P = 0.014),
independent of standard prognostic markers.
CONCLUSION: A high HOXB13/IL-17BR expression ratio is associated with increased
relapse and death in patients with resected node-negative, ER-positive breast
cancer treated with tamoxifen and may identify patients in whom alternative
therapies should be studied.

PMID: 16609019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;12(7 Pt 1):1954-5.

Genomic testing for sensitivity of breast cancer to hormonal therapy.

Symmans WF.

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;12(7 Pt 1):2080-7.

PMID: 16609001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cell Mol Med. 2006 Jan-Mar;10(1):100-25.

Epigenetics of prostate cancer: beyond DNA methylation.

Schulz WA(1), Hatina J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
wolfgang.schulz@uni-duesseldorf.de

Epigenetic mechanisms permit the stable inheritance of cellular properties
without changes in DNA sequence or amount. In prostate carcinoma, epigenetic
mechanisms are essential for development and progression, complementing,
amplifying and diversifying genetic alterations. DNA hypermethylation affects at 
least 30 individual genes, while repetitive sequences including retrotransposons 
and selected genes become hypomethylated. Hypermethylation of several genes
occurs in a coordinate manner early in carcinogenesis and can be exploited for
cancer detection, whereas hypomethylation and further hypermethylation events are
associated with progression. DNA methylation alterations interact with changes in
chromatin proteins. Prominent alterations at this level include altered patterns 
of histone modification, increased expression of the EZH2 polycomb histone
methyltransferase, and changes in transcriptional corepressors and coactivators. 
These changes may make prostate carcinoma particularly susceptible to drugs
targeting chromatin and DNA modifications. They relate to crucial alterations in 
a network of transcription factors comprising ETS family proteins, the androgen
receptor, NKX3.1, KLF, and HOXB13 homeobox proteins. This network controls
differentiation and proliferation of prostate epithelial cells integrating
signals from hormones, growth factors and cell adhesion proteins that are
likewise distorted in prostate cancer. As a consequence, prostate carcinoma cells
appear to be locked into an aberrant state, characterized by continued
proliferation of largely differentiated cells. Accordingly, stem cell
characteristics of prostate cancer cells appear to be secondarily acquired. The
aberrant differentiation state of prostate carcinoma cells also results in
distorted mutual interactions between epithelial and stromal cells in the tumor
that promote tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3933104
PMID: 16563224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Oncol. 2006 Apr;28(4):931-8.

Suppression of invasive characteristics by antisense introduction of
overexpressed HOX genes in ovarian cancer cells.

Yamashita T(1), Tazawa S, Yawei Z, Katayama H, Kato Y, Nishiwaki K, Yokohama Y,
Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asahikawa Medical College,
Midorigaoka, Asahikawa 078-8510, Japan. tyamashi@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

HOX genes encode transcription factors that function to establish basic body
pattern during embryogenesis and maintain the function of specific organs in the 
adult. Recent studies have demonstrated that HOX genes are also involved in
oncogenesis in a range of malignancies. To elucidate whether HOX genes contribute
to ovarian carcinogenesis, we created an expression profile of HOX genes using
ovarian derived materials from surgical samples and epithelial ovarian cancer
cells derived from five different cell lines. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR assay
indicated overexpression of 14 HOX genes in clusters A and B but only 2 genes in 
clusters C and D. Of the 16 HOX genes, overexpression of paralogs of HOX3, HOX4
and HOX7 is seen in cluster A and B, and of HOX13 in all paralogs. In addition,
HOXB7, HOXA13 and HOXB13 showed high levels of overexpression in cancer cells and
tissues whereas no or little expression was observed in normal controls. To
examine whether overexpressed HOX genes regulate invasion of ovarian cancer cells
directly, we introduced an antisense DNA fragment of overexpressed HOXB7 and
HOXB13, and HOXC5 that did not show overexpression into SKOV3 cells by
electroporation. Antisense introduction followed by chemoinvasion assay using
matrigel chamber demonstrated that SKOV3 cells introduced an antisense of each
HOXB7 and HOXB13 showed 85% and 50% reduction of invasion ability compared to the
parental SKOV3 cells, respectively. In contrast, antisense of HOXC5 introduced
cells showed no significant difference of the invasion ability. These results
suggest an important role of overexpressed HOX genes, especially for invasive
characteristics of ovarian cancer cells.

PMID: 16525643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006 Jan-Feb;16(1):329-35.

HOXB homeobox gene expression in cervical carcinoma.

López R(1), Garrido E, Piña P, Hidalgo A, Lazos M, Ochoa R, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, CINVESTAV-IPN, Mexico DF,
Mexico.

The homeobox (HOX) genes are a family of transcription factors that bind to
specific DNA sequences in target genes regulating gene expression. Thirty-nine
HOX genes have been mapped in four conserved clusters: A, B, C, and D; they act
as master genes regulating the identity of body segments along the
anteroposterior axis of the embryo. The role played by HOX genes in adult cell
differentiation is unclear to date, but growing evidence suggests that they may
play an important role in the development of cancer. To study the role played by 
HOX genes in cervical cancer, in the present work, we analyzed the expression of 
HOXB genes and the localization of their transcripts in human cervical tissues.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis and nonradioactive RNA
in situ hybridization were used to detect HOXB expression in 11 normal cervical
tissues and 17 cervical carcinomas. It was determined that HOXB1, B3, B5, B6, B7,
B8, and B9 genes are expressed in normal adult cervical epithelium and squamous
cervical carcinomas. Interestingly, HOXB2, HOXB4, and HOXB13 gene expression was 
found only in tumor tissues. Our findings suggest that the new expression of
HOXB2, HOXB4, and B13 genes is involved in cervical cancer.

PMID: 16445654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Dec 21;97(24):1851-2; author reply 1852-3.

Re: Limits of predictive models using microarray data for breast cancer clinical 
treatment outcome.

Jansen MP, Foekens JA, Klijn JG, Berns EM.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Jun 15;97(12):927-30.

PMID: 16368948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;21(5):372-4.

[Differential display of homeobox gene expressions in the normal, wounded human
fetal and adult skins by DNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Song HF(1), Chai JK, Chen ML, Lin ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Burn Institute, the 304th Hospital
Affiliated to PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100037, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the differential expression of homeobox genes in the
normal, wounded human fetal and adult skins and its significance in fetal
scarless healing.
METHODS: Gene chips containing 14 000 human genes were used to investigate
homeobox gene expressions of the normal, wounded human fetal and adult skins.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the expression of homeobox
genes, especially for PRX-2, HOXB13, HOXB6 and HOXB7.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox gene is in close relation to developmental biology. The
different expressions and changes of homeobox genes in the normal, wounded human 
fetal and adult skin may be a primary cause of different wound healing between
fetal and adult skin.

PMID: 16335386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 16;25(12):1733-42.

Epigenetic inactivation of the candidate tumor suppressor gene HOXB13 in human
renal cell carcinoma.

Okuda H(1), Toyota M, Ishida W, Furihata M, Tsuchiya M, Kamada M, Tokino T, Shuin
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kochi Medical School, Nankoku 783-8505, Japan.
okudah@med.kochi-u.ac.jp

Epigenetic alterations like DNA methylation and the resulting inactivation of
cancer-related genes often contribute to the development of various cancers. To
identify the genes that are silenced by aberrant methylation in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), we subjected two RCC lines to methylated CpG island
amplification/representational difference analysis. This identified 27 CpG
islands. Combined bisulfite restriction analysis of these CpG islands in primary 
RCC cases revealed that four were methylated in a tumor-specific manner. One of
these was identified as the human homeo-box gene B13 (HOXB13) gene, but the
remaining three CpG islands were not associated with known genes. The methylation
frequencies of HOXB13 in primary RCC samples and lines were 30 and 73%,
respectively. The methylation status of HOXB13 correlated with the loss of its
expression both in RCC lines and primary tumors, and methyltransferase inhibitor 
treatment induced the recovery of its expression. Exogenous expression of HOXB13 
in RCC cells that lacked endogenous HOXB13 expression suppressed colony formation
and induced apoptotic features. Furthermore, HOXB13 methylation correlated
positively with tumor grade and microvessel invasion. These results suggest that 
HOXB13 is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene in RCC and that its
inactivation may play an important role in both RCC tumorigenesis and
progression.

PMID: 16278676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29904-11. Epub 2005 Jun 17.

Hoxb13 up-regulates transglutaminase activity and drives terminal differentiation
in an epidermal organotypic model.

Mack JA(1), Li L, Sato N, Hascall VC, Maytin EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Lerner
Research Institute, Ohio 44195, USA. mackj@ccf.org

Hox genes act to differentiate and pattern embryonic structures by promoting the 
proliferation of specific cell types. An exception is Hoxb13, which functions as 
a proapoptotic and antiproliferative protein during development of the caudal
spinal cord and tail vertebrae and has also been implicated in adult cutaneous
wound repair. The adult epidermis, which expresses several Hox genes including
Hoxb13, is continually renewed in a program of growth arrest, differentiation,
and a specialized form of apoptosis (cornification). Yet little is known about
the function(s) of these genes in skin. Based on its role during embryogenesis,
Hoxb13 is an attractive candidate to be involved in the regulation of epidermal
differentiation. Here, we demonstrate that Hoxb13 overexpression in an adult
organotypic epidermal model recapitulates actions of Hoxb13 reported in embryonic
development. Epidermal cell proliferation is decreased, apoptosis increased, and 
excessive terminal differentiation observed, as characterized by enhanced
transglutaminase activity and excessive cornified envelope formation.
Overexpression of Hoxb13 also produces abnormal phenotypes in the epidermal
tissue that resemble certain pathological features of dysplastic skin diseases.
Our results suggest that Hoxb13 functions to promote epidermal differentiation, a
critical process for skin regeneration and for the maintenance of normal barrier 
function.

PMID: 15964834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Jun 15;97(12):927-30.

Limits of predictive models using microarray data for breast cancer clinical
treatment outcome.

Reid JF(1), Lusa L, De Cecco L, Coradini D, Veneroni S, Daidone MG, Gariboldi M, 
Pierotti MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la
Cura dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. james.reid@ifom-ieo-campus.it

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Dec 21;97(24):1851-2; author reply 1852-3.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Jun 15;97(12):866-7.

Data from microarray studies have been used to develop predictive models for
treatment outcome in breast cancer, such as a recently proposed predictive model 
for antiestrogen response after tamoxifen treatment that was based on the
expression ratio of two genes. We attempted to validate this model on an
independent cohort of 58 patients with resectable estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer. We measured expression of the genes HOXB13 and IL17BR with real
time-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and assessed the association between 
their expression and outcome by use of univariate logistic regression, area under
the receiver-operating-characteristic curve (AUC), a two-sample t test, and a
Mann-Whitney test. We also applied standard supervised methods to the original
microarray dataset and to another independent dataset from similar patients to
estimate the classification accuracy obtainable by using more than two genes in a
microarray-based predictive model. We could not validate the performance of the
two-gene predictor on our cohort of samples (relation between outcome and the
following genes estimated by logistic regression: for HOXB13, odds ratio [OR] =
1.04, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.92 to 1.16, P = .54; for IL17BR, OR =
0.69, 95% CI = 0.40 to 1.20, P = .18; and for HOXB13/IL17BR, OR = 1.30, 95% CI = 
0.88 to 1.93, P = .18). Similar results were obtained with the AUC, a two-sample 
two-sided t test, and a Mann-Whitney test. In addition, estimates of
classification accuracies applied to two independent microarray datasets
highlighted the poor performance of treatment-response predictive models that can
be achieved with the sample sizes of patients and informative genes to date.

PMID: 15956654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Br J Cancer. 2005 Jun 20;92(12):2233-9.

HOXB13 is downregulated in colorectal cancer to confer TCF4-mediated
transactivation.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Zhang H, Lee SJ, Sheng H, Loehrer PJ, Gardner TA, Jeng MH, Kao
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Mutations in the Wnt signalling cascade are believed to cause aberrant
proliferation of colorectal cells through T-cell factor-4 (TCF4) and its
downstream growth-modulating factors. HOXB13 is exclusively expressed in prostate
and colorectum. In prostate cancers, HOXB13 negatively regulates
beta-catenin/TCF4-mediated transactivation and subsequently inhibits cell growth.
To study the role of HOXB13 in colorectal tumorigenesis, we evaluated the
expression of HOXB13 in 53 colorectal tumours originated from the distal left
colon to rectum with their matching normal tissues using quantitative RT-PCR
analysis. Expression of HOXB13 is either lost or diminished in 26 out of 42 valid
tumours (62%), while expression of TCF4 RNA is not correlated with HOXB13
expression. TCF4 promoter analysis showed that HOXB13 does not regulate TCF4 at
the transcriptional level. However, HOXB13 downregulated the expression of TCF4
and its target gene, c-myc, at the protein level and consequently inhibited
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated signalling. Functionally, forced expression of HOXB13
drove colorectal cancer (CRC) cells into growth suppression. This is the first
description of the downregulation of HOXB13 in CRC and its mechanism of action is
mediated through the regulation of TCF4 protein stability. Our results suggest
that loss of HOXB13 may be an important event for colorectal cell transformation,
considering that over 90% of colorectal tumours retain mutations in the
APC/beta-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2361828
PMID: 15928669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):721-6.

Regulation of tumor invasion by HOXB13 gene overexpressed in human endometrial
cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Yamashita T, Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asahikawa Medical College,
Midorigaoka Higashi 2-1-1-1, Asahikawa 078-8510, Japan.

During the last two decades, a group of homeobox-containing genes, the HOX gene
family, has been studied both in the context of embryonic development and
neoplasia. In particular, there is accumulating evidence of the involvement of
HOX abnormalities in a variety of malignancies, including breast cancer. However,
little is known about the association of HOX genes with endometrial cancer, which
is the most common malignancy of the female genital tract and is thought to be
dependent on estrogen, like breast cancer. In this study, we detected
overexpression of the HOXB13 gene in endometrial cancer cells and tissues from
patients by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. To investigate whether overexpression 
of HOXB13 is involved in invasion or metastasis of endometrial cancer, we
transfected antisense HOXB13/pcDNA3.1+ plasmid vector into endometrial cancer
AN3CA cells by electroporation and performed in vitro chemoinvasion assay. We
revealed that the invasive ability of antisense-transfectants showed a 90%
reduction compared with parental cells and control transfectants (p<0.01). In
addition, administration of 17beta-estradiol induced time- and dose-dependent
responses of the HOXB13 expression in endometrial cancer AN3CA cells. These
results suggest that overexpression of HOXB13 in endometrial cancer may be
associated with the invasive ability of cancer cells with regulation by estrogen.

PMID: 15756448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 15;278(2):396-414.

The role of Fgf10 signaling in branching morphogenesis and gene expression of the
rat prostate gland: lobe-specific suppression by neonatal estrogens.

Huang L(1), Pu Y, Alam S, Birch L, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 820 Wood Street, M/C
955 Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Brief exposure of rats to high-dose estrogen during the neonatal period
interrupts prostate development in a lobe-specific manner and predisposes the
gland to dysplasia with aging, a phenomenon referred to as developmental
estrogenization. Our previous studies have revealed that these effects are
initiated through altered steroid receptor expression; however, the immediate
downstream targets remain unclear. We have recently shown that developmental
expression of Shh-ptc-gli is downregulated in the dorsolateral prostate following
estrogenization, and this is responsible, in part, for branching deficits
observed in that prostatic region specifically. In the present study, we examine 
the role of Fgf10 signaling during rat prostate development and as a mediator of 
the developmental estrogenized phenotype. Fgf10 and FgfR2iiib localize to the
distal signaling center of elongating and branching ducts in separate prostate
lobes where they regulate the expression of multiple morphoregulatory genes
including Shh, ptc, Bmp7, Bmp4, Hoxb13, and Nkx3.1. Ventral and lateral lobe
organ cultures and mesenchyme-free ductal cultures demonstrate a direct role for 
Fgf10/FgfR2iiib in ductal elongation, branching, epithelial proliferation, and
differentiation. Based on these findings, a model is proposed depicting the
localized expression and feedback loops between several morphoregulatory factors 
in the developing prostate that contribute to tightly regulated branching
morphogenesis. Similar to Shh-ptc-gli, neonatal estrogen exposure downregulates
Fgf10, FgfR2iiib, and Bmp7 expression in the dorsolateral prostate while ventral 
lobe expression of these genes is unaffected. Lateral prostate organ culture
experiments demonstrate that growth and branching inhibition as well as
Fgf10/FgfR2iiib suppression are mediated directly at the prostatic level.
Furthermore, exogenous Fgf10 fully rescues the growth and branching deficits due 
to estrogen exposure. Together, these studies demonstrate that alterations in
Fgf10 signaling are a proximate cause of Shh-ptc-gli and Bmp7 downregulation that
together result in branching inhibition of the dorsolateral prostate following
neonatal estrogen exposure.

PMID: 15680359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 15;64(24):9185-92.

HOXB13 induces growth suppression of prostate cancer cells as a repressor of
hormone-activated androgen receptor signaling.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Zhang HJ, Lee SJ, Jeng MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) signals play a decisive role in regulating the growth and 
differentiation of both normal and cancerous prostate cells by triggering the
regulation of target genes, in a process in which AR cofactors have critical
functions. Because of the highly prostate-specific expression pattern of HOXB13, 
we studied the role of this homeodomain protein in prostate cells. Expression of 
HOXB13 was limited to AR-expressing prostate cells. Reporter transcription assay 
demonstrated that HOXB13 significantly suppressed hormone-mediated AR activity in
a dose-responsive manner, and suppression was specific to AR with which HOXB13
physically interacts. Overexpression of HOXB13 further down-regulated the
androgen-stimulated expression of prostate-specific antigen, and suppression of
endogenous HOXB13 stimulated transactivation of AR. Functionally, HOXB13
suppressed growth of LNCaP prostate cancer cells, which could be counteracted by 
additional hormone-activated AR. On the other hand, the growth-suppressive
function of HOXB13 in AR-negative CV-1 cells was not affected by AR. These
results suggest that HOXB13 functions as an AR repressor to modulate the complex 
AR signaling and subsequent growth regulation of prostate cancer cells. In
addition to the loss of HOXB13 expression, maintaining AR may be an important
step for prostate cancer cells to tolerate the suppressor function of HOXB13.
Altogether, our data present a novel mechanism for the HOXB13-mediated repression
of AR signaling, which can be interpreted to a growth-suppressive event.

PMID: 15604291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Br J Cancer. 2005 Jan 31;92(2):376-81.

Expression analysis onto microarrays of randomly selected cDNA clones highlights 
HOXB13 as a marker of human prostate cancer.

Edwards S(1), Campbell C, Flohr P, Shipley J, Giddings I, Te-Poele R, Dodson A,
Foster C, Clark J, Jhavar S, Kovacs G, Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Male Urological Cancer Research Centre,
Institute of Cancer Research, 15 Cotswold Road, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.

In a strategy aimed at identifying novel markers of human prostate cancer, we
performed expression analysis using microarrays of clones randomly selected from 
a cDNA library prepared from the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line. Comparisons of 
expression profiles in primary human prostate cancer, adjacent normal prostate
tissue, and a selection of other (nonprostate) normal human tissues, led to the
identification of a set of clones that were judged as the best candidate markers 
of normal and/or malignant prostate tissue. DNA sequencing of the selected clones
revealed that they included 10 genes that had previously been established as
prostate markers: NKX3.1, KLK2, KLK3 (PSA), FOLH1 (PSMA), STEAP2, PSGR, PRAC,
RDH11, Prostein and FASN. Following analysis of the expression patterns of all
selected and sequenced genes through interrogation of SAGE databases, a further
three genes from our clone set, HOXB13, SPON2 and NCAM2, emerged as additional
candidate markers of human prostate cancer. Quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated the 
specificity of expression of HOXB13 in prostate tissue and revealed its
ubiquitous expression in a series of 37 primary prostate cancers and 20 normal
prostates. These results demonstrate the utility of this expression-microarray
approach in hunting for new markers of individual human cancer types.

PMCID: PMC2361840
PMID: 15583692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. FASEB J. 2005 Feb;19(2):243-5. Epub 2004 Nov 17.

Molecular profiling of human prostate tissues: insights into gene expression
patterns of prostate development during puberty.

Dhanasekaran SM(1), Dash A, Yu J, Maine IP, Laxman B, Tomlins SA, Creighton CJ,
Menon A, Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109-0602, USA.

Testosterone production surges during puberty and orchestrates massive growth and
reorganization of the prostate gland, and this glandular architecture is
maintained thereafter throughout adulthood. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
and prostate adenocarcinoma (PCA) are common diseases in adulthood that do not
develop in the absence of androgens. Our objective was to gain insight into gene 
expression changes of the prostate gland at puberty, a crucial juncture in
prostate development that is androgen dependent. Understanding the role played by
androgens in normal prostate development may provide greater insight into
androgen involvement in prostatic diseases. Benign prostate tissues obtained from
pubertal and adult age group cadaveric organ donors were harvested and profiled
using 20,000 element cDNA microarrays. Statistical analysis of the microarray
data identified 375 genes that were differentially expressed in pubertal
prostates relative to adult prostates including genes such as Nkx3.1, TMEPAI,
TGFBR3, FASN, ANKH, TGFBR2, FAAH, S100P, HoxB13, fibronectin, and TSC2 among
others. Comparisons of pubertal and BPH expression profiles revealed a subset of 
genes that shared the expression pattern between the two groups. In addition, we 
observed that several genes from this list were previously demonstrated to be
regulated by androgen and hence could also be potential in vivo targets of
androgen action in the pubertal human prostate. Promoter searches revealed the
presence of androgen response elements in a cohort of genes including tumor
necrosis factor-alpha induced adipose related protein, which was found to be
induced by androgen. In summary, this is the first report that provides a
comprehensive view of the molecular events that occur during puberty in the human
prostate and provides a cohort of genes that could be potential in vivo targets
of androgenic action during puberty.

PMID: 15548588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jun;5(6):607-16.

A two-gene expression ratio predicts clinical outcome in breast cancer patients
treated with tamoxifen.

Ma XJ(1), Wang Z, Ryan PD, Isakoff SJ, Barmettler A, Fuller A, Muir B, Mohapatra 
G, Salunga R, Tuggle JT, Tran Y, Tran D, Tassin A, Amon P, Wang W, Wang W,
Enright E, Stecker K, Estepa-Sabal E, Smith B, Younger J, Balis U, Michaelson J, 
Bhan A, Habin K, Baer TM, Brugge J, Haber DA, Erlander MG, Sgroi DC.

Author information: 
(1)Arcturus Bioscience, Inc., 2715 Loker Avenue West, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2004 Nov;6(5):445.

Tamoxifen significantly reduces tumor recurrence in certain patients with
early-stage estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer, but markers predictive of
treatment failure have not been identified. Here, we generated gene expression
profiles of hormone receptor-positive primary breast cancers in a set of 60
patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy. An expression signature
predictive of disease-free survival was reduced to a two-gene ratio, HOXB13
versus IL17BR, which outperformed existing biomarkers. Ectopic expression of
HOXB13 in MCF10A breast epithelial cells enhances motility and invasion in vitro,
and its expression is increased in both preinvasive and invasive primary breast
cancer. The HOXB13:IL17BR expression ratio may be useful for identifying patients
appropriate for alternative therapeutic regimens in early-stage breast cancer.

PMID: 15193263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cancer Res. 2004 May 1;64(9):3046-51.

HOXB13 homeodomain protein suppresses the growth of prostate cancer cells by the 
negative regulation of T-cell factor 4.

Jung C(1), Kim RS, Lee SJ, Wang C, Jeng MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. chjung@iupui.edu

In prostate gland, HOXB13 is highly expressed from the embryonic stages to
adulthood. However, the function of HOXB13 in normal cell growth and
tumorigenesis is not yet known. We investigated the role of HOXB13 and mechanism 
by which it functions in HOXB13-negative cells. Expression of HOXB13 was forced
in HOXB13-negative PC3 prostate cancer cells using a liposome-mediated gene
transfer approach. Compared with the control clones, HOXB13-expressing PC3 cells 
exhibited significant inhibition of in vitro and in vivo cell growth with G1 cell
cycle arrest mediated by the suppression of cyclin D1 expression. Because cyclin 
D1 is mainly regulated by beta-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF), TCF-4 response
element was used in a reporter gene transcription assay, demonstrating that
HOXB13 significantly inhibits TCF-4-mediated transcriptional activity in both
prostate and nonprostate cells. This inhibition occurred in a dose-responsive
manner and was specific to TCF-4 response element. Western blot analysis
demonstrated that HOXB13 down-regulates the expression of TCF-4 and its
responsive genes, c-myc and cyclin D1. HOXB13 also suppressed the activity of
natural c-myc promoter. This study suggests that HOXB13, a transcription factor, 
functions as a cell growth suppressor by negatively regulating the expression of 
TCF-4, which eventually provides negative signals for cell proliferation. This
observation will provide valuable insight into the molecular basis of prostate
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15126340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2004 Jan 1;124B(1):64-7.

No association between allelic variants of HOXA1/HOXB1 and autism.

Gallagher L(1), Hawi Z, Kearney G, Fitzgerald M, Gill M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Smurfit Institute for Genetics, Trinity College,
Dublin 2, Ireland. lgallagh@tcd.ie

Two recent studies have reported conflicting findings of association of a variant
in the HOXA1 gene and autism. To try to resolve the conflict in findings, we
conducted an association study in 78 Irish families of the reported DNA variants.
We did not find statistically significant association between the variants and
autism. Similarly there was no evidence of preferential transmission of variants 
from parent of either sex to affected offspring. We also report negative findings
for HOXB1 variants. We conclude that the HOXA1/B1 are unlikely to be the
susceptibility genes for autism in our sample.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14681917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2003 Apr;19(2):112-5.

[The significance and the expression of homeobox genes during human burn wound
healing].

[Article in Chinese]

Song HF(1), Chai JK, Chen ML, Lin ZH, Liu NF, Yuan XB, Chen BJ, Sheng ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, The 304th Hospital, Beijing, 100037. 
P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of several homeobox genes during the
wound healing in fetal and adult skin and their roles in fetal scarless wound
healing.
METHODS: The expressions of PRX-2, HOXB13, HOX2.2 and HOX2.3 during wound healing
in fetal and adult skin were determined with in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: (1) PRX-2 positive expression could be identified in normal fetal and
adult skin, especially in the fetus. But there was difference in location sites
of the genes. The positive expression in normal fetal skin was mainly found in
the peripheral cells at the hair shafts within dermal papilla layers and was also
found in the epithelium. Nevertheless, weak positive expression of PRX-2 was
found in the epithelial basal layer cells in normal adult skin but not in dermal 
tissue. There was strong positive expression of the PRX-2 in the tissue around
the wound in fetus but not of that in adults except the epithelial basal layers. 
(2) Positive expression of HOXB13 could be identified in both normal fetal and
adult skins. And the expression was concentrated mainly in hair follicle cells in
the dermis and in the basal layer cells in the epithelium. Furthermore, the
expression became weak after trauma, especially in fetal skin. (3) The positive
expression of HOX2.2 and HOX2.3 in normal fetal skin was observed mainly in the
whole layer of the epithelium and especially in the epithelial basal layers. Weak
positive expression could be found in the dermis and strong expression found in
the tissue near the wound. But there was no positive expression of the HOX genes 
in normal adult skin and wounds.
CONCLUSION: The difference in the HOX expression in fetal and adult skin wound
healing might be the key factor leading to different wound healing. Homeobox
genes might be closely related with the developmental biology.

PMID: 12812639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jun;227(2):192-202.

HOXB13 homeodomain protein is cytoplasmic throughout fetal skin development.

Kömüves LG(1), Ma XK, Stelnicki E, Rozenfeld S, Oda Y, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, VA Medical Center and University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Substantial evidence suggests that HOX homeobox genes regulate aspects of body
development, including hair formation. We initially isolated the HOXB13 gene from
human fetal skin in experiments designed to identify candidate genes that
regulate scarless fetal wound healing. Although the HOX homeodomain proteins have
been proposed to function as transcription factors, we have demonstrated
previously that substantial fractions of the HOXB6 and HOXB4 proteins are
localized to the cytoplasm throughout epidermal development. The purpose of the
current study was to identify HOXB13 protein expression patterns in developing
skin to elucidate potential mechanisms by which this protein might regulate
aspects of tissue development and healing. HOXB13 protein expression was detected
throughout the developing epidermis, with weaker signal observed in the early
developing dermis. Epidermal HOXB13 signal was detected over the entire body
surface, but surprisingly, essentially all of the signal was cytoplasmic in
developing skin. Low-level HOXB13 protein expression was detected in adult skin
and within the telogen hair follicle, and a portion of the residual signal in
adult epidermis was nuclear. Expression in hyperproliferative skin conditions
remained cytoplasmic with the exception of epidermis associated with Kaposi's
sarcoma, which showed strong HOXB13 expression that was partially localized to
the nucleus.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. FASEB J. 2003 Jul;17(10):1352-4. Epub 2003 May 20.

Hoxb13 knockout adult skin exhibits high levels of hyaluronan and enhanced wound 
healing.

Mack JA(1), Abramson SR, Ben Y, Coffin JC, Rothrock JK, Maytin EV, Hascall VC,
Largman C, Stelnicki EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston, Florida, USA.
mackj@ccf.org

In contrast to adult cutaneous wound repair, early gestational fetal cutaneous
wounds heal by a process of regeneration, resulting in little or no scarring.
Previous studies indicate that down-regulation of HoxB13, a member of the highly 
conserved family of Hox transcription factors, occurs during fetal scarless wound
healing. No down-regulation was noted in adult wounds. Here, we evaluate healing 
of adult cutaneous wounds in Hoxb13 knockout (KO) mice, hypothesizing that loss
of Hoxb13 in adult skin should result in enhanced wound healing. Tensiometry was 
used to measure the tensile strength of incisional wounds over a 60-day time
course; overall, Hoxb13 KO wounds are significantly stronger than wild-type (WT).
Histological evaluation of incisional wounds shows that 7-day-old Hoxb13 KO
wounds are significantly smaller and that 60-day-old Hoxb13 KO wounds exhibit a
more normal collagen architecture compared with WT wounds. We also find that
excisional wounds close at a faster rate in Hoxb13 KO mice. Biochemical and
histochemical analyses show that Hoxb13 KO skin contains significantly elevated
levels of hyaluronan. Because higher levels of hyaluronan and enhanced wound
healing are characteristics of fetal skin, we conclude that loss of Hoxb13
produces a more "fetal-like" state in adult skin.

PMID: 12759339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Biol. 2003 Apr 15;256(2):317-30.

Hoxb13 mutations cause overgrowth of caudal spinal cord and tail vertebrae.

Economides KD(1), Zeltser L, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

To address the expression and function of Hoxb13, the 5' most Hox gene in the
HoxB cluster, we have generated mice with loss-of-function and beta-galactosidase
reporter insertion alleles of this gene. Mice homozygous for Hoxb13
loss-of-function mutations show overgrowth in all major structures derived from
the tail bud, including the developing secondary neural tube (SNT), the caudal
spinal ganglia, and the caudal vertebrae. Using the beta-galactosidase reporter
allele of Hoxb13, also a loss-of-function allele, we found that the expression
patterns of Hoxb13 in the developing spinal cord and caudal mesoderm are closely 
associated with overgrowth phenotypes in the tails of homozygous mutant animals. 
These phenotypes can be explained by the observed increased cell proliferation
and decreased levels of apoptosis within the tail of homozygous mutant mice. This
analysis of Hoxb13 function suggests that this 5' Hox gene may act as an
inhibitor of neuronal cell proliferation, an activator of apoptotic pathways in
the SNT, and as a general repressor of growth in the caudal vertebrae.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science (USA)

PMID: 12679105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 2003 May;130(10):2061-9.

Hoxb13 is required for normal differentiation and secretory function of the
ventral prostate.

Economides KD(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The murine prostate is a structure that is made up of four distinct lobes; the
dorsal and lateral prostates (often grouped together as the dorsolateral
prostate), the anterior (coagulating gland) and the ventral prostate. Previous
work has implicated Hox genes in the development of these structures, but how
each lobe acquires unique identities for specific functions has not been
addressed. In this study, the ventral prostate-specific function of Hoxb13 is
described. Mice lacking Hoxb13 function show normal numbers of duct tips, but
mice mutant for both Hoxb13 and Hoxd13 exhibit severe hypoplasia of the duct
tips, revealing a role for Hoxb13 in ventral prostate morphogenesis.
Additionally, a ventral lobe-specific defect was identified in Hoxb13 mutants
wherein the epithelium is composed of simple cuboidal cells rather than of tall
columnar cells. Ventral prostate ducts appear devoid of contents and do not
express the ventral prostate-specific secretory proteins p12, a kazal-type
protease inhibitor and p25, a spermine binding protein. These defects are not due
to reduction of Nkx3.1 expression or to a global effect on androgen receptor
signaling. These results suggest a specific role for Hoxb13 in a differentiation 
pathway that gives the ventral prostate epithelium a unique identity, as well as 
a more general role in ventral prostate morphogenesis that is redundant with
other Hox13 paralogs.

PMID: 12668621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. World J Urol. 2001 Nov;19(5):365-70.

Expression, specificity and immunotherapy potential of prostate-associated genes 
in murine cell lines.

Grossmann ME(1), Wood M, Celis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
grossmann.michael@mayo.edu

The TRAMP-C1 (C1) and TRAMP-C2 (C2) cell lines were derived from a prostate tumor
that arose in a mouse from the transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP)
model. However, their similarity to primary prostate tumors and therefore their
usefulness in immunotherapy studies has not been clearly defined. We showed using
RT-PCR that these cell lines exhibited a variety of prostate-specific genes
expressed by human prostate tumors that may be used as tumor-associated antigens 
for immunotherapy. Interestingly, several of these genes are also expressed in
cell lines that are not prostatic in origin. The prostate cell lines were also
shown to grow in an androgen-independent manner, to be capable of expressing MHC 
class I and to be susceptible to specific lysis by cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Therefore, these cell lines will provide us with the ability to evaluate immune
responses to and tolerance of prostate-specific protein peptides in an animal
model.

PMID: 11760786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3718-26. Epub 2001 Nov 19.

HOXC13 is involved in the regulation of human hair keratin gene expression.

Jave-Suarez LF(1), Winter H, Langbein L, Rogers MA, Schweizer J.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Tumor Cell Regulation and Cell Biology, German Cancer Research
Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

At present, HOXC13 is the only member of the HOX multigene family that produces a
fragile hair phenotype when mutated or overexpressed in mice. To determine
whether hair keratin genes are targets for this transcription factor, we analyzed
the HOXC13 responsiveness of human hair keratin genes, whose expression matched
that of nuclear HOXC13, immunologically revealed in cells of the lower
hair-forming compartment of the human anagen hair follicle. We show that HOXC13, 
but not a homeobox-deleted HOXC13, strongly activated the promoters of the genes,
with the respective proximal promoter regions being sufficient for optimal
activation. The hair keratin promoters contained numerous putative Hox binding
core motifs TAAT, TTAT, and TTAC. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed 
that HOXC13 bound exclusively to distinct TAAT and TTAT core motifs that were
clearly concentrated in the proximal promoter regions. A comparison of the
sequences flanking HOXC13 binding and nonbinding core motifs, respectively,
allowed the deduction of an extended 8-bp HOXC13 consensus binding sequence
TT(A/T)ATNPuPu. Thus, the DNA binding conditions for HOXC13 were distinct from
those of other members of the paralogous group 13, i.e. murine Hoxb13 and HOXd13,
for which previous investigations yielded the consensus binding sequence
TTTA(T/C)NPuPu. Collectively, our data speak for a direct involvement of HOXC13
in the control of hair keratin expression during early trichocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 11714694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Dev Biol. 2001 Jan 15;229(2):396-406.

Expression of Hoxb13 and Hoxc10 in developing and regenerating Axolotl limbs and 
tails.

Carlson MR(1), Komine Y, Bryant SV, Gardiner DM.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Center, University of California, Irvine, California
92697, USA.

The expression of Hox complex genes in correct spatial and temporal order is
critical to patterning of the body axis and limbs during embryonic development.
In order to understand the role such genes play in appendage regeneration, we
have compared the expression of two 5' Hox complex genes: Hoxb13 and Hoxc10
during development and regeneration of the body axis and the limbs of axolotls.
In contrast to higher vertebrates, Hoxb13 is expressed not only in the tip of the
developing tail, but also in the distal mesenchyme of developing hind limbs, and 
at low levels in developing forelimbs. Hoxc10 is expressed as two transcripts
during both development and regeneration. The short transcript (Hoxc10S) is
expressed in the tip of the developing tail, in developing hind limbs, and at low
levels in developing forelimbs. The long transcript (Hoxc10L) is expressed in a
similar pattern, with the exception that no expression in developing forelimbs
could be detected. Hoxb13 and both transcripts of Hoxc10 are expressed at high
levels in the regenerating spinal cord during tail regeneration, and in both
regenerating hind limbs and forelimbs. The up-regulation of expression of these
genes during forelimb regeneration, relative to the very low levels of expression
during forelimb development, suggests that they play a critical and perhaps
unique role in regeneration. This is particularly true for Hoxc10L, which is not 
expressed during forelimb development, but is expressed during forelimb
regeneration; thus making it the first truly "regeneration-specific" gene
transcript identified to date.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11150241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 1;222(1):71-83.

A large targeted deletion of Hoxb1-Hoxb9 produces a series of single-segment
anterior homeotic transformations.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Bradley A, Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University System Health
Sciences Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Hox genes regulate axial regional specification during animal embryonic
development and are grouped into four clusters. The mouse HoxB cluster contains
10 genes, Hoxb1 to Hoxb9 and Hoxb13, which are transcribed in the same direction.
We have generated a mouse strain with a targeted 90-kb deletion within the HoxB
cluster from Hoxb1 to Hoxb9. Surprisingly, heterozygous mice show no detectable
abnormalities. Homozygous mutant embryos survive to term and exhibit an ordered
series of one-segment anterior homeotic transformations along the cervical and
thoracic vertebral column and defects in sternum morphogenesis. Neurofilament
staining indicates abnormalities in the IXth cranial nerve. Notably, simultaneous
deletion of Hoxb1 to Hoxb9 resulted in the sum of phenotypes of single HoxB gene 
mutants. Although a higher penetrance is observed, no synergistic or new
phenotypes were observed, except for the loss of ventral curvature at the
cervicothoracic boundary of the vertebral column. Although Hoxb13, the most 5'
gene, is separated from the rest by 70 kb, it has been suggested to be expressed 
with temporal and spatial colinearity. Here, we show that the expression pattern 
of Hoxb13 is not affected by the targeted deletion of the other 9 genes. Thus,
Hoxb13 expression seems to be independent of the deleted region, suggesting that 
its expression pattern could be achieved independent of the colinear pattern of
the cluster or by a regulatory element located 5' of Hoxb9.

PMID: 10885747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Prostate. 1999 Nov 1;41(3):203-7.

Androgen-independent expression of hoxb-13 in the mouse prostate.

Sreenath T(1), Orosz A, Fujita K, Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, NIDCR, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes encode transcriptional regulatory proteins that are largely
responsible for establishing the body plan of all metazoan organisms. A subset of
Hox genes is expressed during the period of organogenesis and into adulthood.
hoxb-13 is a recently-described member of the Hox gene family that is expressed
in the spinal cord, hindgut, and urogenital sinus during embryogenesis.
METHODS: Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses of hoxb-13 expression
in adult mouse tissues were performed.
RESULTS: hoxb-13 mRNA is restricted to the prostate gland and distal colon in
adult animals. In situ hybridization of mouse prostate tissue demonstrated that
hoxb-13 is expressed in the epithelial cells of the ventral, dorsal, lateral, and
anterior prostate lobes. Accumulation of hoxb-13 mRNA is not diminished following
castration.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that hoxb-13 expression is
androgen-independent in mouse prostate glands. The identification of hoxb-13 as
an androgen-independent gene expressed in adult mouse prostate epithelial cells
provides a new potential target for developing therapeutics to treat advanced
prostate cancer.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10517879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Jul;111(1):57-63.

Modulation of the human homeobox genes PRX-2 and HOXB13 in scarless fetal wounds.

Stelnicki EJ(1), Arbeit J, Cass DL, Saner C, Harrison M, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

Scarless healing of cutaneous wounds occurs in humans during the first two
trimesters of development, but by birth all wounds are repaired with scar
formation. To search for transcriptional regulatory genes that might mediate
fetal tissue regeneration, we surveyed homeobox gene expression in proliferating 
fetal fibroblasts and in wounded and unwounded skin. Two novel human homeobox
genes, PRX-2 and HOXB13, were identified that were differentially expressed
during fetal versus adult wound healing. Both genes were predominantly expressed 
in proliferating fetal fibroblasts and developing dermis, and PRX-2 was
downregulated in adult skin. In a model of scarless fetal skin regeneration,
PRX-2 expression was strongly increased compared with unwounded skin and the
signal was localized to the wounded dermis, the site of scarless repair.
Conversely, in adult skin weak epidermal PRX-2 expression was observed, mRNA
levels were not increased by wounding, and no dermal expression was detected.
HOXB13 expression was decreased in wounded fetal tissue relative to unwounded
fetal controls or wounded adult skin. Thus both HOXB13 and PRX-2 are expressed in
patterns consistent with roles in fetal skin development and cutaneous
regeneration.

PMID: 9665387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Development. 1996 Aug;122(8):2475-84.

Hoxb-13: a new Hox gene in a distant region of the HOXB cluster maintains
colinearity.

Zeltser L(1), Desplan C, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

The Hox genes are involved in patterning along the A/P axes of animals. The
clustered organization of Hox genes is conserved from nematodes to vertebrates.
During evolution, the number of Hox genes within the ancestral complex increased,
exemplified by the five-fold amplification of the AbdB-related genes, leading to 
a total number of thirteen paralogs. This was followed by successive duplications
of the cluster to give rise to the four vertebrate HOX clusters. A specific
subset of paralogs was subsequently lost from each cluster, yet the composition
of each cluster was likely conserved during tetrapod evolution. While the HOXA,
HOXC and HOXD clusters contain four to five AbdB-related genes, only one gene
(Hoxb-9) is found in the HOXB complex. We have identified a new member of paralog
group 13 in human and mouse, and shown that it is in fact Hoxb-13. A combination 
of genetic and physical mapping demonstrates that the new gene is found approx.
70 kb upstream of Hoxb-9 in the same transcriptional orientation as the rest of
the cluster. Despite its relatively large distance from the HOX complex, Hoxb-13 
exhibits temporal and spatial colinearity in the main body axis of the mouse
embryo. The onset of transcription occurs at E9.0 in the tailbud region. At later
stages of development, Hoxb-13 is expressed in the tailbud and posterior domains 
in the spinal cord, digestive tract and urogenital system. However, it is not
expressed in the secondary axes such as the limbs and genital tubercle. These
results indicate that the 5' end of the HOXB cluster has not been lost and that
at least one member exists and is highly conserved among different vertebrate
species. Because of its separation from the complex, Hoxb-13 may provide an
important system to dissect the mechanism(s) responsible for the maintenance of
colinearity.

PMID: 8756292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


