
1. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2016 Feb 3;5:4. doi: 10.1186/s40164-016-0033-6. eCollection
2015.

miR-199b, a novel tumor suppressor miRNA in acute myeloid leukemia with
prognostic implications.

Favreau AJ(1), McGlauflin RE(2), Duarte CW(3), Sathyanarayana P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81
Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074 USA ; The Graduate School of Biomedical
Science and Engineering, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469 USA. (2)Center for 
Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81 Research Drive,
Scarborough, ME 04074 USA. (3)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center
Research Institute, 81 Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074 USA ; Department of 
Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA USA. (4)Center for
Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81 Research Drive,
Scarborough, ME 04074 USA ; The Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469 USA ; Department of Medicine,
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of miRNAs that can act as tumor suppressors or
oncogenes can result in tumorigenesis. Previously we demonstrated that miR-199b
was significantly downregulated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and targets
podocalyxin and discoidin domain receptor 1. Herein we investigated the
functional role of miR-199b in AML and its prognostic implications.
METHODS: Major approaches include transduction of hematopoietic stem cells and
bone marrow transplantation, analyses of blood lineages, histone deacetylases
(HDAC) inhibitors, and molecular and clinical data analyses of AML patients using
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
RESULTS: We first examined the relative miR-199b expression in steady state
hematopoiesis and showed CD33(+) myeloid progenitors had the highest miR-199b
expression. Further, silencing of miR-199b in CD34(+) cells resulted in
significant increases in CFU-GM colonies. Via TCGA we analyzed the molecular and 
clinical characteristics of 166 AML cases to investigate a prognostic role for
miR-199b. The Kaplan-Meier curves for high and low expression values of miR-199b 
and the observed distribution of miRNA expression revealed the highly expressed
group had significantly better survival outcomes (p < 0.016, log rank test).
Additionally, there was significant difference between miR-199b expression across
the AML subtypes with particularly low expression found in the FAB-M5 subtype.
Furthermore, FAB-M5 subtype showed a poor prognosis with a 1-year survival rate
of only 25 %, compared with 51 % survival in the overall sample (p < 0.024).
Furthermore, significant inverse correlation of HoxA7 and HoxB6 expression with
miR-199b was observed in FAB-M5 AML patients. Molecular mutations were analyzed
among miR-199b high and low AML cases. Significant correlations in terms of
association and survival outcomes were observed for NPMc and IDH1 mutations.
Treatment of THP-1 cells (represents M5-subtype) with HDAC inhibitors AR-42,
Panobinostat, or Decitabine showed miR-199b expression was significantly elevated
upon AR-42 and Panobinostat treatment. To further understand the
hematopathological consequences of decreased miR-199b, we employed a bone-marrow 
transduce/transplant (BMT) mouse model. Interestingly, in vivo miR-199b silencing
per-se in HSCs did not result in profound perturbations.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of miR-199b can lead to myeloproliferation while HDAC
inhibitors restore miR-199b expression and promote apoptosis. Low miR-199b in AML
patients correlates with worse overall survival and has prognostic significance
for FAB-M5 subtype.

PMCID: PMC4740997
PMID: 26848406  [PubMed]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 22;11(1):e0146019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146019.
eCollection 2016.

Developmental Patterning as a Quantitative Trait: Genetic Modulation of the Hoxb6
Mutant Skeletal Phenotype.

Kappen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Pennington Biomedical Research
Center/Louisiana State University System, 6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana, 70808, United States of America.

The process of patterning along the anterior-posterior axis in vertebrates is
highly conserved. The function of Hox genes in the axis patterning process is
particularly well documented for bone development in the vertebral column and the
limbs. We here show that Hoxb6, in skeletal elements at the cervico-thoracic
junction, controls multiple independent aspects of skeletal pattern, implicating 
discrete developmental pathways as substrates for this transcription factor. In
addition, we demonstrate that Hoxb6 function is subject to modulation by genetic 
factors. These results establish Hox-controlled skeletal pattern as a
quantitative trait modulated by gene-gene interactions, and provide evidence that
distinct modifiers influence the function of conserved developmental genes in
fundamental patterning processes.

PMCID: PMC4723086
PMID: 26800342  [PubMed - in process]


3. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):437-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.133074. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Hoxb6 can interfere with somitogenesis in the posterior embryo through a
mechanism independent of its rib-promoting activity.

Casaca A(1), Nóvoa A(1), Mallo M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras 2780-156, Portugal. (2)Instituto
Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras 2780-156, Portugal mallo@igc.gulbenkian.pt.

Formation of the vertebrate axial skeleton requires coordinated Hox gene
activity. Hox group 6 genes are involved in the formation of the thoracic area
owing to their unique rib-promoting properties. Here we show that the linker
region (LR) connecting the homeodomain and the hexapeptide is essential for Hoxb6
rib-promoting activity in mice. The LR-defective Hoxb6 protein was still able to 
bind a target enhancer together with Pax3, producing a dominant-negative effect, 
indicating that the LR brings additional regulatory factors to target DNA
elements. We also found an unexpected association between Hoxb6 and segmentation 
in the paraxial mesoderm. In particular, Hoxb6 can disturb somitogenesis and
anterior-posterior somite patterning by dysregulation of Lfng expression.
Interestingly, this interaction occurred differently in thoracic versus more
caudal embryonic areas, indicating functional differences in somitogenesis before
and after the trunk-to-tail transition. Our results suggest the requirement of
precisely regulated Hoxb6 expression for proper segmentation at tailbud stages.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26718008  [PubMed - in process]


4. Development. 2015 Nov 15;142(22):3859-68. doi: 10.1242/dev.126888. Epub 2015 Oct 
8.

Mesenchymal Hox6 function is required for mouse pancreatic endocrine cell
differentiation.

Larsen BM(1), Hrycaj SM(2), Newman M(2), Li Y(3), Wellik DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA Cellular and Molecular
Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA. (3)Department of Cell and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA Cellular and Molecular
Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2200, USA dwellik@umich.edu.

Despite significant advances in our understanding of pancreatic endocrine cell
development, the function of the pancreatic mesodermal niche in this process is
poorly understood. Here we report a novel role for mouse Hox6 genes in pancreatic
organogenesis. Hox6 genes are expressed exclusively in the mesoderm of the
developing pancreas. Genetic loss of all three Hox6 paralogs (Hoxa6, Hoxb6 and
Hoxc6) leads to a dramatic loss of endoderm-derived endocrine cells, including
insulin-secreting ß-cells, and to mild delays and disruptions in pancreatic
branching and exocrine differentiation. Ngn3-expressing pan-endocrine progenitor 
cells are specified normally in Hox6 mutant pancreata, but fail to mature into
hormone-producing cells. Reduced expression of Wnt5a is observed in mutant
pancreatic mesenchyme, leading to subsequent loss of expression of the crucial
Wnt inhibitors Sfrp3 and Dkk1 in endocrine progenitor cells. These results reveal
a key role for Hox6 genes in establishing Wnt mesenchymal-epithelial crosstalk in
pancreatic development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712882 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26450967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Oct;24(10):1574-84. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1270. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Network-Based Integration of GWAS and Gene Expression Identifies a HOX-Centric
Network Associated with Serous Ovarian Cancer Risk.

Kar SP, Tyrer JP, Li Q, Lawrenson K, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N,
Chenevix-Trench G; Australian Cancer Study; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study
Group, Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean YT, Beckmann MW, Berchuck A, Bisogna M, Bjørge
L, Bogdanova N, Brinton L, Brooks-Wilson A, Butzow R, Campbell I, Carty K,
Chang-Claude J, Chen YA, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer D, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C,
Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Dürst
M, Eccles D, Easton DF, Edwards RP, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT,
Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J,
Harrington P, Harter P, Hein A, Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E,
Hogdall CK, Hosono S, Iversen ES, Jakubowska A, Paul J, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan
BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley J, Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C,
Kupryjanczyk J, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Lele S, Leminen A,
Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall L, Massuger
L, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, McNeish IA, Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich
KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Nevanlinna H, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I,
Orsulic S, Weber RP, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM,
Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph
A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Shu XO,
Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston-Campbell LE,
Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tsai YY, Tworoger SS, van
Altena AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C,
Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu A, Yang H,
Zheng W, Ziogas A, Sellers TA, Monteiro AN, Freedman ML, Gayther SA, Pharoah PD.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have so far reported 12 loci
associated with serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. We hypothesized that
some of these loci function through nearby transcription factor (TF) genes and
that putative target genes of these TFs as identified by coexpression may also be
enriched for additional EOC risk associations.
METHODS: We selected TF genes within 1 Mb of the top signal at the 12 genome-wide
significant risk loci. Mutual information, a form of correlation, was used to
build networks of genes strongly coexpressed with each selected TF gene in the
unified microarray dataset of 489 serous EOC tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Genes represented in this dataset were subsequently ranked using a gene-level
test based on results for germline SNPs from a serous EOC GWAS meta-analysis
(2,196 cases/4,396 controls).
RESULTS: Gene set enrichment analysis identified six networks centered on TF
genes (HOXB2, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7 at 17q21.32 and HOXD1, HOXD3 at 2q31) that were
significantly enriched for genes from the risk-associated end of the ranked list 
(P < 0.05 and FDR < 0.05). These results were replicated (P < 0.05) using an
independent association study (7,035 cases/21,693 controls). Genes underlying
enrichment in the six networks were pooled into a combined network.
CONCLUSION: We identified a HOX-centric network associated with serous EOC risk
containing several genes with known or emerging roles in serous EOC development.
IMPACT: Network analysis integrating large, context-specific datasets has the
potential to offer mechanistic insights into cancer susceptibility and prioritize
genes for experimental characterization.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592449
PMID: 26209509  [PubMed - in process]


6. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 1;15:416. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-416.

Stability of gene expression and epigenetic profiles highlights the utility of
patient-derived paediatric acute lymphoblastic leukaemia xenografts for
investigating molecular mechanisms of drug resistance.

Wong NC, Bhadri VA, Maksimovic J, Parkinson-Bates M, Ng J, Craig JM, Saffery R,
Lock RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Lowy Cancer
Research Centre, UNSW, PO Box 81, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
rlock@ccia.unsw.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Patient-derived tumour xenografts are an attractive model for
preclinical testing of anti-cancer drugs. Insights into tumour biology and
biomarkers predictive of responses to chemotherapeutic drugs can also be gained
from investigating xenograft models. As a first step towards examining the
equivalence of epigenetic profiles between xenografts and primary tumours in
paediatric leukaemia, we performed genome-scale DNA methylation and gene
expression profiling on a panel of 10 paediatric B-cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (BCP-ALL) tumours that were stratified by prednisolone
response.
RESULTS: We found high correlations in DNA methylation and gene expression
profiles between matching primary and xenograft tumour samples with Pearson's
correlation coefficients ranging between 0.85 and 0.98. In order to demonstrate
the potential utility of epigenetic analyses in BCP-ALL xenografts, we identified
DNA methylation biomarkers that correlated with prednisolone responsiveness of
the original tumour samples. Differential methylation of CAPS2, ARHGAP21, ARX and
HOXB6 were confirmed by locus specific analysis. We identified 20 genes showing
an inverse relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression in
association with prednisolone response. Pathway analysis of these genes
implicated apoptosis, cell signalling and cell structure networks in prednisolone
responsiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study confirm the stability of epigenetic and
gene expression profiles of paediatric BCP-ALL propagated in mouse xenograft
models. Further, our preliminary investigation of prednisolone sensitivity
highlights the utility of mouse xenograft models for preclinical development of
novel drug regimens with parallel investigation of underlying gene expression and
epigenetic responses associated with novel drug responses.

PMCID: PMC4057609
PMID: 24885906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;29(4):781-90. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu004. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Regulation of endometrial receptivity by the highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and
HOXD10 HOX-class homeobox genes.

Xu B(1), Geerts D, Bu Z, Ai J, Jin L, Li Y, Zhang H, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
People's Republic of China.

STUDY QUESTION: Are other HOX genes, in addition to HOXA10, involved in
endometrial receptivity?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 genes also appear
to be involved in endometrial receptivity.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Within the HOX family of homeobox transcription factor
genes are the leading candidates for the regulation of embryonic implantation. A 
crucial role of HOXA10 in endometrial receptivity has been well established.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: To identify HOX candidate genes, we performed data 
mining on all 39 human HOX genes in the 'Human body index' gene expression
database of normal human tissue. The temporal and spatial expression pattern of
four highly expressed HOX genes in the human endometrium was determined. To
further investigate the function of these Hox genes, we used a robust in vivo
mouse model in which we blocked maternal Hox gene expression.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING AND METHODS: Analysis of a gene expression
profile set in the public domain consisting of 504 samples representing 95
different normal human tissues, showed that in addition to HOXA10, also HOXA9,
HOXA11, HOXB6 and HOXD10 mRNA showed increased expression in the human
endometrium (16 samples). The temporal and spatial expression pattern of these
four HOX genes throughout the menstrual cycle was determined in the endometrium
from 27 female patients eligible for IVF-embryo transfer with a normal cycle by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot and immunohistochemistry. The 
role of maternal Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 was assessed in a mouse implantation
model by expression knockdown using RNA interference. Forty mice were transfected
with Hoxa9-, Hoxa11- or Hoxd10-specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs or a
vector control by injection into the uterine horn at Day 2 after vaginal plug
detection (Day 1) (160 mice in total). The effects were examined by qRT-PCR and
western blot at Day 4 and litter sizes counted at Day 9 of pregnancy.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: HOXA10, HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 all showed 
increased expression during the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle (P <
0.01). Knockdown of Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 in the murine uterus resulted in
significantly reduced average implantation rates (P < 0.01) and, with regard to
four Hox target genes, also correlated with a significantly increased empty
spiracles homolog 2 (Emx2) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(Igfbp1), and decreased integrin ß3 (Itgb3) and leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif),
expression (P < 0.01).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Menstrual cycle stage was not confirmed by
serum hormone analysis. We verified the absence of significant differences in
stage-specific expression of the reference genes used in our study (ACTB/Actb and
GAPDH/Gapdh) and therefore possible limitations of this approach were minimized. 
In addition, the translatability of our data from a mouse model to patients needs
to be investigated further.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We provide evidence that three other HOX
genes in addition to HOXA10 are involved in endometrial receptivity, and that
part of their function is asserted through several known HOX target genes,
suggesting the presence of a central HOX signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 24549215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 22;3:2178. doi: 10.1038/srep02178.

Hox genes are involved in vascular wall-resident multipotent stem cell
differentiation into smooth muscle cells.

Klein D(1), Benchellal M, Kleff V, Jakob HG, Ergün S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
University Hospital, 45122 Essen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

Human vascular wall-resident CD44+ multipotent stem cells (VW-MPSCs) within the
vascular adventitia are capable to differentiate into pericytes and smooth muscle
cells (SMC). This study demonstrates HOX-dependent differentiation of CD44(+)
VW-MPSCs into SMC that involves epigenetic modification of transgelin as a
down-stream regulated gene. First, HOXB7, HOXC6 and HOXC8 were identified to be
differentially expressed in VW-MPSCs as compared to terminal differentiated human
aortic SMC, endothelial cells and undifferentiated pluripotent embryonic stem
cells. Silencing these HOX genes in VW-MPSCs significantly reduced their
sprouting capacity and increased expression of the SMC markers transgelin and
calponin and the histone gene histone H1. Furthermore, the methylation pattern of
the TAGLN promoter was altered. In summary, our findings suggest a role for
certain HOX genes in regulating differentiation of human VW-MPSC into SMCs that
involves epigenetic mechanisms. This is critical for understanding
VW-MPSC-dependent vascular disease processes such as neointima formation and
tumor vascularization.

PMCID: PMC3804857
PMID: 24145756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Urol. 2013 Nov;190(5):1884-92. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.05.061. Epub 2013 May
30.

Hypospadias and genes related to genital tubercle and early urethral development.

Carmichael SL(1), Ma C, Choudhry S, Lammer EJ, Witte JS, Shaw GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, California. Electronic address: scarmichael@stanford.edu.

PURPOSE: We determined whether variants in genes associated with genital tubercle
(the anlage for the penis) and early urethral development were associated with
hypospadias in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined 293 relatively common tag single nucleotide
polymorphisms in BMP4, BMP7, FGF8, FGF10, FGFR2, HOXA13, HOXD13, HOXA4, HOXB6,
SRY, WT1, WTAP, SHH, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3. The analysis included 624 cases (81
mild, 319 moderate, 209 severe, 15 undetermined severity) and 844 population
based nonmalformed male controls born in California from 1990 to 2003.
RESULTS: There were 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms for which any of the
comparisons (ie overall or for a specific severity) had a p value of less than
0.01. The homozygous variant genotypes for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms in
BMP7 were associated with at least a twofold increased risk of hypospadias
regardless of severity. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms for FGF10 were
associated with threefold to fourfold increased risks, regardless of severity.
For 4 of them the results were restricted to whites. For GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3
there were 12 associated single nucleotide polymorphisms but results were
inconsistent by severity and race/ethnicity. For SHH 1 single nucleotide
polymorphism was associated with a 2.4-fold increased risk of moderate
hypospadias. For WT1 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with
approximately a twofold increased risk, primarily for severe hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms in
several genes that contribute to genital tubercle and early urethral development 
are associated with hypospadias risk.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4103581
PMID: 23727413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 25;110(26):10682-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300592110. Epub 2013 May 14.

Role of a polymorphism in a Hox/Pax-responsive enhancer in the evolution of the
vertebrate spine.

Guerreiro I(1), Nunes A, Woltering JM, Casaca A, Nóvoa A, Vinagre T, Hunter ME,
Duboule D, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 25;110(26):10473-4.

Patterning of the vertebrate skeleton requires the coordinated activity of Hox
genes. In particular, Hox10 proteins are essential to set the transition from
thoracic to lumbar vertebrae because of their rib-repressing activity. In snakes,
however, the thoracic region extends well into Hox10-expressing areas of the
embryo, suggesting that these proteins are unable to block rib formation. Here,
we show that this is not a result of the loss of rib-repressing properties by the
snake proteins, but rather to a single base pair change in a Hox/Paired box
(Pax)-responsive enhancer, which prevents the binding of Hox proteins. This
polymorphism is also found in Paenungulata, such as elephants and manatees, which
have extended rib cages. In vivo, this modified enhancer failed to respond to
Hox10 activity, supporting its role in the extension of rib cages. In contrast,
the enhancer could still interact with Hoxb6 and Pax3 to promote rib formation.
These results suggest that a polymorphism in the Hox/Pax-responsive enhancer may 
have played a role in the evolution of the vertebrate spine by differently
modulating its response to rib-suppressing and rib-promoting Hox proteins.

PMCID: PMC3696775
PMID: 23674686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Exp Hematol. 2013 Jun;41(6):567-581.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.02.009. Epub
2013 Feb 21.

Region-specific Etv2 ablation revealed the critical origin of hemogenic capacity 
from Hox6-positive caudal-lateral primitive mesoderm.

Kataoka H(1), Hayashi M, Kobayashi K, Ding G, Tanaka Y, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Japan. kataokah@cdb.riken.jp

Hematopoietic cells (HPCs) develop from hemogenic endothelial cells (ECs), a
specialized type of ECs undergoing hematopoietic transition. However, the
mesoderm origin for hemogenic ECs or HPCs has not been clarified. To examine the 
origin for hemogenic mesoderm, we inactivated Etv2, a master regulator for EC/HPC
commitment, in specific regions. Region-specific Etv2 ablation in early mesoderm 
caused local EC differentiation block, resulting in the loss of specific vascular
beds without compensatory migration of residual ECs into avascular area. This
feature of local EC/HPC differentiation block was correlated to the hemogenic
potential of each mesoderm subset. We found that caudal-lateral mesoderm of
E7.5-8.5 embryos represent the pre-committed population critical for generating
hemogenic ECs. Etv2 ablation in caudal-lateral mesoderm by Hoxb6 Cre or
Hoxb6CreER transgene affected vitelline plexus formation and intra-aortic
hematopoietic clusters. In differentiated embryonic stem cells, this mesoderm
subset marked by Hoxb6-lateral mesoderm promoter showed enriched T lymphopoietic 
potential among Flk-1(+) cells, which could be regarded as a characteristic for
definitive HPCs. These findings indicate that critical mesoderm precursors
possibly for definitive type hemogenic ECs are regionally specified in primitive 
mesoderm, suggesting that Hoxb6(+) caudal-lateral mesoderm represents the
critical source of HPCs, which are potentially useful to enrich definitive HPCs
from embryonic stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23438573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9077-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116933109. Epub 2012 May 17.

Evidence for a functional role of epigenetically regulated midcluster HOXB genes 
in the development of Barrett esophagus.

di Pietro M(1), Lao-Sirieix P, Boyle S, Cassidy A, Castillo D, Saadi A, Eskeland 
R, Fitzgerald RC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison Medical Research Council 
Research Centre, CB2 0XZ Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Barrett esophagus (BE) is a human metaplastic condition that is the only known
precursor to esophageal adenocarcinoma. BE is characterized by a posterior
intestinal-like phenotype in an anterior organ and therefore it is reminiscent of
homeotic transformations, which can occur in transgenic animal models during
embryonic development as a consequence of mutations in HOX genes. In humans,
acquired deregulation of HOX genes during adulthood has been linked to
carcinogenesis; however, little is known about their role in the pathogenesis of 
premalignant conditions. We hypothesized that HOX genes may be implicated in the 
development of BE. We demonstrated that three midcluster HOXB genes (HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB7) are overexpressed in BE, compared with the anatomically
adjacent normal esophagus and gastric cardia. The midcluster HOXB gene signature 
in BE is identical to that seen in normal colonic epithelium. Ectopic expression 
of these three genes in normal squamous esophageal cells in vitro induces markers
of intestinal differentiation, such as KRT20, MUC2, and VILLIN. In BE-associated 
adenocarcinoma, the activation midcluster HOXB gene is associated with loss of
H3K27me3 and gain of AcH3, compared with normal esophagus. These changes in
histone posttranslational modifications correlate with specific chromatin
decompaction at the HOXB locus. We suggest that epigenetically regulated
alterations of HOX gene expression can trigger changes in the transcriptional
program of adult esophageal cells, with implications for the early stages of
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3384195
PMID: 22603795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):260-83. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dms002. Epub
2012 Feb 26.

Aetiology of hypospadias: a systematic review of genes and environment.

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Franke B, Knoers NV, Roeleveld N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. l.vanderzanden@ebh.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external 
genitalia. Most cases have an unknown aetiology, which is probably a mix of
monogenic and multifactorial forms, implicating both genes and environmental
factors. This review summarizes current knowledge about the aetiology of
hypospadias.
METHODS: Pubmed was used to identify studies on hypospadias aetiology published
between January 1995 and February 2011. Reference lists of the selected
manuscripts were also searched to identify additional studies, including those
published before 1995.
RESULTS: The search provided 922 articles and 169 articles were selected for this
review. Studies screening groups of patients with hypospadias for single gene
defects found mutations in WT1, SF1, BMP4, BMP7, HOXA4, HOXB6, FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD3B2, SRD5A2, ATF3, MAMLD1, MID1 and BNC2. However, most investigators are
convinced that single mutations do not cause the majority of isolated hypospadias
cases. Indeed, associations were found with polymorphisms in FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD17B3, SRD5A2, ESR1, ESR2, ATF3, MAMLD1, DGKK, MID1, CYP1A1, GSTM1 and GSTT1.
In addition, gene expression studies indentified CTGF, CYR61 and EGF as candidate
genes. Environmental factors consistently implicated in hypospadias are low
birthweight, maternal hypertension and pre-eclampsia, suggesting that placental
insufficiency may play an important role in hypospadias aetiology. Exogenous
endocrine-disrupting chemicals have the potential to induce hypospadias but it is
unclear whether human exposure is high enough to exert this effect. Other
environmental factors have also been associated with hypospadias but, for most,
the results are inconsistent.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a number of contributors to the aetiology of hypospadias
have been identified, the majority of risk factors remain unknown.

PMID: 22371315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Genet. 2011 May;204(5):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.02.003.

Expression of HOXB genes is significantly different in acute myeloid leukemia
with a partial tandem duplication of MLL vs. a MLL translocation: a
cross-laboratory study.

Liu HC(1), Shih LY, May Chen MJ, Wang CC, Yeh TC, Lin TH, Chen CY, Lin CJ, Liang 
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene may be
rearranged to generate a partial tandem duplication (PTD), or fused to partner
genes through a chromosomal translocation (tMLL). In this study, we first
explored the differentially expressed genes between MLL-PTD and tMLL using gene
expression profiling of our cohort (15 MLL-PTD and 10 tMLL) and one published
data set. The top 250 probes were chosen from each set, resulting in 29 common
probes (21 unique genes) to both sets. The selected genes include four HOXB
genes, HOXB2, B3, B5, and B6. The expression values of these HOXB genes
significantly differ between MLL-PTD and tMLL cases. Clustering and
classification analyses were thoroughly conducted to support our gene selection
results. Second, as MLL-PTD, FLT3-ITD, and NPM1 mutations are identified in AML
with normal karyotypes, we briefly studied their impact on the HOXB genes.
Another contribution of this study is to demonstrate that using public data from 
other studies enriches samples for analysis and yields more conclusive results.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21665178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genome Res. 2011 May;21(5):798-810. doi: 10.1101/gr.111385.110. Epub 2011 Mar 30.

MicroRNA programs in normal and aberrant stem and progenitor cells.

Arnold CP(1), Tan R, Zhou B, Yue SB, Schaffert S, Biggs JR, Doyonnas R, Lo MC,
Perry JM, Renault VM, Sacco A, Somervaille T, Viatour P, Brunet A, Cleary ML, Li 
L, Sage J, Zhang DE, Blau HM, Chen C, Chen CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Emerging evidence suggests that microRNAs (miRNAs), an abundant class of
~22-nucleotide small regulatory RNAs, play key roles in controlling the
post-transcriptional genetic programs in stem and progenitor cells. Here we
systematically examined miRNA expression profiles in various adult
tissue-specific stem cells and their differentiated counterparts. These analyses 
revealed miRNA programs that are common or unique to blood, muscle, and neural
stem cell populations and miRNA signatures that mark the transitions from
self-renewing and quiescent stem cells to proliferative and differentiating
progenitor cells. Moreover, we identified a stem/progenitor transition miRNA
(SPT-miRNA) signature that predicts the effects of genetic perturbations, such as
loss of PTEN and the Rb family, AML1-ETO9a expression, and MLL-AF10
transformation, on self-renewal and proliferation potentials of mutant
stem/progenitor cells. We showed that some of the SPT-miRNAs control the
self-renewal of embryonic stem cells and the reconstitution potential of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Finally, we demonstrated that SPT-miRNAs
coordinately regulate genes that are known to play roles in controlling HSC
self-renewal, such as Hoxb6 and Hoxa4. Together, these analyses reveal the miRNA 
programs that may control key processes in normal and aberrant stem and
progenitor cells, setting the foundations for dissecting post-transcriptional
regulatory networks in stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3083097
PMID: 21451113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Clin Genet. 2011 Nov;80(5):489-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01573.x. Epub
2010 Oct 18.

An autosomal recessive syndrome of severe cognitive impairment, dysmorphic facies
and skeletal abnormalities maps to the long arm of chromosome 17.

Al-Owain M(1), Alazami AM, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Cognitive impairment (CI) is one of the most challenging referrals to the
clinical genetics service. The different algorithms proposed to assist in the
molecular diagnosis of CI rest largely on the distinction between syndromic and
non-syndromic forms. We have identified what appears to be a novel syndromic form
of CI, the variable phenotype of which comprises severe CI, hirsutism, dysmorphic
facies and skeletal abnormalities, and have mapped it to a single locus on
chromosome 17q21.31-17q22 spanning 12.2 Mb. Two candidate genes, HOXB6 and
PPP1R9B were sequenced but no pathogenic alterations were identified. This report
adds to the growing list of autosomal recessive syndromic CI conditions and
defines a linkage interval harboring a gene which probably plays a vital role in 
brain development.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 20950399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genesis. 2010 Aug;48(8):479-84. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20644.

A Tlx2-Cre mouse line uncovers essential roles for hand1 in extraembryonic and
lateral mesoderm.

Maska EL, Cserjesi P, Hua LL, Garstka ME, Brody HM, Morikawa Y.

Hand1 regulates development of numerous tissues within the embryo, extraembryonic
mesoderm, and trophectoderm. Systemic loss of Hand1 results in early embryonic
lethality but the cause has remained unknown. To determine if Hand1 expression in
extraembryonic mesoderm is essential for embryonic survival, Hand1 was
conditionally deleted using the HoxB6-Cre mouse line that expresses Cre in
extraembryonic and lateral mesoderm. Deletion of Hand1 using HoxB6-Cre resulted
in embryonic lethality identical to systemic knockout. To determine if lethality 
is due to Hand1 function in extraembryonic mesoderm or lateral mesoderm, we
generated a Tlx2-Cre mouse line expressing Cre in lateral mesoderm but not
extraembryonic tissues. Deletion of Hand1 using the Tlx2-Cre line results in
embryonic survival with embryos exhibiting herniated gut and thin enteric smooth 
muscle. Our results show that Hand1 regulates development of lateral mesoderm
derivatives and its loss in extraembryonic mesoderm is the primary cause of
lethality in Hand1-null embryos.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2955361
PMID: 20506548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Jun;11(2):269-79. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0068.

HOXC10 as a potential marker for discriminating between amnion- and
decidua-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Hwang JH(1), Seok OS, Song HR, Jo JY, Lee JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea
University College of Medicine , Seoul, Korea.

The HOX family of genes plays a fundamental role in the morphogenesis of
vertebrate embryonic cells. HOX genes are thought to be important for the
regulation of stem cells. We investigated HOX gene expression in mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) from human placentas. We isolated MSCs from human placentas and
confirmed stemness by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis and
differentiation studies. Using reverse transcription PCR, mRNA expression of 39
Class I HOX genes was measured in the MSCs. The expression of HOXB6, C4, C8, C10,
D3, D4, and D10 were measured by Western blot analysis. HOXC10 was expressed in
10 of 10 amnion-derived MSCs but in only 2 of 10 decidua-derived MSCs. HOXC4 and 
D10 were expressed in 100% of both amnion-derived MSCs and deciduas-derived MSCs.
HOXD4 was silent in all amnion-derived MSCs and deciduas-derived MSCs (n = 10).
HOX gene activation patterns might be a useful indicator for the detection of
MSCs of different tissue origins. We demonstrated that HOXC10 is a gene that may 
discriminate between amnion-derived MSCs and decidua-derived MSCs.

PMID: 19522674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Aug;20(15):3543-51. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-02-0114. Epub 2009
May 28.

Induction of HoxB transcription by retinoic acid requires actin polymerization.

Ferrai C(1), Naum-Onganía G, Longobardi E, Palazzolo M, Disanza A, Diaz VM,
Crippa MP, Scita G, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute and University Vita Salute San Raffaele,
20132 Milan, Italy.

We have analyzed the role of actin polymerization in retinoic acid (RA)-induced
HoxB transcription, which is mediated by the HoxB regulator Prep1. RA induction
of the HoxB genes can be prevented by the inhibition of actin polymerization.
Importantly, inhibition of actin polymerization specifically affects the
transcription of inducible Hox genes, but not that of their transcriptional
regulators, the RARs, nor of constitutively expressed, nor of actively
transcribed Hox genes. RA treatment induces the recruitment to the HoxB2 gene
enhancer of a complex composed of "elongating" RNAPII, Prep1, beta-actin, and
N-WASP as well as the accessory splicing components p54Nrb and PSF. We show that 
inhibition of actin polymerization prevents such recruitment. We conclude that
inducible Hox genes are selectively sensitive to the inhibition of actin
polymerization and that actin polymerization is required for the assembly of a
transcription complex on the regulatory region of the Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC2719572
PMID: 19477923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Neonatology. 2009;96(1):50-60. doi: 10.1159/000201739. Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Quantification of Hox and surfactant protein-B transcription during murine lung
development.

Grier DG(1), Thompson A, Lappin TR, Halliday HL.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Neonatal Unit, Royal Maternity Hospital, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12
6BB, UK. grier@doctors.org.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic processes underlying fetal lung development and maturation
are incompletely understood. Better knowledge of these processes would provide
insights into the causes of lung malformations and prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome and the potential adverse effects of glucocorticoids. Hox genes
are involved in the lung branching morphogenesis and maturation of respiratory
epithelium, but their expression pattern remains to be defined.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that genes involved in lung branching would be
downregulated during early development, whereas those involved in maturation
would be unchanged or upregulated.
METHODS: TaqMan real-time primers and probes were designed for all 39 murine Hox 
genes, and the murine SP-B gene and transcription profiles of these genes were
obtained from whole lungs isolated at e14.5, e16.5, e18.5, e19.5 and postnatal
days 1 and 20.
RESULTS: Hox genes in clusters A and B, specifically those between paralog groups
3 and 7, were the most represented, with Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 being the most highly
transcribed. A wave of reduced transcription in 16 Hox genes, coincident with
increased SP-B transcription, was observed with advancing gestation. Consistently
high transcription of Hoxa5 from e14.5 to postnatal day 20 may indicate that
sustained transcription is required for normal lung maturation. When e15.5 lungs 
were cultured with dexamethasone, Hoxb6, Hoxb7 and Hoxb8 levels were
significantly upregulated, creating the potential for modulation of diverse
downstream target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved understanding of the genetic processes underlying lung
development afforded by our Q-PCR platform may allow development of more specific
methods for inducing fetal lung maturation.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19204410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Dyn. 2009 Feb;238(2):467-74. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21846.

Tamoxifen-dependent, inducible Hoxb6CreERT recombinase function in lateral plate 
and limb mesoderm, CNS isthmic organizer, posterior trunk neural crest, hindgut, 
and tailbud.

Nguyen MT(1), Zhu J, Nakamura E, Bao X, Mackem S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

The ability to generate conditional mutant alleles in mice using Cre-lox
technology has facilitated analysis of genes playing critical roles in multiple
developmental processes at different times. We used a transgenic Hoxb6 promoter
to drive tamoxifen-dependent Cre recombinase expression in several developing
systems that serve as major models for elucidating inductive interactions and
mechanisms of morphogenesis, including lateral plate mesoderm and descendant limb
buds, neural crest progenitors of the neural tube, tailbud, and CNS isthmic
organizer. The Hoxb6CreER(T) line gives very rapid and complete recombination
over a short time window after a single tamoxifen dose, allowing precise time
requirements for gene function to be assessed accurately. Embryonic cells
cultured from the Hoxb6CreER(T) line also display rapid recombination ex vivo
after tamoxifen exposure. Hence, the Hoxb6CreER(T) line provides a valuable tool 
for analyzing gene function, as well as lineage tracing studies using genetic
cell marking, in several developing systems.

PMCID: PMC3483870
PMID: 19161221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Sep 3;100(17):1247-59. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn253. Epub
2008 Aug 26.

Identification of chromatin remodeling genes Arid4a and Arid4b as leukemia
suppressor genes.

Wu MY(1), Eldin KW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia evolves through a multistep process from premalignancy to
malignancy. Epigenetic alterations, including histone modifications, have been
proposed to play an important role in tumorigenesis. The involvement of two
chromatin remodeling genes, retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (Rbbp1/Arid4a) and
Rbbp1-like 1 (Rbbp1l1/Arid4b), in leukemogenesis was not characterized.
METHODS: The leukemic phenotype of mice deficient for Arid4a with or without
haploinsufficiency for Arid4b was investigated by serially monitoring complete
blood counts together with microscopic histologic analysis and flow cytometric
analysis of bone marrow and spleen from the Arid4a(-/-) mice or
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice. Regulation in bone marrow cells of downstream genes 
important for normal hematopoiesis was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Genotypic effects on histone
modifications were examined by western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis. 
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Young (2-5 months old) Arid4a-deficient mice had ineffective blood cell 
production in all hematopoietic lineages. Beyond 5 months of age, the Arid4a(-/-)
mice manifested monocytosis, accompanied by severe anemia and thrombocytopenia.
These sick Arid4a(-/-) mice showed bone marrow failure with myelofibrosis
associated with splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Five of 42 Arid4a(-/-) mice and 10
of 12 Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice progressed to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 
had rapid further increases of leukocyte counts. Expression of Hox genes (Hoxb3, 
Hoxb5, Hoxb6, and Hoxb8) was decreased in Arid4a-deficient bone marrow cells with
or without Arid4b haploinsufficiency, and FoxP3 expression was reduced in
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) bone marrow. Increases of histone trimethylation of H3K4, 
H3K9, and H4K20 (fold increases in trimethylation = 32, 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 27 to 32; 45, 95% CI = 41 to 49; and 2.2, 95% CI = 1.7 to 2.7,
respectively) were observed in the bone marrow of Arid4a-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Arid4a-deficient mice initially display ineffective hematopoiesis,
followed by transition to chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)-like
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, and then transformation to AML. The 
disease processes in the Arid4a-deficient mice are very similar to the course of 
events in humans with CMML and AML. This mouse model has the potential to furnish
additional insights into the role of epigenetic alterations in leukemogenesis,
and it may be useful in developing novel pharmacological approaches to treatment 
of preleukemic and leukemic states.

PMCID: PMC2528019
PMID: 18728284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Aug;82(8):571-84. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20481.

Unique spatial and cellular expression patterns of Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6
proteins in normal developing murine lung are modified in pulmonary hypoplasia.

Volpe MV(1), Wang KT, Nielsen HC, Chinoy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Div. of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Tufts Medical Center,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. mvolpe1@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

BACKGROUND: Hox transcription factors modulate signaling pathways controlling
organ morphogenesis and maintain cell fate and differentiation in adults.
Retinoid signaling, key in regulating Hox expression, is altered in pulmonary
hypoplasia. Information on pattern-specific expression of Hox proteins in normal 
lung development and in pulmonary hypoplasia is minimal. Our objective was to
determine how pulmonary hypoplasia alters temporal, spatial, and cellular
expression of Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6 proteins compared to normal lung
development.
METHODS: Temporal, spatial, and cellular Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6 expression was
studied in normal (untreated) and nitrofen-induced hypoplastic (NT-PH) lungs from
gestational day 13.5, 16, and 19 fetuses and neonates using Western blot and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Modification of protein levels and spatial and cellular Hox expression
patterns in NT-PH lungs was consistent with delayed lung development. Distinct
protein isoforms were detected for each Hox protein. Expression levels of the
Hoxa5 and Hoxb6 protein isoforms changed with development and were altered
further in NT-PH lungs. Compared to normal lungs, GD19 and neonatal NT-PH lungs
had decreased Hoxb6 and increased Hoxa5 and Hoxb4. Hoxa5 cellular localization
changed from mesenchyme to epithelia earlier in normal lungs. Hoxb4 was expressed
in mesenchyme and epithelial cells throughout development. Hoxb6 remained mainly 
in mesenchymal cells around distal airways.
CONCLUSIONS: Unique spatial and cellular expression of Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6
participates in branching morphogenesis and terminal sac formation. Altered Hox
protein temporal and cellular balance of expression either contributes to
pulmonary hypoplasia or functions as a compensatory mechanism attempting to
correct abnormal lung development and maturation in this condition.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2670891
PMID: 18553509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Development. 2008 May;135(10):1823-32. doi: 10.1242/dev.020958. Epub 2008 Apr 16.

Developmental origin of smooth muscle cells in the descending aorta in mice.

Wasteson P(1), Johansson BR, Jukkola T, Breuer S, Akyürek LM, Partanen J, Lindahl
P.

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska University Hospital, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Aortic smooth muscle cells (SMCs) have been proposed to derive from lateral plate
mesoderm. It has further been suggested that induction of SMC differentiation is 
confined to the ventral side of the aorta, and that SMCs later migrate to the
dorsal side. In this study, we investigate the origin of SMCs in the descending
aorta using recombination-based lineage tracing in mice. Hoxb6-cre transgenic
mice were crossed with Rosa 26 reporter mice to track cells of lateral plate
mesoderm origin. The contribution of lateral plate mesoderm to SMCs in the
descending aorta was determined at different stages of development. SMC
differentiation was induced in lateral plate mesoderm-derived cells on the
ventral side of the aorta at embryonic day (E) 9.0-9.5, as indicated by
expression of the SMC-specific reporter gene SM22alpha-lacZ. There was, however, 
no migration of SMCs from the ventral to the dorsal side of the vessel. Moreover,
the lateral plate mesoderm-derived cells in the ventral wall of the aorta were
replaced by somite-derived cells at E10.5, as indicated by reporter gene
expression in Meox1-cre/Rosa 26 double transgenic mice. Examination of reporter
gene expression in adult aortas from Hoxb6-cre/Rosa 26 and Meox1-cre/Rosa 26
double transgenic mice suggested that all SMCs in the adult descending aorta
derive from the somites, whereas no contribution was recorded from lateral plate 
mesoderm.

PMID: 18417617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 26;2(9):e945.

Transcriptional program induced by Wnt protein in human fibroblasts suggests
mechanisms for cell cooperativity in defining tissue microenvironments.

Klapholz-Brown Z(1), Walmsley GG, Nusse YM, Nusse R, Brown PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, USA. zklapholzbrown@umail.ucsb.edu

BACKGROUND: The Wnt signaling system plays key roles in development, regulation
of stem cell self-renewal and differentiation, cell polarity, morphogenesis and
cancer. Given the multifaceted roles of Wnt signaling in these processes, its
transcriptional effects on the stromal cells that make up the scaffold and
infrastructure of epithelial tissues are of great interest.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To begin to investigate these effects, we used DNA
microarrays to identify transcriptional targets of the Wnt pathway in human lung 
fibroblasts. Cells were treated with active Wnt3a protein in culture, and RNA was
harvested at 4 hours and 24 hours. Nuclear accumulation of ss-Catenin, as shown
by immunofluorescence, and induction of AXIN2 demonstrate that fibroblasts are
programmed to respond to extracellular Wnt signals. In addition to several known 
Wnt targets, we found many new Wnt induced genes, including many transcripts
encoding regulatory proteins. Transcription factors with important developmental 
roles, including HOX genes, dominated the early transcriptional response.
Furthermore, we found differential expression of several genes that play direct
roles in the Wnt signaling pathway, as well as genes involved in other cell
signaling pathways including fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling. The gene most highly induced by Wnt3a was 
GREMLIN2, which encodes a secreted BMP antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated expression of GREMLIN2 suggests a new role for Wnt signals 
in the maintenance of stem cell niches, whereby Wnt signals induce nearby
fibroblasts to produce a BMP antagonist, inhibiting differentiation and promoting
expansion of stem cells in their microenvironment. We suggest that Wnt-induced
changes in the gene expression program of local stromal cells may play an
important role in the establishment of specialized niches hospitable to the
self-renewal of normal or malignant epithelial stem cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1976560
PMID: 17895986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):2000-9. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with NPM1 mutations is characterized by a gene
expression profile with dysregulated HOX gene expression distinct from
MLL-rearranged leukemias.

Mullighan CG(1), Kennedy A, Zhou X, Radtke I, Phillips LA, Shurtleff SA, Downing 
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):1849-50.

Somatic mutations in nucleophosmin (NPM1) occur in approximately 35% of adult
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). To assess the frequency of NPM1 mutations in
pediatric AML, we sequenced NPM1 in the diagnostic blasts from 93 pediatric AML
patients. Six cases harbored NPM1 mutations, with each case lacking common
cytogenetic abnormalities. To explore the phenotype of the AMLs with NPM1
mutations, gene expression profiles were obtained using Affymetrix U133A
microarrays. NPM1 mutations were associated with increased expression of multiple
homeobox genes including HOXA9, A10, B2, B6 and MEIS1. As dysregulated homeobox
gene expression is also a feature of MLL-rearranged leukemia, the gene expression
signatures of NPM1-mutated and MLL-rearranged leukemias were compared.
Significant differences were identified between these leukemia subtypes including
the expression of different HOX genes, with NPM1-mutated AML showing higher
levels of expression of HOXB2, B3, B6 and D4. These results confirm recent
reports of perturbed HOX expression in NPM1-mutated adult AML, and provide the
first evidence that the NPM1-mutated signature is distinct from MLL-rearranged
AML. These findings suggest that mutated NPM1 leads to dysregulated HOX
expression via a different mechanism than MLL rearrangement.

PMID: 17597811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Jan;15(1):23-8. Epub 2006 Sep 27.

Mutation screening of BMP4, BMP7, HOXA4 and HOXB6 genes in Chinese patients with 
hypospadias.

Chen T(1), Li Q, Xu J, Ding K, Wang Y, Wang W, Li S, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, CAMS & PUMC, Beijing, China.

Hypospadias, one of the most common congenital abnormalities of the male external
genitalia with elusive etiology, are caused by a defect in the normal development
of the urethra, foreskin and ventral aspect of the penis. Evidences indicate that
BMP4 and BMP7, two of those major factors in a signaling cascade involved in
controlling the embryonic urethral development, play central roles in the normal 
development of the urethra, and that HOXA4 and HOXB6 play important roles in the 
development of skin in various tissues at the time course of the urethral
development. We directly sequenced all these exons and exon-intron boundaries of 
the four genes in 90 unrelated Chinese patients with hypospadias. Thirteen
different heterozygous nucleotide variations were identified for the first time
in the four genes in 14 of 90 cases. Of the 13 variations, eight are missense:
c.619C>G (p.H207D), c.668G>A (p.R223H), c.751C>T (p.H251Y) in BMP4; c.907C>T
(p.R303C) in BMP7; c.385G>T (p.G129C), c.869C>G (p.S290C) in HOXA4; c.124C>A
(p.P42T), c.367T>C (p.C123R) in HOXB6. None of these variations were found in 380
control chromosomes. Amino-acid sequence alignments showed most of these changed 
amino acids are conserved across various vertebrate species. In a word, these
findings, together with the indicated roles of the four genes, imply that it
should not be random events for so many nucleotide variations found in the
present study. Further functional studies are required to make the associations
clear between these variants and hypospadias.

PMID: 17003840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;21(5):372-4.

[Differential display of homeobox gene expressions in the normal, wounded human
fetal and adult skins by DNA microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Song HF(1), Chai JK, Chen ML, Lin ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Burn Institute, the 304th Hospital
Affiliated to PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100037, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the differential expression of homeobox genes in the
normal, wounded human fetal and adult skins and its significance in fetal
scarless healing.
METHODS: Gene chips containing 14 000 human genes were used to investigate
homeobox gene expressions of the normal, wounded human fetal and adult skins.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the expression of homeobox
genes, especially for PRX-2, HOXB13, HOXB6 and HOXB7.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox gene is in close relation to developmental biology. The
different expressions and changes of homeobox genes in the normal, wounded human 
fetal and adult skin may be a primary cause of different wound healing between
fetal and adult skin.

PMID: 16335386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Exp Hematol. 2005 Nov;33(11):1402-16.

Comparative characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells from human bone marrow,
adipose tissue, and umbilical cord blood.

Wagner W(1), Wein F, Seckinger A, Frankhauser M, Wirkner U, Krause U, Blake J,
Schwager C, Eckstein V, Ansorge W, Ho AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine V, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Various preparative protocols have been proposed for the acquisition
and cultivation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Whereas surface antigen markers 
have failed to precisely define this population, microarray analysis might
provide a better tool for characterization of MSC.
METHODS: In this study, we have analyzed global gene expression profiles of human
MSC isolated from adipose tissue (AT), from umbilical cord blood (CB), and from
bone marrow (BM) under two growth conditions and have compared them to terminally
differentiated human fibroblasts (HS68). Profiles were compared using our Human
Genome Microarray representing 51.144 different cDNA clones.
RESULTS: Cultured with the appropriate conditions, osteogenic and adipogenic
differentiation could be confirmed in all MSC preparations but not in
fibroblasts. No phenotypic differences were observed by flow cytometry using a
panel of 22 surface antigen markers. Whereas MSC derived from different donors
using the same culture procedure yielded a consistent and reproducible gene
expression profile, many genes were differentially expressed in MSC from
different ontogenetic sources or from different culture conditions. Twenty-five
genes were overlapping and upregulated in all MSC preparations from AT, CB, and
BM as compared to HS68 fibroblasts. These genes included fibronectin, ECM2,
glypican-4, ID1, NF1B, HOXA5, and HOXB6. Many genes upregulated in MSC are
involved in extracellular matrix, morphogenesis, and development, whereas several
inhibitors of the Wnt pathway (DKK1, DKK3, SFRP1) were highly expressed in
fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Our results have provided a foundation for a more reproducible and
reliable quality control using genotypic analysis for defining MSC.

PMID: 16263424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 May 1;11(9):3587-96.

Expression of HOXB2, a retinoic acid signaling target in pancreatic cancer and
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

Segara D(1), Biankin AV, Kench JG, Langusch CC, Dawson AC, Skalicky DA, Gotley
DC, Coleman MJ, Sutherland RL, Henshall SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE: Despite significant progress in understanding the molecular pathology of
pancreatic cancer and its precursor lesion: pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia 
(PanIN), there remain no molecules with proven clinical utility as prognostic or 
therapeutic markers. Here, we used oligonucleotide microarrays to interrogate
mRNA expression of pancreatic cancer tissue and normal pancreas to identify novel
molecular pathways dysregulated in the development and progression of pancreatic 
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: RNA was hybridized to Affymetrix Genechip HG-U133
oligonucleotide microarrays. A relational database integrating data from publicly
available resources was created to identify candidate genes potentially relevant 
to pancreatic cancer. The protein expression of one candidate, homeobox B2
(HOXB2), in PanIN and pancreatic cancer was assessed using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We identified aberrant expression of several components of the retinoic 
acid (RA) signaling pathway (RARalpha, MUC4, Id-1, MMP9, uPAR, HB-EGF, HOXB6, and
HOXB2), many of which are known to be aberrantly expressed in pancreatic cancer
and PanIN. HOXB2, a downstream target of RA, was up-regulated 6.7-fold in
pancreatic cancer compared with normal pancreas. Immunohistochemistry revealed
ectopic expression of HOXB2 in 15% of early PanIN lesions and 48 of 128 (38%)
pancreatic cancer specimens. Expression of HOXB2 was associated with
nonresectable tumors and was an independent predictor of poor survival in
resected tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified aberrant expression of RA signaling components in
pancreatic cancer, including HOXB2, which was expressed in a proportion of PanIN 
lesions. Ectopic expression of HOXB2 was associated with a poor prognosis for all
patients with pancreatic cancer and was an independent predictor of survival in
patients who underwent resection.

PMID: 15867264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Blood. 2005 Feb 15;105(4):1456-66. Epub 2004 Nov 2.

HOXB6 overexpression in murine bone marrow immortalizes a myelomonocytic
precursor in vitro and causes hematopoietic stem cell expansion and acute myeloid
leukemia in vivo.

Fischbach NA(1), Rozenfeld S, Shen W, Fong S, Chrobak D, Ginzinger D, Kogan SC,
Radhakrishnan A, Le Beau MM, Largman C, Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA
94121, USA. fischba@itsa.ucsf.edu

The HOX family of homeobox genes plays an important role in normal and malignant 
hematopoiesis. Dysregulated HOX gene expression profoundly effects the
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
committed progenitors, and aberrant activation of HOX genes is a common event in 
human myeloid leukemia. HOXB6 is frequently overexpressed in human acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). To gain further insight into the role of HOXB6 in hematopoiesis, 
we overexpressed HOXB6 in murine bone marrow using retrovirus-mediated gene
transfer. We also explored structure-function relationships using mutant HOXB6
proteins unable to bind to DNA or a key HOX-binding partner, pre-B-cell leukemia 
transcription factor-1 (PBX1). Additionally, we investigated the potential
cooperative interaction with myeloid ecotropic viral integration site 1 homolog
(MEIS1). In vivo, HOXB6 expanded HSCs and myeloid precursors while inhibiting
erythropoiesis and lymphopoiesis. Overexpression of HOXB6 resulted in AML with a 
median latency of 223 days. Coexpression of MEIS1 dramatically shortened the
onset of AML. Cytogenetic analysis of a subset of HOXB6-induced AMLs revealed
recurrent deletions of chromosome bands 2D-E4, a region frequently deleted in
HOXA9-induced AMLs. In vitro, HOXB6 immortalized a factor-dependent
myelomonocytic precursor capable of granulocytic and monocytic differentiation.
These biologic effects of HOXB6 were largely dependent on DNA binding but
independent of direct interaction with PBX1.

PMID: 15522959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 17;279(38):39895-904. Epub 2004 Jul 21.

HOXB6 protein is bound to CREB-binding protein and represses globin expression in
a DNA binding-dependent, PBX interaction-independent process.

Shen W(1), Chrobak D, Krishnan K, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

Although HOXB6 and other HOX genes have previously been associated with
hematopoiesis and leukemias, the precise mechanism of action of their protein
products remains unclear. Here we use a biological model in which HOXB6 represses
alpha- and gamma-globin mRNA levels to perform a structure/function analysis for 
this homeodomain protein. HOXB6 protein represses globin transcript levels in
stably transfected K562 cells in a DNA-binding dependent fashion. However, the
capacity to form cooperative DNA-binding complexes with the PBX co-factor protein
is not required for HOXB6 biological activity. Neither the conserved extreme
N-terminal region, a polyglutamic acid region at the protein C terminus, nor the 
Ser(214) CKII phosphorylation site was required for DNA binding or activity in
this model. We have previously reported that HOX proteins can inhibit
CREB-binding protein (CBP)-histone acetyltransferase-mediated potentiation of
reporter gene transcription. We now show that endogenous CBP is co-precipitated
with exogenous HOXB6 from nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments of transfected
K562 cells. Furthermore, endogenous CBP co-precipitates with endogenous HOXB6 in 
day 14.5 murine fetal liver cells during active globin gene expression in this
tissue. The CBP interaction motif was localized to the homeodomain but does not
require the highly conserved helix 3. Our data suggest that the homeodomain
contains most or all of the important structures required for HOXB6 activity in
blood cells.

PMID: 15269212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Gynecol Oncol. 2003 Sep;90(3):512-8.

Expression of HOX gene products in normal and abnormal trophoblastic tissue.

Amesse LS(1), Moulton R, Zhang YM, Pfaff-Amesse T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine, Dayton, OH 45409, USA. lsamesse@mvh.org

OBJECTIVE: The expression pattern of three homeobox genes products, HOX A11, HOX 
B6, and HOX C6, was examined in normal human placental tissue and abnormal
trophoblastic tissue derived from complete hydatidiform moles and choriocarcinoma
tumors. We sought to determine whether expression of these gene products during
different states of trophoblastic differentiation and proliferation is constant
or demonstrates variation. Variation in expression of these respective homeobox
genes may provide insight into predicting which molar tissues are likely to
develop into choriocarcinoma tumors.
METHODS: Tissue sections from a total of 12 samples were studied. Among these,
six full-term human placentas, three complete hydatidiform moles, and three
choriocarcinoma tumors were examined for expression of the homeobox HOX A11, HOX 
B6, and HOX C6 gene products, using immunohistochemistry staining methods.
RESULTS: Expression of HOX homeobox gene products, HOX A11, HOX B6, and HOX C6,
was detected in full-term human placenta and tissue from complete hydatiform
moles. Abnormal trophoblasts from complete moles demonstrated an immunoreactivity
expression pattern comparable to that of normal trophoblasts from term
pregnancies. However, definitive expression of these respective homeobox genes
was not identified in tissue obtained from choriocarcinoma tumors.
CONCLUSION: Variation in expression of HOX homeobox gene products, HOX A11, HOX
B6, and HOX C6, was established in trophoblast tissue obtained from full-term
human placentas, complete hydatiform moles, and choriocarcinoma tumors. This
finding indicates that normal full-term trophoblasts and abnormal molar
trophoblasts may share similar fundamental regulatory control mechanisms. The
absence of definitive expression of these HOX gene products in trophoblastic
cells derived from choriocarcinoma tumors indicates that while HOX A11, HOX B6,
and HOX C6 genes may be involved in maintenance of some trophoblastic cell
states, they may be either downregulated or have alterations in their expression 
in trophoblasts from choriocarcinoma tumors.

PMID: 13678718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jun;227(2):192-202.

HOXB13 homeodomain protein is cytoplasmic throughout fetal skin development.

Kömüves LG(1), Ma XK, Stelnicki E, Rozenfeld S, Oda Y, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, VA Medical Center and University of California, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Substantial evidence suggests that HOX homeobox genes regulate aspects of body
development, including hair formation. We initially isolated the HOXB13 gene from
human fetal skin in experiments designed to identify candidate genes that
regulate scarless fetal wound healing. Although the HOX homeodomain proteins have
been proposed to function as transcription factors, we have demonstrated
previously that substantial fractions of the HOXB6 and HOXB4 proteins are
localized to the cytoplasm throughout epidermal development. The purpose of the
current study was to identify HOXB13 protein expression patterns in developing
skin to elucidate potential mechanisms by which this protein might regulate
aspects of tissue development and healing. HOXB13 protein expression was detected
throughout the developing epidermis, with weaker signal observed in the early
developing dermis. Epidermal HOXB13 signal was detected over the entire body
surface, but surprisingly, essentially all of the signal was cytoplasmic in
developing skin. Low-level HOXB13 protein expression was detected in adult skin
and within the telogen hair follicle, and a portion of the residual signal in
adult epidermis was nuclear. Expression in hyperproliferative skin conditions
remained cytoplasmic with the exception of epidermis associated with Kaposi's
sarcoma, which showed strong HOXB13 expression that was partially localized to
the nucleus.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12761847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Cancer. 2003 May;39(8):1165-75.

Histone acetylation-mediated regulation of genes in leukaemic cells.

Chambers AE(1), Banerjee S, Chaplin T, Dunne J, Debernardi S, Joel SP, Young BD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Medical Oncology Laboratory, The Medical College of St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6QB, UK.
annechambers@yahoo.co.uk

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) functions are
associated with various cancers, and the inhibition of HDAC has been found to
arrest disease progression. Here, we have investigated the gene expression
profiles of leukaemic cells in response to the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA) using oligonucleotide microarrays. Nucleosomal histone acetylation was
monitored in parallel and the expression profiles of selected genes were
confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A large number of
genes (9% of the genome) were found to be similarly regulated in CCRF-CEM and
HL-60 cells in response to TSA, and genes showing primary and secondary responses
could be distinguished by temporal analysis of gene expression. A small fraction 
of genes were highly sensitive to histone hyper-acetylation, including XRCC1,
HOXB6, CDK10, MYC, MYB, NMI and CBFA2T3 and many were trans-acting factors
relevant to cancer. The most rapidly repressed gene was MKRN3, an imprinted gene 
involved in the Prader-Willi syndrome.

PMID: 12736119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Jun 28;26(3):189-91.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5,
HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in human embryo lung cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LY(1), Wu GJ, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes in
human embryo lung (HEL) cells and influence of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
infection on the expressions of these genes.
METHOD: The expressions of HOXB1, HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB9 genes were detected
with semi-quantitative RT-PCR method.
RESULTS: 1. HEL cells expressed HOXB5 and HOXB6 genes, but they did not express
HOXB1 and HOXB9 genes. 2. After HCMV infection, HEL cell was induced to express
HOXB9 gene, as the expression of HOXB6 gene was elevated. The expression of HOXB5
gene had no significant change. HOXB1 was still not expressed. 3. Treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the expression of HOXB9 gene in HEL cells
infected by HCMV was significantly increased. But during the advanced infect
period, the expression of HOXB6 was significantly decreased.
CONCLUSION: HCMV can induce abnormal expressions of HOXB6 and HOXB9 genes, which 
may play an important role in HCMV-induced abnormal embryogenesis.

PMID: 12536675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2001 Oct 28;26(5):409-11.

[Influence of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of HOXB5, HOXB6, 
HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes in gliomaous cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu GJ(1), Chen LY, Dai G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: The expressions of HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7, and HOXB8 genes of U251 cell
infected by human cytomegalovirus and/or treated with all trans-retinoic
acid(ATRA) were detected by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. The results were that U251 
cell did not express HOXB5, HOXB6, and HOXB8 but expressed HOXB7 without
infecting HCMV and/or being treated with ATRA. After infected with HCMV and/or
treated with ATRA, the expressions of HOXB7 and HOXB8 were up-regulated and the
expression of HOXB7 lasted the fourth generation, while HOXB8 was up-regulated
only in the second generation. These results indicate that the abnormal
expression of HOXB gene induced by HCMV may play an important role in the
maldevelopment.

PMID: 12536483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Cancer. 2003 Mar 10;104(1):73-84.

Serologic analysis of ovarian tumor antigens reveals a bias toward antigens
encoded on 17q.

Stone B(1), Schummer M, Paley PJ, Thompson L, Stewart J, Ford M, Crawford M,
Urban N, O'Briant K, Nelson BH.

Author information: 
(1)Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason Research Center, Seattle, WA
98101-2795, USA. bstone@vmresearch.org

We utilized SEREX immunoscreening to identify a set of novel tumor antigens that 
are associated with human serous ovarian cancer and may prove useful for the
early detection and treatment of this disease. Extensive screening with a panel
of sera from 25 late-stage ovarian cancer patients against 3 independent cDNA
libraries identified a set of 9 antigens that were immunogenic in more than 1
patient and not in a panel of 20-45 normal female serum donors. These antigens
include p53, NY-ESO-1, UBQLN1, HOXB6, TOP2A, putative helicase-RUVBL (RUVBL),
HMBA-inducible (HEXIM1), DDX5 and HDCMA. Ten of 25 ovarian cancer patients (40%) 
expressed serum IgG to at least 1 of these antigens, while 14% (4/25) had
antibodies to 2 or more antigens. Unexpectedly, 4 antigens identified in this
screen, DDX5, HEXIM1, TOP2A and HOXB6, are encoded within a region of 17q that
also includes the genes for HER2/neu, Homeobox-B7 and BRCA1. Real-time RT-PCR
analysis showed that mRNA for HER2/neu and 3 SEREX-defined antigens, TOP2A, HOXB6
and DDX5, was more abundant in ovarian tumors than most normal tissues, including
normal and benign ovarian tissues, suggesting that elevated expression of genes
encoded within this region of chromosome 17 is a common event in ovarian tumors. 
Thus, these abnormal expression patterns combined with the endogenous immune
response suggests that these antigens represent potential targets for
immunotherapy.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12532422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. EMBO J. 2003 Jan 15;22(2):262-9.

Retinoids regulate the anterior expression boundaries of 5' Hoxb genes in
posterior hindbrain.

Oosterveen T(1), Niederreither K, Dollé P, Chambon P, Meijlink F, Deschamps J.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute of Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

We describe the regulatory interactions that cause anterior extension of the
mouse 5' Hoxb expression domains from spinal cord levels to their definitive
boundaries in the posterior hindbrain between embryonic day E10 and E11.5. This
anterior expansion is retinoid dependent since it does not occur in mouse embryos
deficient for the retinoic acid-synthesizing enzyme retinaldehyde dehydrogenase
2. A retinoic acid response element (RARE) was identified downstream of Hoxb5 and
shown to be essential for expression of Hoxb5 and Hoxb8 reporter transgenes in
the anterior neural tube. The spatio-temporal activity of this element overlaps
with rostral extension of the expression domain of endogenous Hoxb5, Hoxb6 and
Hoxb8 into the posterior hindbrain. The RARE and surrounding sequences are found 
at homologous positions in the human, mouse and zebrafish genome, which supports 
an evolutionarily conserved regulatory function.

PMCID: PMC140104
PMID: 12514132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2002 Sep;129(18):4171-83.

Involvement of the Polycomb-group gene Ring1B in the specification of the
anterior-posterior axis in mice.

Suzuki M(1), Mizutani-Koseki Y, Fujimura Y, Miyagishima H, Kaneko T, Takada Y,
Akasaka T, Tanzawa H, Takihara Y, Nakano M, Masumoto H, Vidal M, Isono K, Koseki 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The products of the Polycomb group of genes form complexes that maintain the
state of transcriptional repression of several genes with relevance to
development and in cell proliferation. We have identified Ring1B, the product of 
the Ring1B gene (Rnf2 - Mouse Genome Informatics), by means of its interaction
with the Polycomb group protein Mel18. We describe biochemical and genetic
studies directed to understand the biological role of Ring1B. Immunoprecipitation
studies indicate that Ring1B form part of protein complexes containing the
products of other Polycomb group genes, such as Rae28/Mph1 and M33, and that this
complexes associate to chromosomal DNA. We have generated a mouse line bearing a 
hypomorphic Ring1B allele, which shows posterior homeotic transformations of the 
axial skeleton and a mild derepression of some Hox genes (Hoxb4, Hoxb6 and Hoxb8)
in cells anterior to their normal boundaries of expression in the mesodermal
compartment. By contrast, the overexpression of Ring1B in chick embryos results
in the repression of Hoxb9 expression in the neural tube. These results, together
with the genetic interactions observed in compound Ring1B/Mel18 mutant mice, are 
consistent with a role for Ring1B in the regulation of Hox gene expression by
Polycomb group complexes.

PMID: 12183370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Jul;187(1):24-32.

Expression of homeobox gene transcripts in trophoblastic cells.

Zhang YM(1), Xu B, Rote N, Peterson L, Amesse LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine and College of Science and Mathematics, Dayton, Ohio 45409-2793, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to examine the dynamics of homeobox gene
expression in the differentiation of trophoblasts as a key to the understanding
of the regulatory mechanisms that are involved in placental development.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of homeobox genes was examined in primary trophoblastic 
cells and in the BeWo choriocarcinoma model cell lines by molecular and
immunocytochemistry techniques.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the expression of 3 homeobox genes (HOX B6, HOX C6, and 
HOX A11) in primary trophoblastic cells. BeWo cells showed an expression pattern 
similar to that of the primary cell lines. In both primary trophoblasts and BeWo 
cells, the HOX A11 gene, but not the HOX B6 or HOX C6 genes, were found to
down-regulate with differentiation from single- to multinucleate giant cells.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates a novel expression pattern for HOX A11 gene
in trophoblastic differentiation and suggests that the down-regulation of HOX A11
may be necessary for the differentiation of cytotrophoblasts into
syncytiotrophoblasts.

PMID: 12114884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Leukemia. 2002 Jul;16(7):1293-301.

Expression pattern of HOXB6 homeobox gene in myelomonocytic differentiation and
acute myeloid leukemia.

Giampaolo A(1), Felli N, Diverio D, Morsilli O, Samoggia P, Breccia M, Lo Coco F,
Peschle C, Testa U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
Italy.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors known to be important morphogenic
regulators during embryonic development. An increasing body of work implies a
role for homeobox genes in both hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. In the present 
study we have analyzed the role of the homeobox gene, HOXB6, in the program of
differentiation of the myeloid cell lines, NB4 and HL60. HOXB6 expression is
transiently induced during normal granulocytopoiesis and monocytopoiesis, with an
initial induction during the early phases of differentiation, followed by a
blockade of expression at early maturation. The enforced expression of HOXB6 in
promyelocytic NB4 cells or in myeloblastic HL60 cells elicited inhibition of the 
granulocytic or monocytic maturation, respectively. Furthermore, HOXB6 was
frequently expressed (18 out of 49 cases) in AMLs lacking major translocations
while it was expressed at very low frequency (two out of 47 cases) in AMLs
characterized by PML/RAR-alpha, AML-1/ETO, CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion and
rearrangements of the MLL gene at 11q23. According to these observations, we
suggest that a regulated pattern of HOXB6 expression is required for normal
granulopoiesis and monocytopoiesis. Abnormalities of the HOXB6 expression may
contribute to the development of the leukemic phenotype.

PMID: 12094253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32489-94. Epub 2001 Jun 29.

An Abd-B class HOX.PBX recognition sequence is required for expression from the
mouse Ren-1c gene.

Pan L(1), Xie Y, Black TA, Jones CA, Pruitt SC, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Expression from the mouse Ren-1(c) gene in As4.1 cells is dependent on a proximal
promoter element (PPE) located at approximately -60 and a 241-base pair enhancer 
region located at -2625 relative to the transcription start site. The PPE
(TAATAAATCAA) is identical to a consensus HOX.PBX binding sequence. Further,
PBX1b has been shown to be a component of a PPE-specific binding complex present 
in nuclear extracts from As4.1 cells. The binding affinities of different paralog
HOX members to the PPE were examined in the absence or presence of PBX1b. HOXB6, 
-B7, and -C8 failed to bind the PPE alone but showed weak affinity in the
presence of PBX1b. In contrast, HOXD10 and to a lesser degree HOXB9 bound the PPE
with high affinities regardless of whether PBX1b was present. Abd-B HOX members, 
including HOXD10, -A10, -A9, -B9, and -C9, are expressed in As4.1 cells. The
ability of HOX and PBX1b to form a ternary complex with PREP1 on the PPE is also 
demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. Point mutations in either the HOX or PBX 
half-site of the PPE disrupted the formation of the HOX.PBX complex and
dramatically decreased transcriptional activity of the Ren-1(c) gene
demonstrating that both the HOX and PBX half-sites are critical for mouse renin
gene expression. These results strongly implicate Abd-B class Hox genes and their
cofactors as major determinants of the sites of renin expression.

PMID: 11432851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Pathol. 2001 Mar;158(3):955-66.

HOX genes in human lung: altered expression in primary pulmonary hypertension and
emphysema.

Golpon HA(1), Geraci MW, Moore MD, Miller HL, Miller GJ, Tuder RM, Voelkel NF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Hypertension Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
4200 E. Ninth Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes belong to the large family of homeodomain genes that function as
transcription factors. Animal studies indicate that they play an essential role
in lung development. We investigated the expression pattern of HOX genes in human
lung tissue by using microarray and degenerate reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction survey techniques. HOX genes predominantly from the 3' end of
clusters A and B were expressed in normal human adult lung and among them HOXA5
was the most abundant, followed by HOXB2 and HOXB6. In fetal (12 weeks old) and
diseased lung specimens (emphysema, primary pulmonary hypertension) additional
HOX genes from clusters C and D were expressed. Using in situ hybridization,
transcripts for HOXA5 were predominantly found in alveolar septal and epithelial 
cells, both in normal and diseased lungs. A 2.5-fold increase in HOXA5 mRNA
expression was demonstrated by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction in primary pulmonary hypertension lung specimens when compared to 
normal lung tissue. In conclusion, we demonstrate that HOX genes are selectively 
expressed in the human lung. Differences in the pattern of HOX gene expression
exist among fetal, adult, and diseased lung specimens. The altered pattern of HOX
gene expression may contribute to the development of pulmonary diseases.

PMCID: PMC1850338
PMID: 11238043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):233-6.

HoxA and HoxB cluster genes subdivide the digestive tract into morphological
domains during chick development.

Sakiyama J(1), Yokouchi Y, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602, Nagoya, Japan.

The digestive tract exhibits region-specific morphology and cytodifferentiation
along the anteroposterior axis. We analyzed the spatial expression patterns of
Hox genes belonging to the HoxA and HoxB cluster (Hoxa-4 approximately a-9,
Hoxb-5 approximately b-9) in the developing chick digestive tract. The expression
domains of these Hox genes correlated with morphological subdivision of the
digestive tract along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 11231082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Biol. 2000 Apr 15;220(2):154-67.

Targeted misexpression of constitutively active BMP receptor-IB causes
bifurcation, duplication, and posterior transformation of digit in mouse limb.

Zhang Z(1), Yu X, Zhang Y, Geronimo B, Lovlie A, Fromm SH, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Oslo, Oslo, 0316, Norway.

Members of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play important roles in many
aspects of vertebrate embryogenesis. In developing limbs, BMPs have been
implicated in control of anterior-posterior patterning, outgrowth,
chondrogenesis, and apoptosis. These diverse roles of BMPs in limb development
are apparently mediated by different BMP receptors (BMPR). To identify the
developmental processes in mouse limb possibly contributed by BMP receptor-IB
(BMPR-IB), we generated transgenic mice misexpressing a constitutively active
Bmpr-IB (caBmpr-IB). The transgene driven by the mouse Hoxb-6 promoter was
ectopically expressed in the posterior mesenchyme of the forelimb bud, the
lateral plate mesoderm, and the whole mesenchyme of the hindlimb bud. While the
forelimbs appeared normal, the transgenic hindlimbs exhibited several phenotypes,
including bifurcation, preaxial polydactyly, and posterior transformation of the 
anterior digit. However, the size of bones in the transgenic limbs seemed
unaltered. Defects in sternum and ribs were also found. The bifurcation in the
transgenic hindlimb occurred early in the limb development (E10.5) and was
associated with extensive cell death in the mesenchyme and occasionally in the
apical ectodermal ridge (AER). Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Patched (Ptc) expression 
appeared unaffected in the transgenic limb buds, suggesting that the BMPR-IB
mediated signaling pathway is downstream from Shh. However, ectopic Fgf4
expression was found in the anterior AER, which may account for the duplication
of the anterior digit. An ectopic expression of Gremlin found in the transgenic
limb bud would be responsible for the ectopic Fgf4 expression. The observations
that Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-13 expression patterns were extended anteriorly provide a
molecular basis for the posterior transformation of the anterior digit. Together 
these results suggest that BMPR-IB is the endogenous receptor to mediate the role
of BMPs in anterior-posterior patterning and apoptosis in mouse developing limb. 
In addition, BMPR-IB may represent a critical component in the Shh/FGF4 feedback 
loop by regulating Gremlin expression.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10753507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Hematol. 2000 Oct;65(2):111-8.

Disruption of the homeobox gene Hoxb-6 in mice results in increased numbers of
early erythrocyte progenitors.

Kappen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Samuel C. Johnson Medical Research Center, Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, Scottsdale,
Arizona, USA. ckappen@unmc.edu

Hox genes encode transcription factors that are required for proper development
of certain tissues and for patterning of the hindbrain, the limbs, and skeleton. 
They are also expressed in the hematopoietic system with a preference for
specific cell lineages. To determine the role of Hoxb-6 in normal hematopoiesis, 
mice with a targeted disruption in the Hoxb-6 gene were generated. Mature
hematopoietic cell types and immune responses are normal in homozygous Hoxb-6
mutants. Clonogenic progenitor cell assays demonstrate an increased number of
early erythroid progenitor cells in the bone marrow and fetal liver of mutants,
while differentiation of other cell lineages is unaffected. These results suggest
that Hoxb-6 controls the generation, proliferation, or survival of erythroid
progenitor cells.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10996827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Dyn. 2000 Aug;218(4):636-47.

Changes in HOXB6 homeodomain protein structure and localization during human
epidermal development and differentiation.

Kömüves LG(1), Shen WF, Kwong A, Stelnicki E, Rozenfeld S, Oda Y, Blink A,
Krishnan K, Lau B, Mauro T, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California VA Medical Center, San
Francisco, California.

HOX homeodomain proteins are master developmental regulators, which are now
thought to function as transcription factors by forming cooperative DNA binding
complexes with PBX or other protein partners. Although PBX proteins exhibit
regulated subcellular localization and function in the nucleus in other tissues, 
little data exists on HOX and PBX protein localization during skin development.
We now show that the HOXB6 protein is expressed in the suprabasal layer of the
early developing epidermis and throughout the upper layers of late fetal and
adult human skin. HOXB6 signal is cytoplasmic throughout fetal epidermal
development, but substantially nuclear in normal adult skin. HOXB6 protein is
also partially nuclear in hyperproliferative skin conditions, but appears to be
cytoplasmic in basal and squamous cell carcinomas. Although all three PBX genes
are expressed in fetal epidermis, none of the three PBX proteins exhibit nuclear 
co-localization with HOXB6 in either fetal or adult epidermis. RNA and protein
data suggest that a truncated HOXB6 protein, lacking the homeodomain, is
expressed in undifferentiated keratinocytes and that the full-length protein is
induced by differentiation. GFP-fusion proteins were used to demonstrate that the
full-length HOXB6 protein is localized to the nucleus while the truncated protein
is largely cytoplasmic. Taken together, these data suggest that during epidermal 
development the truncated HOXB6 isoform may function by a mechanism other than as
DNA binding protein, and that most of the nuclear, homeodomain-containing HOXB6
protein does not utilize PBX proteins as DNA binding partners in the skin.
Published 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10906782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Biol. 2000 Jul 1;223(1):77-90.

Lim1 activity is required for intermediate mesoderm differentiation in the mouse 
embryo.

Tsang TE(1), Shawlot W, Kinder SJ, Kobayashi A, Kwan KM, Schughart K, Kania A,
Jessell TM, Behringer RR, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embyology Unit, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

During gastrulation and early organogenesis, Lim1 is expressed in the visceral
endoderm, the anterior mesendoderm, and the lateral mesoderm that comprises the
lateral plate and intermediate mesoderm. A previous study has reported that
kidneys and gonads are missing in the Lim1 null mutants (W. Shawlot and R. R.
Behringer, 1995, Nature 374, 425-430). Results of the present study show that in 
the early organogenesis stage mutant embryo, the intermediate mesoderm that
contains the urogenital precursor tissues is disorganized and displays diminished
expression of PAX2 and the Hoxb6-lacZ transgene. When posterior epiblast cells of
the Lim1 null mutant embryo were transplanted to the primitive streak of
wild-type host embryos, they were able to colonize the lateral plate and
intermediate mesoderm of the host, suggesting that Lim1 activity is not essential
for the allocation of epiblast cells to these mesodermal lineages. However, most 
of the mutant cells that colonized the lateral and intermediate mesoderm of the
host embryo did not express the Hoxb6-lacZ transgene, except for some cells that 
were derived from the distal part of the posterior epiblast. Lim1 activity may
therefore be required for the full expression of this transgene that normally
marks the differentiation of the lateral plate and intermediate mesoderm.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10864462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 7;272(2):513-8.

Deregulated expression of homeobox-containing genes, HOXB6, B8, C8, C9, and
Cdx-1, in human colon cancer cell lines.

Vider BZ(1), Zimber A, Chastre E, Gespach C, Halperin M, Mashiah P, Yaniv A,
Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Previously we have demonstrated a reciprocal deregulation of various homeobox
genes (HOXB6, B8, C8 and C9 vs Cdx-1) in human colorectal cancer (CRC). In the
present study, using RT-PCR, we have investigated the expression pattern of these
homeobox genes in various human colon cell lines, representing various stages of 
colon cancer progression and differentiation. Thus, we have tested polyposis coli
Pc/AA adenoma cells, Caco-2, HT-29 and LS174T adenocarcinoma cell lines. All cell
lines, except LS174T, demonstrated a pattern of deregulated homeobox gene
expression which resembled that of CRC. In contrast, the pattern of expression of
these genes in the highly oncogenic LS174T cells, as well as in Caco-2 cells
transfected with activated Ha-ras or Polyoma middle T oncogene, resembled that of
the normal mucosa. The reciprocal deregulation of HOX and Cdx-1 genes in CRC and 
in CRC-derived cell lines suggests a possible role in human CRC development.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10833444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genesis. 2000 Feb;26(2):118-20.

HoxB6-Cre transgenic mice express Cre recombinase in extra-embryonic mesoderm, in
lateral plate and limb mesoderm and at the midbrain/hindbrain junction.

Lowe LA(1), Yamada S, Kuehn MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1360, USA.

PMID: 10686603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Exp Zool. 1999 Aug 15;285(2):170-6.

Evolution of the HOXB6 intergenic region: motif conservation at the lateral plate
mesoderm (LPM) enhancer element.

Deinard A(1), Dorit R, Castiglione C, Jiang Z, Becker D, Ruddle F, Schugart K,
Kidd K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

This study reports the results of a comparative sequencing study in higher
primates, focusing on the intergenic region located between HOXB6 and HOXB7. We
have examined an 832 bp. region, encompassing a putative Lateral Plate Mesoderm
(LPM) enhancer element in a variety of anthropoid apes. The interspecific
comparisons reveal extensive substitutions occurring within this region, with a
marked bias in favor of C-->T transitions within the enhancer element. The
pattern of these substitutions suggests that the LPM enhancer region is subject
to specific sequence and compositional constraints that are only revealed through
comparative sequencing. These constraints produce an enhancer signature, the CpG 
microisland, which may be useful in identifying additional regulatory elements
located within the HOX complexes. J. Exp. Zool. (Mol. Dev. Evol.) 285:170-176,
1999.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10440728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Hum Evol. 1999 Jun;36(6):687-703.

Evolution of a HOXB6 intergenic region within the great apes and humans.

Deinard A(1), Kidd K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
asdeinard@ucdavis.edu

Data accumulated over the past decade from several loci suggest that nonhuman
primates have a greater amount of intraspecific genetic variation relative to
humans. In phylogenetic reconstructions among primates that are based on genetic 
data, therefore, it becomes essential to adequately sample the population(s)
being analyzed. Inadequate sampling may not only underestimate variation within
any given population, but such an underestimate may confound any phylogenetic or 
population-specific conclusions implied by the data. Here we present inter- and
intraspecific data on the molecular evolution of an approximately 1.0 kb
intergenic HOXB6 sequence among humans, common chimpanzees, pygmy chimpanzees,
gorillas and orangutans. To date, this study represents the most comprehensive
investigation of a noncoding nuclear locus among the great apes and humans that
examines the nature and amount of intraspecific variation in DNA sequences. Not
only do these HOXB6 data continue to support earlier findings that Homo sapiens
sapiens has less genetic variation than any great ape species (Ruano et al.,
1992; Deinard & Kidd, 1995), but they strongly suggest that a high level of
genetic polymorphism existed within the common ancestor of the African ape clade 
(Homo-Pan-Gorilla). Despite detecting two nucleotide substitutions linking Pan
and Homo, we caution against concluding that the HOXB6 data definitively support 
a Homo-Pan clade to the exclusion of Gorilla. Rather, we believe that taking into
consideration the level of genetic polymorphism that is likely to have existed
within the common ancestor, the most prudent conclusion that can be made from all
available data, including morphological, karyotypic and genetic data, may be that
speciation among Homo-Pan-Gorilla is best represented by a "trichotomy".

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10330333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Exp Zool. 1999 Apr 15;285(1):76-84.

Phylogenetically conserved CK-II phosphorylation site of the murine homeodomain
protein Hoxb-6.

Fienberg AA(1), Nordstedt C, Belting HG, Czernik AJ, Nairn AC, Gandy S, Greengard
P, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA. fienba@rockvax.rockefeller.edu

In an effort to characterize the signal transduction mechanisms that operate to
regulate homeodomain protein function, we have analyzed the phosphorylation state
of two homeodomain proteins, Hoxb-6 and Hoxc-8, in vitro and in vivo. The
baculovirus expression system was employed to demonstrate that Hoxb-6 is
phosphorylated in Sf9 cells while Hoxc-8 is not. Using two-dimensional tryptic
phosphopeptide mapping and purified protein kinases, we demonstrate that Hoxb-6
is phosphorylated in vitro by casein kinase II and cAMP-dependent protein kinase.
The casein kinase II phosphorylation site was mapped to serine-214.
Two-dimensional tryptic phosphopeptide mapping of immunoprecipitated Hoxb-6 from 
mouse embryonic spinal cords demonstrates that the same peptide phosphorylated in
vitro and in Sf9 cells by casein kinase II is also phosphorylated in vivo. The
conservation of this site in several homeodomain proteins from various species is
discussed.

PMID: 10327653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3391-400.

Characterization of HOX gene expression during myelopoiesis: role of HOX A5 in
lineage commitment and maturation.

Fuller JF(1), McAdara J, Yaron Y, Sakaguchi M, Fraser JK, Gasson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA School of Medicine, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

During the process of normal hematopoiesis, proliferation is tightly linked to
maturation. The molecular mechanisms that lead to production of mature effector
cells with a variety of phenotypes and functions from a single multipotent
progenitor are only beginning to be elucidated. It is important to determine how 
these maturation events are regulated at the molecular level, because this will
provide significant insights into the process of normal hematopoiesis as well as 
leukemogenesis. Transcription factors containing the highly conserved homeobox
motif show considerable promise as potential regulators of hematopoietic
maturation events. In this study, we focused on identification and
characterization of homeobox genes of the HOX family that are important in
regulating normal human myeloid differentiation induced by the hematopoietic
growth factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We have
identified three homeobox genes, HOX A5, HOX B6, and HOX B7, which are expressed 
during early myelopoiesis. Treating bone marrow cells with antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides to HOX A5 resulted in inhibition of granulocytic/monocytic 
hematopoiesis and increased the generation of erythroid progenitors. Also,
overexpression of HOX A5 inhibited erythroid differentiation of the K562 cell
line. Based on these observations, we propose that HOX A5 functions as an
important regulator of hematopoietic lineage determination and maturation.

PMID: 10233891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Leuk Lymphoma. 1998 Nov;31(5-6):599-608.

Modulation of homeobox B6 and B9 genes expression in human leukemia cell lines
during myelomonocytic differentiation.

Ohnishi K(1), Tobita T, Sinjo K, Takeshita A, Ohno R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Japan.

Homeobox genes (HOX) may have a regulatory function in the differentiation
process of hematopoiesis. We examined the change of HOX B6 and HOX B9 mRNA
expressions during the in vitro differentiation of four myeloid leukemia cell
lines because HOX B6 may be involved closely in myeloid differentiation. HL-60,
NB4, NKM-1 and NOMO-1 were established from acute leukemia of M2, M3, M2 and M5
subtype of the French-American-British classification, respectively. All-trans
retinoic acid (ATRA), TPA, and G-CSF were used as differentiation inducers. Each 
cell line was cultured with each inducer and total RNA was isolated on day 1, 2, 
3, or 5. HOX B mRNA was detected by Northern blotting and RT-PCR methods. HOX B6 
and HOX B9 mRNAs were constitutively expressed in NB4, NKM-1 and NOMO-1, but were
expressed at very low levels in HL-60. HOX B6 and HOX B9 mRNAs were also
expressed in fresh acute myelocytic leukemia blasts. HOX B6 mRNA expression in
HL-60, NB4, and NKM-1 cultured with ATRA increased on day 3 and decreased on day 
5. HOX B6 mRNA expression in NB4 and NKM-1 cultured with TPA decreased on day 3. 
HOX B9 mRNA expression displayed changes similar to those of HOX B6 mRNA in NB4
and NKM-1. These results indicate that myeloid leukemia cell lines express HOX B6
and HOX B9, and that their respective mRNA expressions in NB4 and HL-60 increase 
at a mid stage of myeloid differentiation by ATRA induction and then decrease
during a late stage. HOX B6 mRNA expression decreased in monocytoid
differentiation by TPA induction in NB4, HL-60 and NKM-1. HOX B6
antisense-oligonucleotide inhibited the proliferation of NB4 and NKM-1. These
results suggest that HOX B gene expression is related to simultaneous activation 
of cellular proliferation and differentiation in leukemic cells.

PMID: 9922051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mech Dev. 1998 Sep;77(1):49-57.

Analysis of Hoxa7/Hoxb7 mutants suggests periodicity in the generation of the
different sets of vertebrae.

Chen F(1), Greer J, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with targeted disruptions in Hoxa7 and Hoxb7, respectively.
Mice carrying the Hoxa7 mutation are healthy. No abnormalities in the formation
of the skeleton or other tissues were found in these mutants. Twelve percent of
Hoxb7-/- mutants show first and second rib defects similar to those observed in
mice homozygous for a Hoxb9 mutation (Chen, F., Capecchi, M.R., 1997. Dev. Biol. 
181, 186-196). Hoxb7-/- mice are also fertile and were used to generate double
mutants with Hoxa7 to reveal potential interactions between these two paralogous 
genes. Mice homozygous for both mutations have first and second rib defects with 
higher penetrance and increased expressivity, indicating a functional role for
Hoxa7 in the patterning of the upper thoracic region. Although Hoxb6, Hoxa7,
Hoxb7, and Hoxb9 have distinctive anterior expression limits in axial mesoderm,
the disruptions of these genes all yield first and second rib defects. A
hypothesis is suggested to explain the observation that axial defects in these
and other mouse Hox mutants appear to concentrate along the axial column at zones
of transition between vertebral types.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9784603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1788-98.

Selectivity, sharing and competitive interactions in the regulation of Hoxb
genes.

Sharpe J(1), Nonchev S, Gould A, Whiting J, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The clustered organisation of Hox complexes is highly conserved in vertebrates
and the reasons for this are believed to be linked with the regulatory mechanisms
governing their expression. In analysis of the Hoxb4-Hoxb6 region of the HoxB
complex we identified enhancers which lie in the intergenic region between Hoxb4 
and Hoxb5, and which are capable of mediating the correct boundaries of neural
and mesodermal expression for Hoxb5. We examined their regulatory properties in
the context of the local genomic region spanning the two genes by transgenic
analysis, in which each promoter was independently marked with a different
reporter, to monitor simultaneously the relative transcriptional read-outs from
each gene. Our analysis revealed that within this intergenic region: (i) a limb
and a neural enhancer selectively activate Hoxb4 as opposed to Hoxb5; (ii) a
separate neural enhancer is able to activate both genes, but expression is
dependent upon competition between the two promoters for the enhancer and is
influenced by the local genomic context; (iii) mesodermal enhancer activities can
be shared between the genes. We found similar types of regulatory interactions
between Hoxb5 and Hoxb6. Together these results provide evidence for three
separate general mechanisms: selectivity, competition and sharing, that control
the balance of cis-regulatory interactions necessary for generating the proper
spatial and temporal patterns of Hox gene expression. We suggest that these
mechanisms are part of a regulatory basis for maintenance of Hox organisation.

PMCID: PMC1170526
PMID: 9501100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 1997 Apr 15;89(8):2723-35.

Mammalian homeobox B6 expression can be correlated with erythropoietin production
sites and erythropoiesis during development, but not with hematopoietic or
nonhematopoietic stem cell populations.

Zimmermann F(1), Rich IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.

There has been increasing interest in the involvement of mammalian homeobox (HOX)
genes in hematopoietic regulation. The HOX genes are clustered in 4 chromosomes
in mice and humans. In general, 5' end HOX gene expression is predominant in
hematopoietic stem cell populations, whereas 3' end HOX gene expression are
primarily found in committed progenitor cells. Furthermore, HOX genes of the A
cluster are generally found in myelomonocytic cells, B cluster genes in
erythropoietic cells, and C cluster genes in lymphoid cells. The results
presented here concentrate on a single gene, namely HOX B6. Preliminary
observations using whole mount in situ hybridization showed that both HOX B6 and 
erythropoietin (EPO) gene expression occurred in exactly the same areas of the
8.5-day mouse embryo. As a consequence, we studied the expression of HOX B6 and
EPO gene expression from 6.5 to 19.5 days of gestation, in the neonate, and in
the adult. It was found that the sequential transfer of erythropoiesis in
different organs during development was followed by a similar transfer of HOX B6 
and EPO gene expression. Between days 16.5 and 17.5, both HOX B6 and EPO gene
expression decrease in the fetal liver, even though hepatic erythropoiesis
continues to decline and is transferred to the fetal spleen. Precisely at this
time point, HOX B6 and EPO gene expression are transferred to both the fetal
spleen and fetal kidney. However, surprisingly, expression of both genes
increases again in the fetal liver just before birth. HOX B6 is expressed in
cells from in vitro erythropoietic colonies (colony-forming unit-erythroid and
burst-forming unit-erythroid) and TER-119+ erythroid cells but not in
hematopoietic or nonhematopoietic stem cell populations. When the latter two
populations are allowed to differentiate into erythropoietic cells, HOX B6 and
erythroid-relevant markers are expressed. The results indicate that HOX B6 is
intimately involved in the regulation of the erythropoietic system and could be a
marker for this lineage.

PMID: 9108390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Mar 27;232(3):742-8.

Human colorectal carcinogenesis is associated with deregulation of homeobox gene 
expression.

Vider BZ(1), Zimber A, Hirsch D, Estlein D, Chastre E, Prevot S, Gespach C, Yaniv
A, Gazit A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Microbiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.

In the present study, the possible involvement of homeobox-containing genes in
colorectal cancer (CRC) development was investigated. Using a stepwise screening 
approach and RT-PCR, we have demonstrated that the human HOXB6, B8, C8 and C9 are
overexpressed at various stages of CRC. In contrast, all CRC cases exhibited a
marked decrease in the homeodomain-containing Cdx1 gene expression. Recent data
which suggest a regulatory link between HOXB8 and several tumor suppressor genes,
such as DCC, APC, and TGF beta, sustain a possible implication of homeobox genes 
in colon carcinogenesis. Moreover, our data showing a decrease in Cdx1 expression
are consistent with the notion that genes functioning in the establishment and
maintenance of the intestinal epithelium might, upon deregulation, disturb the
normal control of cellular proliferation, differentiation, and death, thus
leading to cancer development.

PMID: 9126347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Dev Dyn. 1996 Sep;207(1):47-59.

Retinoic acid alters the expression of pattern-related genes in the developing
rat lung.

Cardoso WV(1), Mitsialis SA, Brody JS, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118, USA.

Exogenous retinoids alter pattern formation and differentiation in many
developing systems, such as limb, vertebrae, and central nervous system. Many of 
these effects are mediated by changes in expression of patterning genes such as
Hox genes and Sonic hedgehog. We have previously shown that exogenous retinoic
acid, administered to the embryonic rat lung in culture alters the structural
pattern of the developing lung, suppressing formation of distal lung and favoring
growth of proximal tubules. To determine whether these retinoic acid-induced
changes in lung development were linked to alterations in pattern-related genes, 
we characterized the expression of Hoxa-2, Hoxb-6, and Sonic hedgehog mRNAs in
vivo and in vitro, with or without 10(-5)M retinoic acid, by in situ
hybridization and quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Each of these genes
demonstrated unique timing and distribution of expression that was similar in
vivo and in control cultured embryonic lungs. Hoxb-6 and Sonic hedgehog mRNAs
both decreased during lung development in vivo or in vitro. From the patterns of 
mRNA expression we propose that Hoxb-6 is involved in distal airway branching
while Hoxa-2 is involved in differentiation of proximal mesenchymal derivatives
and vasculogenesis in the lung. RA upregulated all three genes, changing their
developmental pattern of distribution and preventing the developmental decrease
in Sonic hedgehog expression. We propose that RA acts to maintain high levels of 
expression of these and likely other pattern-related genes in a fashion that is
characteristic of the immature lung, promoting continued formation of proximal
lung structures and preventing formation of typical distal lung structures of the
mature lung.

PMID: 8875075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Pharm Acta Helv. 1996 Jun;71(1):29-35.

The limb/LPM enhancer of the murine Hoxb6 gene: reporter gene analysis in
transgenic embryos and studies of DNA-protein interactions.

Becker D(1), Eid R, Schughart K.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Freiburg, Germany.

Homeobox genes are expressed in stage-, region-, and tissue-specific patterns
during embryonic development of the mouse. In order to study cis-acting
regulatory elements of murine homeobox genes, transgenic mouse embryos were
generated which contained the LacZ reporter gene under the control of different
fragments from the murine Hoxb6 gene. A 2 kb limb/LPM (lateral plate mesoderm)
enhancer region was identified which reproduced several aspects of the endogenous
Hoxb6 gene expression pattern in the mesenchyme of the developing limb buds and
the ventro-lateral body region. Both tissues represent derivatives of the lateral
plate mesoderm. In order to describe proteins interacting with specific DNA
sequences in the limb/LPM enhancer, electro mobility shift assays were performed 
using nuclear extracts prepared from embryonic tissues. Several specific
DNA-protein complexes could be detected, suggesting that these DNA-protein
interactions are important for the regulation of Hoxb6 gene expression.

PMID: 8786996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mamm Genome. 1996 Mar;7(3):174-9.

Chromosomal localization of homeobox genes and associated markers on porcine
chromosomes 3, 5, 12, 15, 16 and 18: comparative mapping study with human and
mouse.

Lahbib-Mansais Y(1), Yerle M, Pinton P, Gellin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Genetique Cellulaire, Centre INRA Toulouse, France.

Four homeobox genes that belong to the four homeobox gene clusters known in
mammals have been regionally assigned to four distinct porcine chromosomes in
conserved regions between human and pig. HOXA11, HOXB6, HOXC8, and HOXD4 genes
were mapped by radioactive in situ hybridization to porcine Chromosomes (Chrs)
18q21-24 (with a secondary signal in 16q14-21), 12p11-12, 5p11-12, and 15q22-23
respectively. Besides, we have also revealed the presence of a porcine homeobox
(pig Hbx24) which, although showing DNA sequence homology with a mouse gene of
HOXB cluster, was located on porcine Chr 3 (3p14-13) outside the Hox clusters. To
support the identity of the homeobox gene clusters analyzed and in the light of
the high sequence similarity among homeobox genes, we also localized markers
known to be mapped near each Hox cluster in human. In this way, four genes were
also mapped in pig: GAPD (5q12-21), GAD1 (15q21-22), INHBA (18q24), and IGFBP3
(18q24). Mapping of HOXA11, INHBA, and IGFBP3 on pig Chr 18 constitutes the first
assignments of genes on this small chromosome. These new localizations extend the
information on the conservation of four human chromosomal regions in the pig
genome.

PMID: 8833235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Biol Rep. 1996;23(1):59-70.

Transcription factor regulation of epidermal keratinocyte gene expression.

Eckert RL(1), Welter JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA.

The epidermis is a tissue that undergoes a very complex and tightly controlled
differentiation program. The elaboration of this program is generally flawless,
resulting in the production of an effective protective barrier for the organism. 
Many of the genes expressed during keratinocyte differentiation are expressed in 
a coordinate manner; this suggests that common regulatory models may emerge. The 
simplest model envisions a 'common regulatory element' that is possessed by all
genes that are regulated together (e.g., involucrin and transglutaminase type 1).
Studies to date, however, have not identified any such elements and, if anything,
the available studies suggest that appropriate expression of each gene is
achieved using sometime subtly and sometime grossly different mechanisms. Recent 
studies indicate that a variety of transcription factors (AP1, AP2, POU domain.
Sp1, STAT factors) are expressed in the epidermis and, in many cases, multiple
members of several families are present (e.g., AP1 and POU domain factors). The
simultaneous expression of multiple members of a single transcription factor
family provides numerous opportunities for complex regulation. Some studies
suggest that specific members of these families interact with specific
keratinocyte genes. The best studied of these families in epidermis is the AP1
family of factors. All of the known AP1 factors are expressed in epidermis [52]
and each is expressed in a specific spatial pattern that suggests the potential
to regulate multiple genes. It will be important to determine the role of each of
these members in regulating keratinocyte gene expression. Finally, information is
beginning to emerge regarding signal transduction in keratinocytes. Some of the
early events in signal transduction have been identified (e.g., PLC and PKC
activation, etc.) and some of the molecular targets of these pathways (e.g., AP1 
transcription factors) are beginning to be identified. Eventually we can expect
to elucidation of all of the steps between the interaction of the stimulating
agent with its receptor and the activation of target gene expression.

PMID: 8983019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Dev Dyn. 1996 Jan;205(1):73-81.

Conserved regulatory element involved in the early onset of Hoxb6 gene
expression.

Becker D(1), Jiang Z, Knödler P, Deinard AS, Eid R, Kidd KK, Shashikant CS,
Ruddle FH, Schughart K.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Freiburg, Germany.

We have identified a 338 bp DNA fragment, the lateral plate mesoderm (LPM)
enhancer, that is highly conserved between mouse and human. The LPM enhancer
directs gene expression into the posterior lateral plate mesoderm and hindgut
endoderm at early stages of development. By reporter gene analysis in transgenic 
mice, we demonstrate that both mouse and human DNA sequences possess similar
enhancer activity. The expression patterns of the transgene and Hoxb6 during
early stages of mouse development are identical, suggesting that the LPM enhancer
is involved in the initial activation of Hoxb6 gene expression in posterior
regions of mammalian embryos.

PMID: 8770553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Genes Dev. 1995 Mar 15;9(6):663-74.

Pbx proteins display hexapeptide-dependent cooperative DNA binding with a subset 
of Hox proteins.

Chang CP(1), Shen WF, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, California 94305,
USA.

The human proto-oncogene PBX1 codes for a homolog of Drosophila extradenticle, a 
divergent homeo domain protein that modulates the developmental and DNA-binding
specificity of select HOM proteins. We demonstrate that wild-type Pbx proteins
and chimeric E2a-Pbx1 oncoproteins cooperatively bind a consensus DNA probe with 
HoxB4, B6, and B7 of the Antennapedia class of Hox/HOM proteins. Specificity of
Hox-Pbx interactions was suggested by the inability of Pbx proteins to
cooperatively bind the synthetic DNA target with HoxA10 or Drosophila
even-skipped. Site-directed mutagenesis showed that the hexapeptide motif
(IYPWMK) upstream of the Hox homeo domain was essential for HoxB6 and B7 to
cooperatively bind DNA with Pbx proteins. Engraftment of the HoxB7 hexapeptide
onto HoxA10 endowed it with robust cooperative properties, demonstrating a
functional role for the highly conserved hexapeptide element as one of the
molecular determinants delimiting Hox-Pbx cooperativity. The Pbx homeo domain was
necessary but not sufficient for cooperativity, which required conserved amino
acids carboxy-terminal of the homeo domain. These findings demonstrate that
interactions between Hox and Pbx proteins modulate their DNA-binding properties, 
suggesting that Pbx and Hox proteins act in parallel as heterotypic complexes to 
regulate expression of specific subordinate genes.

PMID: 7729685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genomics. 1994 Feb;19(3):589-91.

Localization of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) to a gene
cluster on chromosome 17q.

Lewis TB(1), Saenz M, O'Connell P, Leach RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio 78284.

Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) has been regionally localized 
to a gene cluster on human chromosome 17q. Genetic mapping through CEPH reference
families demonstrated that GIP was tightly linked to NME1 and PPY and fully
linked to HOXB6 and NGFR. High-resolution radiation hybrid mapping resolved the
gene order as cen-PPY-HOXB6-NGFR-GIP-NME1-tel. GIP maps distal to NGFR with an
estimated distance of 250 kb.

PMID: 8188305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochem Pharmacol. 1994 Jan 13;47(1):137-43.

Homeobox genes: potential candidates for the transcriptional control of the
transformed and invasive phenotype.

Castronovo V(1), Kusaka M, Chariot A, Gielen J, Sobel M.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

The transformation of a cell and the acquisition of the invasive and metastatic
phenotype result from the activation of a group of complex cellular processes
rather than from the effect of a single gene product. It is likely that the
coordination of the multiple genes involved in malignancy is under the control of
a few genes that act as master genes or orchestrator genes. The latter probably
code for transcription factors that control the genetic program for tumor
invasion and metastasis. Homeobox genes are a family of transcription factors
that contain a 183 bp highly conserved nucleotide sequence coding for a 61 amino 
acid domain that binds specifically to DNA. First discovered in Drosophila as
genes controlling segmentation and segment identity, homeobox genes have since
been identified in many other species including nematodes, frog, mouse and human.
There is strong support for the suggestion that homeobox genes play a key role in
development and differentiation. In humans, there are 38 homeobox genes organized
in four clusters that are localized on chromosomes 2, 7, 12 and 17. The specific 
functions of each of these genes are generally unknown. Alterations in expression
of several homeobox genes have been reported in a variety of malignant lesions,
suggesting that they could play a role in the development of cancer. Using
reverse transcriptase reaction coupled with polymerase chain reaction and
degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the 5' and 3' ends of the highly
conserved homeodomain, we amplified 130 bp cDNA fragments from the human breast
cancer cell line MCF7 that were subsequently cloned into pBluescript vector.
Sequencing of the clones, resulted in the identification of the homeodomains of
four different human homeobox genes: HOXB6, HOXA1, HOXA10 and HOXC6. Further
studies should determine the specific role of these four homeobox genes in the
development and progression of human breast cancer and potentially determine if
they might be good targets for gene therapy.

PMID: 7906121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mech Dev. 1993 Aug;42(3):139-50.

Functional analysis of the mouse homeobox gene HoxB9 in Drosophila development.

Malicki J(1), Bogarad LD, Martin MM, Ruddle FH, McGinnis W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511.

Mammalian genomes contain clusters of homeobox genes (Hox-C, HOX-C) which are
structurally similar to the homeotic genes of the Drosophila HOM complex. One
method for assessing the functional similarity of particular Drosophila HOM and
mammalian Hox genes is to test the ability of Hox genes to induce homeotic
phenotypes when expressed in developing Drosophila. Here we describe such
functional tests using mouse HoxB9 (formerly Hox-2.5), whose closest structural
relative in Drosophila is Abdominal-B. When expressed from a heat shock promoter,
HoxB9 induces transformations of head towards more posterior identities in
Drosophila larvae and adults. These transformations share some similarities with 
the phenotypic effects produced by ectopically expressed Abdominal-B, but are
also similar to the transformations induced by Antennapedia and mouse HoxB6
(Hox-2.2), suggesting that HoxB9 specifies a positional identity that is
intermediate between Antennapedia and Abdominal-B.

PMID: 8105876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


