
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):742-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.071. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

The role of HOXB2 and HOXB3 in acute myeloid leukemia.

Lindblad O(1), Chougule RA(2), Moharram SA(2), Kabir NN(3), Sun J(2), Kazi JU(4),
Rönnstrand L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Department of Hematology and Vascular
Disorders, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (2)Division of Translational 
Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden; Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (3)Laboratory of Computational Biochemistry, KN
Biomedical Research Institute, Barisal, Bangladesh. (4)Division of Translational 
Cancer Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden; Lund Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden; Laboratory of Computational Biochemistry, KN Biomedical
Research Institute, Barisal, Bangladesh. (5)Division of Translational Cancer
Research, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; Lund 
Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden. Electronic address: lars.ronnstrand@med.lu.se.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous aggressive disease and the most
common form of adult leukemia. Mutations in the type III receptor tyrosine kinase
FLT3 are found in more than 30% of AML patients. Drugs against FLT3 have been
developed for the treatment of AML, but they lack specificity, show poor response
and lead to the development of a resistant phenotype upon treatment. Therefore, a
deeper understanding of FLT3 signaling will facilitate identification of
additional pharmacological targets in FLT3-driven AML. In this report, we
identify HOXB2 and HOXB3 as novel regulators of oncogenic FLT3-ITD-driven AML. We
show that HOXB2 and HOXB3 expression is upregulated in a group of AML patients
carrying FLT3-ITD. Overexpression of HOXB2 or HOXB3 in mouse pro-B cells resulted
in decreased FLT3-ITD-dependent cell proliferation as well as colony formation
and increased apoptosis. Expression of HOXB2 or HOXB3 resulted in a significant
decrease in FLT3-ITD-induced AKT, ERK, p38 and STAT5 phosphorylation. Our data
suggest that HOXB2 and HOXB3 act as tumor suppressors in FLT3-ITD driven AML.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482852  [PubMed - in process]


2. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Sep;17(9):989-93.

[Effects of safflower injection on HEL leukemia cell proliferation and apoptosis 
and relevant molecular mechanisms].

[Article in Chinese]

Duan PF(1), Jia XH, Wang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University,
Binzhou, Shandong 256603, China. jiaxiuhong001@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of safflower injection on the proliferation and
apoptosis of human leukemia cell line HEL and the relevant molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: HEL cells were treated with different concentrations of safflower
injection. HEL cells without safflower injection treatment were used as the
control group. MTT method was used to detect the inhibitory rate of the HEL cells
at 24, 48 and 72 hours after various concentrations of safflower injection
treatment (10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 mg/mL). The cell cycle and apoptosis were
detected using flow cytometry and the HOXB3-mRNA expression was measured by
RT-PCR at 48 hours after safflower injection treatment (10, 20 and 30 mg/mL).
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, various concentrations of safflower
injection inhibited HEL cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner (P<0.05).
At 48 hours after various concentrations of safflower injection treatment, the
number of treated cells in the G2/M phase increased, but that in the S phase
decreased, and the apoptosis rate was significantly higher than that in the
control group, with a dose-dependent manner (P<0.05). The expression of
HOXB3-mRNA in safflower injection-treated cells decreased in a dose-dependent
manner compared with the control group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Safflower injection can inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis
of HEL cells in vitro, and its underlying mechanisms may involve down-regulation 
of the HOXB3-mRNA expression.

PMID: 26412185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Nov 15;24(22):6485-91. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv357. Epub 2015 Sep
10.

CDC174, a novel component of the exon junction complex whose mutation underlies a
syndrome of hypotonia and psychomotor developmental delay.

Volodarsky M(1), Lichtig H(2), Leibson T(3), Sadaka Y(4), Kadir R(1), Perez Y(1),
Liani-Leibson K(1), Gradstein L(5), Shaco-Levy R(6), Shorer Z(7), Frank D(2),
Birk OS(8).

Author information: 
(1)The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for
Biotechnology in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University,
Beer Sheva 84105, Israel. (2)Department of Biochemistry, The Rappaport Family
Institute for Research in the Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion,
Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel. (3)Department of Pediatrics,
Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84101,
Israel. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion
University, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel, Pediatric Neurology Unit, Soroka University
Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel. (5)Department of
Ophthalmology, Soroka University Medical Center and Clalit Health Services, Ben
Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel and. (6)Department of Pathology,
Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84101,
Israel. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Soroka University Medical Center, Ben Gurion
University, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel, Pediatric Neurology Unit, Soroka University
Medical Center, Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel, Zlotowski Center
of Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva 94105, Israel.
(8)The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for
Biotechnology in the Negev and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University,
Beer Sheva 84105, Israel, Genetics Institute, Soroka University Medical Center,
Ben Gurion University, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel, obirk@bgu.ac.il.

Siblings of non-consanguineous Jewish-Ethiopian ancestry presented with
congenital axial hypotonia, weakness of the abducens nerve, psychomotor
developmental delay with brain ventriculomegaly, variable thinning of corpus
callosum and cardiac septal defects. Homozygosity mapping identified a single
disease-associated locus of 3.5 Mb on chromosome 3. Studies of a Bedouin
consanguineous kindred affected with a similar recessive phenotype identified a
single disease-associated 18 Mb homozygosity locus encompassing the entire 3.5 Mb
locus. Whole exome sequencing demonstrated only two homozygous mutations within a
shared identical haplotype of 0.6 Mb, common to both Bedouin and Ethiopian
affected individuals, suggesting an ancient common founder. Only one of the
mutations segregated as expected in both kindreds and was not found in Bedouin
and Jewish-Ethiopian controls: c.1404A>G, p.[*468Trpext*6] in CCDC174. We showed 
that CCDC174 is ubiquitous, restricted to the cell nucleus and co-localized with 
EIF4A3. In fact, yeast-two-hybrid assay demonstrated interaction of CCDC174 with 
EIF4A3, a component of exon junction complex. Knockdown of the CCDC174 ortholog
in Xenopus laevis embryos resulted in poor neural fold closure at the neurula
stage with later embryonic lethality. Knockdown embryos exhibited a sharp
reduction in expression of n-tubulin, a marker for differentiating primary
neurons, and of hindbrain markers krox20 and hoxb3. The Xenopus phenotype could
be rescued by the human normal, yet not the mutant CCDC174 transcripts. Moreover,
overexpression of mutant but not normal CCDC174 in neuroblastoma cells caused
rapid apoptosis. In line with the hypotonia phenotype, the CCDC174 mutation
caused depletion of RYR1 and marked myopathic changes in skeletal muscle of
affected individuals.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26358778  [PubMed - in process]


4. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jun 15;8(6):9121-7. eCollection 2015.

Expression of miRNA-1233 in placenta from patients with hypertensive disorder
complicating pregnancy and its role in disease pathogenesis.

Zhong W(1), Peng H(2), Tian A(3), Wei Y(4), Li H(4), Tian J(4), Zhao X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated
to Shandong University Jinan 250021, Shandong, China ; Department of Obstetrics &
Gynecology, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University Jinan
250013, Shandong, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Jinan Central Hospital
Affiliated to Shandong University Jinan 250013, Shandong, China. (3)Department of
Obstetrics & Gynecology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University (Qingdao) Qingdao
266000, Shandong, China. (4)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Jinan Central 
Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University Jinan 250013, Shandong, China.
(5)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated
to Shandong University Jinan 250021, Shandong, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study is to investigate the expression of miRNA-1233 in placental
tissue from patients with hypertensive disorder complicating pregnancy (HDCP) and
its role in disease pathogenesis.
METHODS: The expression levels of miRNA-1233 and HoxB3 in placental tissue from
HDCP patients and normal control subjects, as well as in the in vitro trophoblast
cells, were detected with real-time PCR and Western blot analysis. The
proliferation and invasion abilities of trophoblast cells were assessed by the
cell counting kit (CCK)-8 and transwell chamber assays, respectively.
Dual-luciferase reporter assay was performed to evaluate the interaction between 
miRNA-1233 and Hoxb3.
RESULTS: Real-time PCR showed that, compared with the control group, the
expression levels of miRNA-1233 were significantly elevated in placental tissue
from HDCP patients. On the other hand, both the mRNA and protein expression
levels of HoxB3 were significantly decreased in the HDCP group. Moreover, the
mRNA and protein expression levels of HoxB3 were significantly declined by the
transfection of miRNA-1233 mimics in trophoblast cells. Bioinformatics analysis
and the dual-luciferase reporter gene assay showed that, miRNA-1233 targeted
HoxB3 in the 3'-UTR and suppressed the gene expression. In addition, the results 
from the CCK-8 and transwell chamber assays showed that, the transfection of
miRNA-1233 significantly decreased the proliferation and invasion abilities of
the trophoblast cells.
CONCLUSION: In placental tissue from HDCP patients, up-regulated miR-1233 could
suppress the expression of HoxB3, and then inhibit the invasion of trophoblast
cells, which might contribute to the disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4538019
PMID: 26309567  [PubMed]


5. Epigenetics. 2015;10(6):526-35. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1048060.

Identification of differentially methylated markers among cytogenetic risk groups
of acute myeloid leukemia.

Qu X(1), Davison J, Du L, Storer B, Stirewalt DL, Heimfeld S, Estey E, Appelbaum 
FR, Fang M.

Author information: 
(1)a Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center ; Seattle , WA , USA.

Aberrant DNA methylation is known to occur in cancer, including hematological
malignancies such as acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, less is known about
whether specific methylation profiles characterize specific subcategories of AML.
We examined this issue by using comprehensive high-throughput array-based
relative methylation analysis (CHARM) to compare methylation profiles among
patients in different AML cytogenetic risk groups. We found distinct profiles in 
each group, with the high-risk group showing overall increased methylation
compared with low- and mid-risk groups. The differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) distinguishing cytogenetic risk groups of AML were enriched in the CpG
island shores. Specific risk-group associated DMRs were located near genes
previously known to play a role in AML or other malignancies, such as MN1, UHRF1,
HOXB3, and HOXB4, as well as TRIM71, the function of which in cancer is not well 
characterized. These findings were verified by quantitative bisulfite
pyrosequencing and by comparison with results available at the TCGA cancer genome
browser. To explore the potential biological significance of the observed
methylation changes, we correlated our findings with gene expression data
available through the TCGA database. The results showed that decreased
methylation at HOXB3 and HOXB4 was associated with increased gene expression of
both HOXB genes specific to the mid-risk AML, while increased DNA methylation at 
DCC distinctive to the high-risk AML was associated with increased gene
expression. Our results suggest that the differential impact of cytogenetic
changes on AML prognosis may, in part, be mediated by changes in methylation.

PMCID: PMC4623036 [Available on 2016-05-21]
PMID: 25996682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 1;24(9):2700-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv028. Epub 2015 Jan
26.

Genetic variants associated with motion sickness point to roles for inner ear
development, neurological processes and glucose homeostasis.

Hromatka BS(1), Tung JY(2), Kiefer AK(2), Do CB(2), Hinds DA(2), Eriksson N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Product Science, 23andMe, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA bhromatka@23andme.com. 
(2)Product Science, 23andMe, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA.

Roughly one in three individuals is highly susceptible to motion sickness and yet
the underlying causes of this condition are not well understood. Despite high
heritability, no associated genetic factors have been discovered. Here, we
conducted the first genome-wide association study on motion sickness in 80 494
individuals from the 23andMe database who were surveyed about car sickness.
Thirty-five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were associated with motion
sickness at a genome-wide-significant level (P < 5 × 10(-8)). Many of these SNPs 
are near genes involved in balance, and eye, ear and cranial development (e.g.
PVRL3, TSHZ1, MUTED, HOXB3, HOXD3). Other SNPs may affect motion sickness through
nearby genes with roles in the nervous system, glucose homeostasis or hypoxia. We
show that several of these SNPs display sex-specific effects, with up to three
times stronger effects in women. We searched for comorbid phenotypes with motion 
sickness, confirming associations with known comorbidities including migraines,
postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), vertigo and morning sickness and
observing new associations with altitude sickness and many gastrointestinal
conditions. We also show that two of these related phenotypes (PONV and
migraines) share underlying genetic factors with motion sickness. These results
point to the importance of the nervous system in motion sickness and suggest a
role for glucose levels in motion-induced nausea and vomiting, a finding that may
provide insight into other nausea-related phenotypes like PONV. They also
highlight personal characteristics (e.g. being a poor sleeper) that correlate
with motion sickness, findings that could help identify risk factors or
treatments.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4383869
PMID: 25628336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Brain Struct Funct. 2016 Apr;221(3):1223-43. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0965-8. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Systematic expression analysis of Hox genes at adulthood reveals novel patterns
in the central nervous system.

Hutlet B(1), Theys N(1), Coste C(1,)(2), Ahn MT(1), Doshishti-Agolli K(1), Lizen 
B(1), Gofflot F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology,
GIGA-Neurosciences Research Center, University of Liège, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. francoise.gofflot@uclouvain.be.

Hox proteins are key regulators of animal development, providing positional
identity and patterning information to cells along the rostrocaudal axis of the
embryo. Although their embryonic expression and function are well characterized, 
their presence and biological importance in adulthood remains poorly
investigated. We provide here the first detailed quantitative and neuroanatomical
characterization of the expression of the 39 Hox genes in the adult mouse brain. 
Using RT-qPCR we determined the expression of 24 Hox genes mainly in the
brainstem of the adult brain, with low expression of a few genes in the
cerebellum and the forebrain. Using in situ hybridization (ISH) we have
demonstrated that expression of Hox genes is maintained in territories derived
from the early segmental Hox expression domains in the hindbrain. Indeed, we show
that expression of genes belonging to paralogy groups PG2-8 is maintained in the 
hindbrain derivatives at adulthood. The spatial colinearity, which characterizes 
the early embryonic expression of Hox genes, is still observed in sequential
antero-posterior boundaries of expression. Moreover, the main mossy and climbing 
fibres precerebellar nuclei express PG2-8 Hox genes according to their migration 
origins. Second, ISH confirms the presence of Hox gene transcripts in territories
where they are not detected during development, suggesting neo-expression in
these territories in adulthood. Within the forebrain, we have mapped Hoxb1,
Hoxb3, Hoxb4, Hoxd3 and Hoxa5 expression in restricted areas of the sensory
cerebral cortices as well as in specific thalamic relay nuclei. Our data thus
suggest a requirement of Hox genes beyond their role of patterning genes,
providing a new dimension to their functional relevance in the central nervous
system.

PMID: 25527350  [PubMed - in process]


8. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;27(3-4):317-22. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0289.

The absence of mutations in homeobox candidate genes HOXA3, HOXB3, HOXD3 and
PITX2 in familial and sporadic thyroid hemiagenesis.

Kizys MM, Nesi-França S, Cardoso MG, Harada MY, Melo MC, Chiamolera MI,
Dias-da-Silva MR, Maciel RM.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms leading to the formation of the two thyroid 
symmetrical lobes, which are impaired in thyroid hemiagenesis (TH), are little
known.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this work was to search for mutations in thyroid
developmental candidate genes HOXA3, HOXB3, HOXD3 and PITX2.
METHODS: Total DNA from peripheral blood was extracted and then the entire coding
region of all these genes was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: Herein we describe familial cases of TH in two generations (proband and 
his father), in addition to other two sporadic cases. We have found polymorphisms
in the HOXB3 (rs2229304), HOXD3 (rs34729309, rs1051929, c.543-199G>T and
c.543-34G>A; and a new synonymous variant, NP_008829.3:p.314;C>G) and PITX2
(c.45+76C>T) genes, but no deleterious mutations.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest the existence of other left-right thyroid
asymmetry candidate genes in humans such as classical Mendelian mutation-causing 
disease, as well as other etiopathogenic mechanisms such as epigenetic
modifications, especially for sporadic hemiagenesis.

PMID: 24127533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cancer Lett. 2013 Apr 28;330(2):217-24. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.11.051. Epub
2012 Dec 5.

HoxB3 promotes prostate cancer cell progression by transactivating CDCA3.

Chen J(1), Zhu S, Jiang N, Shang Z, Quan C, Niu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Secondary Hospital of Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin Institute of Urology, He Xi District, Tianjin, China.

Homeobox (Hox) genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors critical
to development, differentiation, and homeostasis. Their dysregulation has been
implicated in various cancers. In the present study, we show that HoxB3 mRNA and 
protein are overexpressed in primary prostate cancer tissues compared to the
adjacent normal prostate tissues. Moreover, HoxB3 overexpression is associated
with higher Gleason grade (<U+2A7E>7) (P=0.002), clinical stage (P<0.001) and PSA level 
(<U+2A7E>10) (P=0.013). The Kaplan and Meier analysis showed that HoxB3 overexpression
predicts poor survival outcome. Overexpression of HoxB3 promotes LNCaP cells
proliferation and migration in vitro. Furthermore, depletion of HoxB3 in PC-3
cells decreased the capacity of proliferation in a cell division cycle associated
3 (CDCA3)-dependent manner both in vitro and in vivo. The ChIP analysis indicates
that HoxB3 can bind to the CDCA3 promoter region and transactivate the CDCA3
expression. These data suggested that HoxB3 promote prostate cancer progression
by upregulating CDCA3 expression and may serve as a potential therapeutic target 
for human prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23219899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 20;424(1):28-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.028. Epub 2012 Jun 14.

miR-7 and miR-218 epigenetically control tumor suppressor genes RASSF1A and
Claudin-6 by targeting HoxB3 in breast cancer.

Li Q(1), Zhu F, Chen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Second Xiangya Hospital of Central
South University, 139 Middle Renmin Road, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
swallow0108@yahoo.cn

Many microRNAs have been implicated as key regulators of cellular growth and
differentiation and have been found to dysregulate proliferation in human tumors,
including breast cancer. Cancer-linked microRNAs also alter the epigenetic
landscape by way of DNA methylation and post-translational modifications of
histones. Aberrations in Hox gene expression are important for oncogene or tumor 
suppressor during abnormal development and malignancy. Although recent studies
suggest that HoxB3 is critical in breast cancer, the putative role(s) of
microRNAs impinging on HoxB3 is not yet fully understood. In this study, we found
that the expression levels of miR-7 and miR-218 were strongly and reversely
associated with HoxB3 expression. Stable overexpression of miR-7 and miR-218 was 
accompanied by reactivation of tumor suppressor genes including RASSF1A and
Claudin-6 by means of epigenetic switches in DNA methylation and histone
modification, giving rise to inhibition of the cell cycle and clone formation of 
breast cancer cells. The current study provides a novel link between
overexpression of collinear Hox genes and multiple microRNAs in human breast
malignancy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22705304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):886-896.e9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.12.047. 
Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Strand-specific miR-28-5p and miR-28-3p have distinct effects in colorectal
cancer cells.

Almeida MI(1), Nicoloso MS, Zeng L, Ivan C, Spizzo R, Gafà R, Xiao L, Zhang X,
Vannini I, Fanini F, Fabbri M, Lanza G, Reis RM, Zweidler-McKay PA, Calin GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can promote or inhibit tumor growth and are
therefore being developed as targets for cancer therapies. They are diverse not
only in the messenger RNAs (mRNA) they target, but in their production; the same 
hairpin RNA structure can generate mature products from each strand, termed 5p
and 3p, that can bind different mRNAs. We analyzed the expression, functions, and
mechanisms of miR-28-5p and miR-28-3p in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells.
METHODS: We measured levels of miR-28-5p and miR-28-3p expression in 108 CRC and 
49 normal colorectal samples (47 paired) by reverse transcription, quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction. The roles of miR-28 in CRC development were 
studied using cultured HCT116, RKO, and SW480 cells and tumor xenograft analyses 
in immunodeficient mice; their mRNA targets were also investigated.
RESULTS: miR-28-5p and miR-28-3p were down-regulated in CRC samples compared with
normal colon samples. Overexpression of miRNAs in CRC cells had different effects
and the miRNAs interacted with different mRNAs: miR-28-5p altered expression of
CCND1 and HOXB3, whereas miR-28-3p bound NM23-H1. Overexpression of miR-28-5p
reduced CRC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro, whereas
miR-28-3p increased CRC cell migration and invasion in vitro. CRC cells
overexpressing miR-28 developed tumors more slowly in mice compared with control 
cells, but miR-28 promoted tumor metastasis in mice.
CONCLUSION: miR-28-5p and miR-28-3p are transcribed from the same RNA hairpin and
are down-regulated in CRC cells. Overexpression of each has different effects on 
CRC cell proliferation and migration. Such information has a direct application
for the design of miRNA gene therapy trials.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3321100
PMID: 22240480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Crit Rev Oncog. 2011;16(1-2):65-76.

The role of Hox proteins in leukemogenesis: insights into key regulatory events
in hematopoiesis.

Eklund E(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Feinberg School at Northwestern University and Jesse Brown VA Medical
Center, 303 E. Superior St., Lurie 5-105, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
e-eklund@northwestern.edu

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease with highly variable
prognoses. Identification of recurring chromosomal translocations provides some
prognostic information for individual AML subjects. Population based
gene-expression profiling studies also identified abnormalities relevant to
prognosis. Such studies associate increased expression of a set of homeodomain
transcription factors with poor prognosis in AML. This set includes HoxB3, B4,
A7-11 and Meis1, which are dysregulated as a group in the bone marrow in poor
prognosis AML. Aberrant expression of these homeodomain transcription factors is 
found in AML with chromosomal translocations involving the MLL, MYST3 and CREBBP 
genes, and in a poor prognosis subset with normal cytogenetics. Studies in murine
models suggest that Hox protein overexpression is functionally significant for
myeloid malignancies. Overexpression of individual Hox proteins expanded various 
bone marrow populations in vitro, leading to myeloproliferation and in some cases
differentiation block and AML in vivo. Therefore, dysregulated expression of key 
Hox target genes may contribute to adverse prognosis in AML. Identification of
these genes will provide insights into the pathobiology of prognosis in AML.
Studies are beginning to identify Hox target genes which may be rational targets 
for therapeutic approaches to this poor prognosis leukemia subset.

PMCID: PMC3243967
PMID: 22150308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Leuk Res. 2011 Dec;35(12):1585-90. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.08.006. Epub 2011 
Sep 6.

High expression of IGFBP2 is associated with chemoresistance in adult acute
myeloid leukemia.

Kühnl A(1), Kaiser M, Neumann M, Fransecky L, Heesch S, Radmacher M, Marcucci G, 
Bloomfield CD, Hofmann WK, Thiel E, Baldus CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité University Hospital, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany. andrea.kuehnl@charite.de

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling plays an important role in many tumors
and overexpression of IGF Binding Protein (IGFBP) 2 has been associated with
adverse outcome in childhood leukemia. Here, we evaluated IGFBP2 mRNA expression 
and its prognostic implications in 99 adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients
by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. High IGFBP2 was associated with a high
incidence of primary resistant disease (IGFBP2 high 65%, IGFBP2 low 32%; P=0.02) 
and was independently predictive for therapy resistance [OR 3.6 (95% CI 1.2-11); 
P=0.02] in multivariate analyses. Gene-expression profiling revealed an
up-regulation of genes implicated in leukemogenesis (MYB, MEIS1, HOXB3, HOXA9)
and genes associated with adverse outcome (ERG, WT1) in patients with high IGFBP2
expression. Thus, our data suggest a role of IGFBP2 and IGF signaling in
chemoresistance of AML. Patients with high IGFBP2 expression might benefit from
molecular therapies targeting the IGF pathway.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4023812
PMID: 21899885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cancer Genet. 2011 May;204(5):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.02.003.

Expression of HOXB genes is significantly different in acute myeloid leukemia
with a partial tandem duplication of MLL vs. a MLL translocation: a
cross-laboratory study.

Liu HC(1), Shih LY, May Chen MJ, Wang CC, Yeh TC, Lin TH, Chen CY, Lin CJ, Liang 
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene may be
rearranged to generate a partial tandem duplication (PTD), or fused to partner
genes through a chromosomal translocation (tMLL). In this study, we first
explored the differentially expressed genes between MLL-PTD and tMLL using gene
expression profiling of our cohort (15 MLL-PTD and 10 tMLL) and one published
data set. The top 250 probes were chosen from each set, resulting in 29 common
probes (21 unique genes) to both sets. The selected genes include four HOXB
genes, HOXB2, B3, B5, and B6. The expression values of these HOXB genes
significantly differ between MLL-PTD and tMLL cases. Clustering and
classification analyses were thoroughly conducted to support our gene selection
results. Second, as MLL-PTD, FLT3-ITD, and NPM1 mutations are identified in AML
with normal karyotypes, we briefly studied their impact on the HOXB genes.
Another contribution of this study is to demonstrate that using public data from 
other studies enriches samples for analysis and yields more conclusive results.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21665178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. RNA. 2011 Jun;17(6):1048-56. doi: 10.1261/rna.2607011. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

Identification of mRNAs that are spliced but not exported to the cytoplasm in the
absence of THOC5 in mouse embryo fibroblasts.

Guria A(1), Tran DD, Ramachandran S, Koch A, El Bounkari O, Dutta P, Hauser H,
Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, OE4310, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, D-30623
Hannover, Germany.

The TREX (transcription/export) complex has been conserved throughout evolution
from yeast to man and is required for coupled transcription elongation and
nuclear export of mRNAs. The TREX complex in mammals and Drosophila is composed
of the THO subcomplex (THOC1, THOC2, THOC5, THOC6, and THOC7), THOC3, UAP56, and 
Aly/THOC4. In human and Drosophila, various studies have shown that THO is
required for the export of heat shock mRNAs, but nothing is known about other
mRNAs. Our previous study using conditional THOC5 (or FMIP) knockout mice
revealed that the presence of THOC5 is critical in hematopoietic cells but not
for terminally differentiated cells. In this study, we describe the establishment
of a mouse embryo fibroblast cell line (MEF), THOC5 flox/flox. Four days after
infection of MEF THOC5 flox/flox with adenovirus carrying Cre-recombinase gene
(Ad-GFP-Cre), THOC5 is down-regulated >95% at the protein level, and cell growth 
is strongly suppressed. Transcriptome analysis using cytoplasmic RNA isolated
from cells lacking functional THOC5 reveals that only 2.9% of all genes were
down-regulated more than twofold. Although we examined these genes in
fibroblasts, one-fifth of all down-regulated genes (including HoxB3 and polycomb 
CBX2) are known to play a key role in hematopoietic development. We further
identified 10 genes that are spliced but not exported to the cytoplasm in the
absence of THOC5. These mRNAs were copurified with THOC5. Furthermore, Hsp70 mRNA
was exported in the absence of THOC5 at 37°C, but not under heat shock condition 
(42°C), suggesting that THOC5 may be required for mRNA export under stress and/or
upon signaling-induced conditions.

PMCID: PMC3096037
PMID: 21525145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Biol. 2011 Apr 15;352(2):382-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.003. Epub 2011 
Feb 12.

Hoxb3 negatively regulates Hoxb1 expression in mouse hindbrain patterning.

Wong EY(1), Wang XA, Mak SS, Sae-Pang JJ, Ling KW, Fritzsch B, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The spatial regulation of combinatorial expression of Hox genes is critical for
determining hindbrain rhombomere (r) identities. To address the cross-regulatory 
relationship between Hox genes in hindbrain neuronal specification, we have
generated a gain-of-function transgenic mouse mutant Hoxb3(Tg) using the Hoxb2
r4-specific enhancer element. Interestingly, in r4 of the Hoxb3(Tg) mutant where 
Hoxb3 was ectopically expressed, the expression of Hoxb1 was specifically
abolished. The hindbrain neuronal defects of the Hoxb3(Tg) mutant mice were
similar to those of Hoxb1(-/-) mutants. Therefore, we hypothesized that Hoxb3
could directly suppress Hoxb1 expression. We first identified a novel Hoxb3
binding site S3 on the Hoxb1 locus and confirmed protein binding to this site by 
EMSA, and by in vivo ChIP analysis using P19 cells and hindbrain tissues from the
Hoxb3(Tg) mutant. We further showed that Hoxb3 could suppress Hoxb1
transcriptional activity by chick in ovo luciferase reporter assay. Moreover, in 
E10.5 wildtype caudal hindbrain, where Hoxb1 is not expressed, we showed by in
vivo ChIP that Hoxb3 was consistently bound to the S3 site on the Hoxb1 gene.
This study reveals a novel negative regulatory mechanism by which Hoxb3 as a
posterior gene serves to restrict Hoxb1 expression in r4 by direct
transcriptional repression to maintain the rhombomere identity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21320481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Blood. 2010 Nov 4;116(18):3622-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-283648. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

FLT3 internal tandem duplication associates with adverse outcome and gene- and
microRNA-expression signatures in patients 60 years of age or older with primary 
cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: a Cancer and Leukemia Group B
study.

Whitman SP(1), Maharry K, Radmacher MD, Becker H, Mrózek K, Margeson D, Holland
KB, Wu YZ, Schwind S, Metzeler KH, Wen J, Baer MR, Powell BL, Carter TH, Kolitz
JE, Wetzler M, Moore JO, Stone RM, Carroll AJ, Larson RA, Caligiuri MA, Marcucci 
G, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH, USA.

The clinical impact of FLT3-internal tandem duplications (ITDs), an adverse
prognostic marker in adults aged < 60 years with primary cytogenetically normal
acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML), requires further investigation in older
patients. In CN-AML patients aged = 60 years treated on Cancer and Leukemia Group
B frontline trials, we found that FLT3-ITD remained associated with shorter
disease-free survival (P < .001; hazard ratio = 2.10) and overall survival (P <
.001; hazard ratio = 1.97) in multivariable analyses. This impact on shorter
disease-free survival and overall survival was in patients aged 60-69 (P < .001, 
each) rather than in those aged = 70 years. An FLT3-ITD-associated
gene-expression signature revealed overexpression of FLT3, homeobox genes (MEIS1,
PBX3, HOXB3), and immunotherapeutic tar-gets (WT1, CD33) and underexpression of
leukemia-associated (MLLT3, TAL1) and erythropoiesis-associated (GATA3, EPOR,
ANK1, HEMGN) genes. An FLT3-ITD-associated microRNA-expression signature included
overexpressed miR-155 and underexpressed miR-144 and miR-451. FLT3-ITD identifies
older CN-AML patients with molecular high risk and is associated with gene- and
microRNA-expression signatures that provide biologic insights for novel
therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC2981481
PMID: 20656931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):6-14. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.04.017.

Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis revealed four genomic prognostic
biomarkers for primary gastric cancers.

Tomioka N(1), Morita K, Kobayashi N, Tada M, Itoh T, Saitoh S, Kondo M, Takahashi
N, Kataoka A, Nakanishi K, Takahashi M, Kamiyama T, Ozaki M, Hirano T, Todo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, N-15 W-7 Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan. ntomioka@sapporo-shaho.jp

Unlike the case with some other solid tumors, whole genome array screening has
not revealed prognostic genetic aberrations in primary gastric cancer.
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) using bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) arrays for 56 primary gastric cancers resulted in identification of four
prognostic loci in this study: 6q21 (harboring FOXO3A; previously FKHRL1), 9q32
(UGCG), 17q21.1 approximately q21.2 (CASC3), and 17q21.32 (HOXB3 through HOXB9). 
If any one of these four loci was deleted, the prognosis of the patient was
significantly worse (P = 0.0019). This was true even for advanced tumors (stage
IIIA, IIB, or IV, n = 39) (P = 0.0113), whereas only 1 of the 17 patients with
less advanced tumors (stage IA, IB, or II; n = 17) died of disease after surgery.
Multivariate analysis according to the status of four BACs or pathological stage 
based on the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma (stages IA, IB, and II 
vs. stages IIIA, IIIB, and IV) demonstrated that the BAC clone status was also an
independent prognostic factor (P = 0.006). These findings may help predict which 
patients with malignant potential need more intensive therapy, or may point to
new therapeutic approaches especially for advanced tumors. The parameter here
termed the integrated genomic prognostic biomarker may therefore be of clinical
utility as a prognostic biomarker.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2010 Sep;46(8):664-72. doi:
10.1007/s11626-010-9322-2. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Suppression of embryonic lung branching morphogenesis by antisense
oligonucleotides against HOM/C homeobox factors.

Yoshimi T(1), Hashimoto F, Takahashi S, Takahashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo, 192-0392, Japan. vzz05106@nifty.com

The role of HOM/C homeobox genes on rat embryonic lung branching morphogenesis
was investigated using the lung bud explant culture system in an air/liquid
interface. Knock down of homeobox b3 and b4 expression by antisense
oligonucleotide treatment repressed airway branch formation, while antisense
oligonucleotide against homeobox a3 showed no effect. Addition of antisense Hoxb3
oligonucleotide resulted in upregulation of collagen type III mRNA and fibroblast
growth factor 10 mRNA, while that of the T-box regulatory factor-4 was decreased.
Consequently, expression of Clara cell-specific secretory protein was decreased. 
These results suggest a critical role for homeobox b3 and b4 genes in lung airway
branching morphogenesis.

PMID: 20535580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 23;398(2):153-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.150. Epub 2010 May 31.

Multiple coding and non-coding RNAs in the Hoxb3 locus and their spatial
expression patterns during mouse embryogenesis.

Chan KT(1), Qi J, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, 3/F Laboratory Block, Faculty of Medicine Building, 21 Sassoon Road,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Hoxb3 plays important roles in embryogenesis and it has a complex transcription
profile of mRNAs, non-coding RNAs and anti-sense RNAs. Characterization of the
spatial expression patterns of these RNAs is important to understand their
functions. We investigated the regulation and spatial expression patterns of
multiple RNA transcripts derived from the Hoxb3 gene locus. By 5'-RACE we
identified four novel transcription initiation sites and initiating exons, and by
luciferase activity assay we identified a new promoter region. Expression pattern
analysis of the alternative transcripts containing specific initiation exons in
mouse embryos suggests that there are co-operations between the initiation exons,
their adjacent promoters and enhancer elements to orchestrate overlapping neural 
tube specific transcription profiles for Hoxb3. Furthermore, we showed that
anti-sense transcripts derived from the Hoxb3 locus were expressed in the
hindbrain with distinct rhombomere boundaries, in a pattern complementary to the 
sense coding mRNA transcripts. Our results suggest that the multiple non-coding
RNAs could be involved in the regulation of Hoxb3.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20515659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cell. 2009 Oct 23;36(2):219-30. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.10.009.

Epigenetic silencing of the RASSF1A tumor suppressor gene through HOXB3-mediated 
induction of DNMT3B expression.

Palakurthy RK(1), Wajapeyee N, Santra MK, Gazin C, Lin L, Gobeil S, Green MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Programs in Gene Function and Expression and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation
Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The RASSF1A tumor suppressor gene is epigenetically silenced in a variety of
cancers. Here, we perform a genome-wide human shRNA screen and find that
epigenetic silencing of RASSF1A requires the homeobox protein HOXB3. We show that
HOXB3 binds to the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B gene and increases its
expression. DNMT3B, in turn, is recruited to the RASSF1A promoter, resulting in
hypermethylation and silencing of RASSF1A expression. DNMT3B recruitment is
facilitated through interactions with Polycomb repressor complex 2 and MYC, which
is bound to the RASSF1A promoter. Mouse xenograft experiments indicate that the
oncogenic activity of HOXB3 is due, at least in part, to epigenetic silencing of 
RASSF1A. Expression analysis in human lung adenocarcinoma samples reveals that
RASSF1A silencing strongly correlates with overexpression of HOXB3 and DNMT3B.
Analysis of human cancer cell lines indicates that the RASSF1A epigenetic
silencing mechanism described here may be common in diverse cancer types.

PMCID: PMC2776651
PMID: 19854132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. BMC Cancer. 2009 Oct 14;9:363. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-363.

Establishment of canine hemangiosarcoma xenograft models expressing endothelial
growth factors, their receptors, and angiogenesis-associated homeobox genes.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Matsuura S, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Kimura T,
Masegi T, Yanai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Gifu
University, Gifu, Japan. l5102402@edu.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Human hemangiosarcoma (HSA) tends to have a poor prognosis; its
tumorigenesis has not been elucidated, as there is a dearth of HSA clinical
specimens and no experimental model for HSA. However, the incidence of
spontaneous HSA is relatively high in canines; therefore, canine HSA has been
useful in the study of human HSA. Recently, the production of angiogenic growth
factors and their receptors in human and canine HSA has been reported. Moreover, 
the growth-factor environment of HSA is very similar to that of
pathophysiological angiogenesis, which some homeobox genes regulate in the
transcription of angiogenic molecules. In the present study, we established 6
xenograft canine HSA tumors and detected the expression of growth factors, their 
receptors, and angiogenic homeobox genes.
METHODS: Six primary canine HSAs were xenografted to nude mice subcutaneously and
serially transplanted. Subsequently, the expressions of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-A, basic fibroblast growth factors (bFGF), flt-1 and flk-1
(receptors of VEGF-A), FGFR-1, and angiogenic homeobox genes HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7,
HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 were investigated in original and xenograft tumors by
histopathology, immunostaining, and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), using canine-specific primer sets.
RESULTS: Histopathologically, xenograft tumors comprised a proliferation of
neoplastic cells that were varied in shape, from spindle-shaped and polygonal to 
ovoid; some vascular-like structures and vascular clefts of channels were
observed, similar to those in the original tumors. The expression of endothelial 
markers (CD31 and vWF) was detected in xenograft tumors by immunohistochemistry
and RT-PCR. Moreover, the expression of VEGF-A, bFGF, flt-1, flk-1, FGFR-1,
HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7, HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 was detected in xenograft tumors.
Interestingly, expressions of bFGF tended to be higher in 3 of the xenograft HSA 
tumors than in the other tumors.
CONCLUSION: We established 6 xenograft canine HSA tumors in nude mice and found
that the expressions of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors in
xenograft HSAs were similar to those in spontaneous HSA. Furthermore, we detected
the expression of angiogenic homeobox genes; therefore, xenograft models may be
useful in analyzing malignant growth in HSA.

PMCID: PMC2768746
PMID: 19825192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Gastroenterology. 2009 Dec;137(6):2136-45.e1-7. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.08.065. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

Retinoic acid receptor antagonists inhibit miR-10a expression and block
metastatic behavior of pancreatic cancer.

Weiss FU(1), Marques IJ, Woltering JM, Vlecken DH, Aghdassi A, Partecke LI,
Heidecke CD, Lerch MM, Bagowski CP.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Greifswald, Klinik für Innere Medizin A, Greifswald,
Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The infiltrating ductal adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is
among the most lethal of all solid malignancies, largely owing to a high
frequency of early metastasis. We identified microRNA-10a (miR-10a) as an
important mediator of metastasis formation in pancreatic tumor cells and
investigated the upstream and downstream regulatory mechanisms of miR-10a.
METHODS: Northern blot analysis revealed increased expression levels of miR-10a
in metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The role of miR-10a was analyzed by
Morpholino and short interfering RNA transfection of pancreatic carcinoma cell
lines and resected specimens of human pancreatic carcinoma. Metastatic behavior
of primary pancreatic tumors and cancer cell lines was tested in
xenotransplantation experiments in zebrafish embryos.
RESULTS: We show that miR-10a expression promotes metastatic behavior of
pancreatic tumor cells and that repression of miR-10a is sufficient to inhibit
invasion and metastasis formation. We further show that miR-10a is a retinoid
acid target and that retinoic acid receptor antagonists effectively repress
miR-10a expression and completely block metastasis. This antimetastatic activity 
can be prevented by specific knockdown of HOX genes, HOXB1 and HOXB3.
Interestingly, suppression of HOXB1 and HOXB3 in pancreatic cancer cells is
sufficient to promote metastasis formation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that miR-10a is a key mediator of metastatic 
behavior in pancreatic cancer, which regulates metastasis via suppression of
HOXB1 and HOXB3. Inhibition of miR-10a expression (with retinoic acid receptor
antagonists) or function (with specific inhibitors) is a promising starting point
for antimetastatic therapies.

PMID: 19747919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Comp Pathol. 2009 Aug-Oct;141(2-3):199-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2009.04.004.
Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Immunohistochemical demonstration of angiogenesis-associated homeobox proteins in
canine vascular tumours.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Yanai T, Masegi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty
of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193,
Japan.

Angiogenic homeobox genes regulate the behaviour of endothelial cells (ECs)
during angiogenesis, so the aim of this study was to determine whether expression
of these genes may be a determinant of malignancy in canine haemangiosarcoma
(HSA). Homeobox proteins were evaluated immunohistochemically in tissue samples
from canine HSAs (n=78), haemangiomas (HAs; n=30) and samples of granulation
tissue (n=8). Active ECs in granulation tissue were positively labelled by
antisera specific for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3, HoxB7, Pbx1 and Meis1. Quiescent ECs
in granulation tissue did not express HoxD3 and Pbx1. There were significantly
more neoplastic cells positively labelled for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3 and Pbx1 in HSA
compared with HA. Almost all tumours were positive for HoxB7 and Meis1. HoxB3,
HoxD3, Pbx1 and Meis1 proteins were detected in 80-90% of the HSAs, but in <20%
of the HAs. Overall, homeobox protein expression in HSA appears to have a
phenotype similar to that of active ECs in angiogenesis. The expression of
homeobox genes associated with angiogenesis might be associated with the
malignant growth of HSA.

PMID: 19505696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Aug;20(15):3543-51. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-02-0114. Epub 2009
May 28.

Induction of HoxB transcription by retinoic acid requires actin polymerization.

Ferrai C(1), Naum-Onganía G, Longobardi E, Palazzolo M, Disanza A, Diaz VM,
Crippa MP, Scita G, Blasi F.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute and University Vita Salute San Raffaele,
20132 Milan, Italy.

We have analyzed the role of actin polymerization in retinoic acid (RA)-induced
HoxB transcription, which is mediated by the HoxB regulator Prep1. RA induction
of the HoxB genes can be prevented by the inhibition of actin polymerization.
Importantly, inhibition of actin polymerization specifically affects the
transcription of inducible Hox genes, but not that of their transcriptional
regulators, the RARs, nor of constitutively expressed, nor of actively
transcribed Hox genes. RA treatment induces the recruitment to the HoxB2 gene
enhancer of a complex composed of "elongating" RNAPII, Prep1, beta-actin, and
N-WASP as well as the accessory splicing components p54Nrb and PSF. We show that 
inhibition of actin polymerization prevents such recruitment. We conclude that
inducible Hox genes are selectively sensitive to the inhibition of actin
polymerization and that actin polymerization is required for the assembly of a
transcription complex on the regulatory region of the Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC2719572
PMID: 19477923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Vet Med Sci. 2009 Jan;71(1):69-77.

Quantitative analysis of mRNA transcripts of Hox, SHH, PTCH, Wnt, and Fzd genes
in canine hematopoietic progenitor cells and various in vitro colonies
differentiated from the cells.

Ide K(1), Goto-Koshino Y, Momoi Y, Fujino Y, Ohno K, Tsujimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Science, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Homeobox (Hox), Sonic hedgehog (SHH), and Wingless-type MMTV integration site
family (Wnt) are known to modulate the self-renewal and expansion of
hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells in humans and mice. Frizzled (Fzd) and
Patched1 (PTCH1) represent the receptors of Wnt and SHH, respectively. In this
study, the amounts of mRNA transcripts of the genes associated with the
self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells, HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxA10, Wnt5a, Wnt2b,
Fzd1, Fzd6, SHH, and PTCH1, were measured in canine unfractionated bone marrow
cells, CD34-enriched cells, and various colony-forming units in culture (CFU-C). 
Partial cDNA sequences of these 9 canine genes were determined in this study.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was employed to indicate their
relative amounts of mRNA transcripts. Amounts of mRNA transcripts of HoxB3,
HoxA10, PTCH1, and Wnt5a genes in canine CD34-enriched cell fraction were
significantly larger than those in the CD34-depleted cell fraction. Amounts of
mRNA transcripts of HoxB3, HoxA10, PTCH1, Wnt5a, and Wnt2b genes in various CFU-C
cells were significantly smaller than those in the seeded CD34-enriched cell
fraction. These results suggested important roles of the products of these genes 
in self-renewal, expansion, and survival of hematopoietic progenitor cells in
dogs as shown in humans and rodents.

PMID: 19194078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Sci (Lond). 2009 Jan;116(1):27-35. doi: 10.1042/CS20080068.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1/Nkx2.1/TITF1) gene regulation in the lung.

Boggaram V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, 11937 US Highway 271, Tyler, TX 75708-3154, USA.
vijay.boggaram@uthct.edu

TTF-1 [thyroid transcription factor-1; also known as Nkx2.1, T/EBP
(thyroid-specific-enhancer-binding protein) or TITF1] is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor essential for the morphogenesis and differentiation of the
thyroid, lung and ventral forebrain. TTF-1 controls the expression of select
genes in the thyroid, lung and the central nervous system. In the lung, TTF-1
controls the expression of surfactant proteins that are essential for lung
stability and lung host defence. Human TTF-1 is encoded by a single gene located 
on chromosome 14 and is organized into two/three exons and one/two introns.
Multiple transcription start sites and alternative splicing produce mRNAs with
heterogeneity at the 5' end. The 3' end of the TTF-1 mRNA is characterized by a
rather long untranslated region. The amino acid sequences of TTF-1 from human,
rat, mouse and other species are very similar, indicating a high degree of
sequence conservation. TTF-1 promoter activity is maintained by the combinatorial
or co-operative actions of HNF-3 [hepatocyte nuclear factor-3; also known as FOXA
(forkhead box A)], Sp (specificity protein) 1, Sp3, GATA-6 and HOXB3 (homeobox
B3) transcription factors. There is limited information on the regulation of
TTF-1 gene expression by hormones, cytokines and other biological agents.
Glucocorticoids, cAMP and TGF-beta (transforming growth factor-beta) have
stimulatory effects on TTF-1 expression, whereas TNF-alpha (tumour necrosis
factor-alpha) and ceramide have inhibitory effects on TTF-1 DNA-binding activity 
in lung cells. Haplo-insufficiency of TTF-1 in humans causes hypothyroidism,
respiratory dysfunction and recurring pulmonary infections, underlining the
importance of optimal TTF-1 levels for the maintenance of thyroid and lung
function. Recent studies have implicated TTF-1 as a lineage-specific
proto-oncogene for lung cancer.

PMID: 19037882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Sep 3;100(17):1247-59. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn253. Epub
2008 Aug 26.

Identification of chromatin remodeling genes Arid4a and Arid4b as leukemia
suppressor genes.

Wu MY(1), Eldin KW, Beaudet AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Leukemia evolves through a multistep process from premalignancy to
malignancy. Epigenetic alterations, including histone modifications, have been
proposed to play an important role in tumorigenesis. The involvement of two
chromatin remodeling genes, retinoblastoma-binding protein 1 (Rbbp1/Arid4a) and
Rbbp1-like 1 (Rbbp1l1/Arid4b), in leukemogenesis was not characterized.
METHODS: The leukemic phenotype of mice deficient for Arid4a with or without
haploinsufficiency for Arid4b was investigated by serially monitoring complete
blood counts together with microscopic histologic analysis and flow cytometric
analysis of bone marrow and spleen from the Arid4a(-/-) mice or
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice. Regulation in bone marrow cells of downstream genes 
important for normal hematopoiesis was analyzed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Genotypic effects on histone
modifications were examined by western blotting and immunofluorescence analysis. 
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Young (2-5 months old) Arid4a-deficient mice had ineffective blood cell 
production in all hematopoietic lineages. Beyond 5 months of age, the Arid4a(-/-)
mice manifested monocytosis, accompanied by severe anemia and thrombocytopenia.
These sick Arid4a(-/-) mice showed bone marrow failure with myelofibrosis
associated with splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Five of 42 Arid4a(-/-) mice and 10
of 12 Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) mice progressed to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and 
had rapid further increases of leukocyte counts. Expression of Hox genes (Hoxb3, 
Hoxb5, Hoxb6, and Hoxb8) was decreased in Arid4a-deficient bone marrow cells with
or without Arid4b haploinsufficiency, and FoxP3 expression was reduced in
Arid4a(-/-)Arid4b(+/-) bone marrow. Increases of histone trimethylation of H3K4, 
H3K9, and H4K20 (fold increases in trimethylation = 32, 95% confidence interval
[CI] = 27 to 32; 45, 95% CI = 41 to 49; and 2.2, 95% CI = 1.7 to 2.7,
respectively) were observed in the bone marrow of Arid4a-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Arid4a-deficient mice initially display ineffective hematopoiesis,
followed by transition to chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)-like
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorder, and then transformation to AML. The 
disease processes in the Arid4a-deficient mice are very similar to the course of 
events in humans with CMML and AML. This mouse model has the potential to furnish
additional insights into the role of epigenetic alterations in leukemogenesis,
and it may be useful in developing novel pharmacological approaches to treatment 
of preleukemic and leukemic states.

PMCID: PMC2528019
PMID: 18728284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cir Pediatr. 2007 Oct;20(4):223-8.

[The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: the Hox 
genes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez L(1), Martínez-Calonge W, Matesanz R, Fernández-Dumont V, Pederiva F,
Vallejo MT, Salinas J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid.
lmartinezm.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Prenatal administration of adriamycin or nitrofen to pregnant mice
produce in the embryos, respectively, esophageal atresia/VACTERL association (EA)
or congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Various genes and signalling pathways
like sonic hedgehog, Gli family, retinoic acid and homeotic genes have been
pointed out in the origin of these malformations. Hox genes are master regulatory
genes involved in embryo segmentation and other main development processes.
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 knock-out mice show cardiac, tracheal, lung 
and diaphragmatic malformations, EA and phenotypes that resemble that of VACTERL 
syndrome. We present herein some of our findings in the expression of these genes
in both experimental models.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin 
or vehicle on embryonic days 7,5 and 8,5; embryos were recovered at four
endpoints (E13 to 16). On the other hand, nitrofen was given to pregnant mice on 
embryonic day 8th and embryos were recovered at E14, E16 and E19. The embryos or,
separately, their lungs and hearts, were randomly processed for
immunohistochemical or molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). We used antibodies for
Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins and specific primers for Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxb3,
Hoxb5, Hoxc4 and Hoxd3 genes.
RESULTS: EA: Upon immunohistochemistry, adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a
severe decrease in expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxb3 proteins in heart, skin, 
foregut but not in the heart. RT-PCR studies showed a statistically significant
decrease of the four genes studied in the lungs of OA mice when compared to
controls. CDH: Upon RT-PCR assessment the expression of Hoxa5 and Hoxb3 were
higher in nitrofen-exposed mice than in controls on E14 and E19 and weaker on
E16. As regards immunohistochemical localization, expression of the three genes
was similar in nitrofen and control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Both experimental models exhibit an alteration in the expression of 
several proximal Hox genes, specially in lung and car- diac tissues. The
malformations in these organs associated with CDH and EA could be in part caused 
by these alterations. Due to their specific participation in lung and foregut
morphogenesis, their study could let us to better understand the mechanisms of
CDH and EA.

PMID: 18351244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Feb;36(2):227-35. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

HOX gene analysis of endothelial cell differentiation in human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Chung N(1), Jee BK, Chae SW, Jeon YW, Lee KH, Rha HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) have been shown to
possess multilineage differentiation potential. HOX genes function in
transcriptional regulators, and are involved in stem cell differentiation. The
aim of the present study was to demonstrate HOX genes that are related to
angiogenesis. To identify the expression patterns of 37 HOX genes in the
endothelial cell differentiation of hMSCs, we analyzed HOX genes through
profiling with multiplex RT-PCR. The results showed that the expression patterns 
of four HOX genes, HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13, significantly changed during 
angiogenesis. The expression levels of HOXA7 and HOXB3 were dramatically
increased, whereas those of HOXA3 and HOXB13 were decreased during endothelial
cell differentiation. When further analysis of the expressions of these HOX genes
was performed with real-time PCR and an immunoblot assay, the expression patterns
were also found to be well-matched with the results of multiplex RT-PCR. Here, we
report that HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13 might be involved in the angiogenesis
of hMSCs.

PMID: 17972163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Exp Hematol. 2007 Sep;35(9):1421-8.

Hoxa9/hoxb3/hoxb4 compound null mice display severe hematopoietic defects.

Magnusson M(1), Brun AC, Lawrence HJ, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, The
Lund Strategic Center for Stem Cell Biology and Cell Therapy, Lund University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Members of the hox family of homeodomain-containing transcription
factors, including hoxa9, hoxb3, and hoxb4 play an important role in the
regulation of differentiation, proliferation and self-renewal of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells. Lack-of-function studies using hoxa9, hoxb4, or
hoxb3/hoxb4 null mice demonstrate that all these mutations compromise the
repopulating ability of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), implying similar
functions of each of these genes in hematopoiesis. Because cross regulation and
cooperativity are known features of hox proteins, we investigated mice with a
compound deficiency in hoxa9, hoxb3 and hoxb4 (hoxa9/b3/b4) for evidence of
synergy between these genes in hematopoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hoxa9/b3/b4 were generated by mating the hoxb3/hoxb4 null 
mice with the hoxa9 null strain and HSC function was measured by competitive
repopulating assay and by immunophenotype using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrate that the hoxa9/b3/b4 null mice are smaller in
body weight, and display a marked reduction in spleen size and cellularity
compared to control mice. The numbers of colony-forming unit (CFU)-granulocyte
macrophage and CFU-spleen progenitor colonies were normal but hoxa9/b3/b4 null
bone marrow contained increased numbers of immunophenotypic HSC (Lin(-),
c-kit(+), Sca-1(+), CD150(+)). However the reconstitution defect in hoxa9 null
HSC was not enhanced further in the hoxa9/b3/b4 null HSC.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate overlapping functions of hoxa9, hoxb3, and
hoxb4 in hematopoietic cells, and emphasize an important role for these
transcription factors for regulation of HSC proliferation. However, none of these
hox proteins is absolutely essential for generation or maintenance of all major
blood lineages.

PMID: 17761289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Exp Hematol. 2007 Mar;35(3):465-75.

Hoxb3 deficiency impairs B lymphopoiesis in mouse bone marrow.

Ko KH(1), Lam QL, Zhang M, Wong CK, Lo CK, Kahmeyer-Gabbe M, Tsang WH, Tsang SL, 
Chan LC, Sham MH, Lu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center of Infection and Immunology, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: Hox genes are involved in hematopoietic lineage commitment and
differentiation. In this study, we investigated the roles of Hoxb3 in
hematopoiesis by examining the phenotypes of a Hoxb3 knockout mutant mouse line.
RESULTS: Despite previous reports describing the apparently normal phenotype of
these mutant mice, we found that by 6 months of age, Hoxb3(-/-) mice began to
exhibit significantly impaired B lymphopoiesis in the bone marrow (BM). The
cellularity was reduced by 30% in mutant BM compared to age- and sex-matched
heterozygous and wild-type controls. The population size of B220(+)CD43(+)
progenitor B cells showed a twofold reduction while that of B220(+)CD43(-)IgM(-) 
precursor B cells was decreased fivefold. Sorting-purified Hoxb3(-/-) progenitor 
B cells displayed significantly reduced proliferative response to IL-7 in
culture, consistent with our findings of reduced IL-7 receptor expression in
Hoxb3(-/-) progenitor B cells. However, the peripheral B cell pool in the spleen 
of Hoxb3(-/-) mice was maintained with a similar size as in wild-type
littermates.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of T-cell development in the thymus and B1 cell compartment 
in the peritoneal cavity showed no significant changes. Thus, our findings
suggest that the Hoxb3 gene plays an essential role in regulating B lymphopoiesis
in the BM of adult mice.

PMID: 17309827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1472-8. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

The histone methyltransferase MLL is an upstream regulator of endothelial-cell
sprout formation.

Diehl F(1), Rössig L, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S, Urbich C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Germany.

Posttranslational histone modification by acetylation or methylation regulates
gene expression. Here, we investigated the role of the histone lysine
methyltransferase MLL for angiogenic functions in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Suppression of MLL expression by siRNA or incubation with the 
pharmacologic methyltransferase inhibitor 5'-deoxy-5'-(methylthio)adenosine
significantly decreased endothelial-cell migration and capillary sprout
formation, indicating that methyltransferase activity is required for
proangiogenic endothelial-cell functions. Because the expression of homeodomain
transcription factors (Hox) is regulated by MLL, we elucidated the role of Hox
gene expression. MLL silencing was associated with reduced mRNA and protein
expression of HoxA9 and HoxD3, whereas HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxB5, and HoxB9 were not
altered. Overexpression of HoxA9 or HoxD3 partially compensated for impaired
migration in MLL siRNA-transfected endothelial cells, suggesting that HoxA9 and
HoxD3 both contribute to MLL-dependent migration. As a potential underlying
mechanism, MLL siRNA down-regulated mRNA and protein levels of the
HoxA9-dependent axon guidance factor EphB4. In contrast, MLL knockdown effects on
capillary sprouting were not rescued by HoxA9 or HoxD3 overexpression, indicating
that MLL affects additional targets required for 3-dimensional sprout formation. 
We conclude that MLL regulates endothelial-cell migration via HoxA9 and EphB4,
whereas sprout formation requires MLL-dependent signals beyond HoxA9 and HoxD3.

PMID: 17047146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 1;297(1):26-43. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Conserved co-regulation and promoter sharing of hoxb3a and hoxb4a in zebrafish.

Hadrys T(1), Punnamoottil B, Pieper M, Kikuta H, Pezeron G, Becker TS, Prince V, 
Baker R, Rinkwitz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical School, New York, NY
10016, USA.

The expression of zebrafish hoxb3a and hoxb4a has been found to be mediated
through five transcripts, hoxb3a transcripts I-III and hoxb4a transcripts I-II,
driven by four promoters. A "master" promoter, located about 2 kb downstream of
hoxb5a, controls transcription of a pre-mRNA comprising exon sequences of both
genes. This unique gene structure is proposed to provide a novel mechanism to
ensure overlapping, tissue-specific expression of both genes in the posterior
hindbrain and spinal cord. Transgenic approaches were used to analyze the
functions of zebrafish hoxb3a/hoxb4a promoters and enhancer sequences containing 
regions of homology that were previously identified by comparative genomics. Two 
neural enhancers were shown to establish specific anterior expression borders
within the hindbrain and mediate expression in defined neuronal populations
derived from hindbrain rhombomeres (r) 5 to 8, suggesting a late role of the
genes in neuronal cell lineage specification. Species comparison showed that the 
zebrafish hoxb3a r5 and r6 enhancer corresponded to a sequence within the mouse
HoxA cluster controlling activity of Hoxa3 in r5 and r6, whereas a homologous
region within the HoxB cluster activated Hoxb3 expression but limited to r5. We
conclude that the similarity of hoxb3a/Hoxa3 regulatory mechanisms reflect the
shared descent of both genes from a single ancestral paralog group 3 gene.

PMID: 16860306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;84(5):555-66.

Homeobox B3, FoxA1 and FoxA2 interactions in epithelial lung cell differentiation
of the multipotent M3E3/C3 cell line.

Yoshimi T(1), Nakamura N, Shimada S, Iguchi K, Hashimoto F, Mochitate K,
Takahashi Y, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo
192-0392, Japan. vzz05106@nifty.com

HOM/C homeobox (Hox) and forkhead box (Fox) factors are reported to be expressed 
in the foregut endoderm and are subsequently detected in a spatio-temporal
pattern during lung development. Some of these factors were reported to influence
the expression of lung marker proteins or to modulate lung development. To
clarify the molecular mechanisms for generating functional lung cells from
progenitor cell populations, we introduced the forkhead box factors, FoxA1 and
FoxA2, and the homeobox factor, HoxB3, into the differentiation process in a
multipotent hamster lung epithelial M3E3/C3 cell line. Ectopic expression of
FoxA2 promoted differentiation to Clara-like cells with up-regulation of the
expression of the lung marker proteins, Clara cell-specific 10-kDa protein and
surfactant protein-B. In contrast, FoxA1 repressed the differentiation. HoxB3
transfection induced FoxA2 expression transiently at the pre-differentiation
stage. The endogenous HoxB3 expression level decreased at later stages of
Clara-like cell differentiation, and the attenuation was enhanced by FoxA2
transfection. HoxB3 is a putative upstream regulator that enhances FoxA2
expression at the pre-differentiation stage. In addition, we found that the
expression of HoxA4, HoxA5, and HoxC9 increased differentially during Clara-like 
cell differentiation. These results suggest that HoxB3 may be a putative positive
regulator of FoxA2 expression at the pre-differentiation stage, and those
interactions of Fox factors and Hox factors could participate in Clara cell
differentiation.

PMID: 16003909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jun;233(2):473-83.

Hoxb3 vagal neural crest-specific enhancer element for controlling enteric
nervous system development.

Chan KK(1), Chen YS, Yau TO, Fu M, Lui VC, Tam PK, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Faculty of Medicine
Building, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

The neural and glial cells of the intrinsic ganglia of the enteric nervous system
(ENS) are derived from the hindbrain neural crest at the vagal level. The Hoxb3
gene is expressed in the vagal neural crest and in the enteric ganglia of the
developing gut during embryogenesis. We have identified a cis-acting enhancer
element b3IIIa in the Hoxb3 gene locus. In this study, by transgenic mice
analysis, we examined the tissue specificity of the b3IIIa enhancer element using
the lacZ reporter gene, with emphasis on the vagal neural crest cells and their
derivatives in the developing gut. We found that the b3IIIa-lacZ transgene marks 
only the vagal region and not the trunk or sacral region. Using cellular markers,
we showed that the b3IIIa-lacZ transgene was expressed in a subset of enteric
neuroblasts during early development of the gut, and the expression was
maintained in differentiated neurons of the myenteric plexus at later stages. The
specificity of the b3IIIa enhancer in directing gene expression in the developing
ENS was further supported by genetic analysis using the Dom mutant, a spontaneous
mouse model of Hirschsprung's disease characterized by the absence of enteric
ganglia in the distal gut. The colonization of lacZ-expressing cells in the large
intestine was incomplete in all the Dom/b3IIIa-lacZ hybrid mutants we examined.
To our knowledge, this is the only vagal neural crest-specific genetic regulatory
element identified to date. This element could be used for a variety of genetic
manipulations and in establishing transgenic mouse models for studying the
development of the ENS.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15768390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):301-12.

Abnormalities of caudal pharyngeal pouch development in Pbx1 knockout mice mimic 
loss of Hox3 paralogs.

Manley NR(1), Selleri L, Brendolan A, Gordon J, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Life Sciences, B 420A, Athens, 
GA 30602, USA. nmanley@uga.edu

Pbx1 is a TALE-class homeodomain protein that functions in part as a cofactor for
Hox class homeodomain proteins. Previous analysis of the in vivo functions of
Pbx1 by targeted mutagenesis in mice has revealed roles for this gene in skeletal
patterning and development and in the organogenesis of multiple systems. Both RNA
expression and protein localization studies have suggested a possible role for
Pbx1 in pharyngeal region development. As several Hox mutants have distinct
phenotypes in this region, we investigated the potential requirement for Pbx1 in 
the development of the pharyngeal arches and pouches and their organ derivatives.
Pbx1 homozygous mutants exhibited delayed or absent formation of the caudal
pharyngeal pouches, and disorganized patterning of the third pharyngeal pouch.
Formation of the third pouch-derived thymus/parathyroid primordia was also
affected, with absent or hypoplastic primordia, delayed expression of
organ-specific differentiation markers, and reduced proliferation of thymic
epithelium. The fourth pouch and the fourth pouch-derived ultimobranchial bodies 
were usually absent. These phenotypes are similar to those previously reported in
Hoxa3(-/-) single mutants and Hoxa1(-/-);Hoxb1(-/-) or
Hoxa3(+/-);Hoxb3(-/-);Hoxd3(-/-) compound mutants, suggesting that Pbx1 acts
together with multiple Hox proteins in the development of the caudal pharyngeal
region. However, some aspects of the Pbx1 mutant phenotype included specific
defects that were less severe than those found in known Hox mutant mice,
suggesting that some functions of Hox proteins in this region are
Pbx1-independent.

PMID: 15581866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Leukemia. 2004 Jun;18(6):1059-63.

Hox expression in AML identifies a distinct subset of patients with intermediate 
cytogenetics.

Roche J(1), Zeng C, Barón A, Gadgil S, Gemmill RM, Tigaud I, Thomas X, Drabkin
HA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6187, Université de Poitiers, 40 Av du Recteur Pineau, Poitiers,
Cédex, France.

We previously reported that favorable and poor prognostic chromosomal
rearrangements in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) were associated with distinct
levels of HOX expression. We have now analyzed HOX expression in 50 independent
adult AML patients (median age=62 years), together with FLT3 and FLT3-ligand mRNA
levels, and FLT3 mutation determination. By cluster analysis, we could divide
AMLs into cases with low, intermediate and high HOX expression. Cases with high
expression were uniquely restricted to a subset of AMLs with intermediate
cytogenetics (P=0.0174). This subset has significantly higher levels of FLT3
expression and appears to have an increase of FLT3 mutations (44%), while
CEBPalpha mutations were infrequent (6%). FLT3 mRNA levels were correlated with
the expression of multiple HOX genes, whereas FLT3 mutations were correlated with
HOXB3. In some cases, FLT3 was expressed at levels equivalent to GAPDH in the
absence of genomic amplification. We propose that high HOX expression may be
characteristically associated with a distinct biologic subset of AML. The
apparent global upregulation of HOX expression could be due to growth-factor
signaling or, alternatively, these patterns may reflect a particular stage of
differentiation of the leukemic cells.

PMID: 15085154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2004 Mar 15;302(2):147-64.

Comparative genomic analysis of vertebrate Hox3 and Hox4 genes.

Hadrys T(1), Prince V, Hunter M, Baker R, Rinkwitz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical School, New York, New
York 10016, USA.

We used a comparative genomic approach to identify putative cis-acting regulatory
sequences of the zebrafish hoxb3a and hoxb4a genes. We aligned genomic sequences 
spanning the clustered Hoxb1 to Hoxb5 genes from pufferfish, mice, and humans
with the zebrafish hoxba and hoxbb cluster sequences. We identified multiple
blocks of conserved sequences in non-coding regions within and surrounding the
Hoxb3/b4 gene locus; a subset of these blocks are conserved in the zebrafish
hoxbb cluster, despite loss of hoxb3/b4 genes. Overall, we find that the
architecture of the Hoxb3/b4 loci and of the conserved sequence elements is very 
similar in teleosts and mammals. Our analyses also revealed two alternative
transcripts of the zebrafish hoxb3a gene and an exon sequence unusually located
10 kb upstream of adjacent hoxb4a; an equivalent murine Hoxb3 exon has not yet
been confirmed. We show that many of the Hoxb3/b4 conserved non-coding sequences 
correlate with functional neural enhancers previously described in the mouse.
Further, within the conserved non-coding sequences we have identified binding
sites for transcription factors, including Kreisler/Valentino, Krox20, Hox, and
Pbx, some of which had not been previously described for the mouse. Finally, we
demonstrate that the regulatory sequences of zebrafish hoxa3a are divergent with 
respect to the mouse ortholog Hoxa3, or the paralog hoxb3a. Despite limited
conservation of regulatory sequences, zebrafish hoxa3a and hoxb3a genes share
very similar expression profiles.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15054858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):1907-17.

Differential and common leukemogenic potentials of multiple NUP98-Hox fusion
proteins alone or with Meis1.

Pineault N(1), Abramovich C, Ohta H, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3,
Canada.

NUP98-Hox fusion genes are newly identified oncogenes isolated in myeloid
leukemias. Intriguingly, only Abd-B Hox genes have been reported as fusion
partners, indicating that they may have unique overlapping leukemogenic
properties. To address this hypothesis, we engineered novel NUP98 fusions with
Hox genes not previously identified as fusion partners: the Abd-B-like gene
HOXA10 and two Antennepedia-like genes, HOXB3 and HOXB4. Notably, NUP98-HOXA10
and NUP98-HOXB3 but not NUP98-HOXB4 induced leukemia in a murine transplant
model, which is consistent with the reported leukemogenic potential ability of
HOXA10 and HOXB3 but not HOXB4. Thus, the ability of Hox genes to induce leukemia
as NUP98 fusion partners, although apparently redundant for Abd-B-like activity, 
is not restricted to this group, but rather is determined by the intrinsic
leukemogenic potential of the Hox partner. We also show that the potent
leukemogenic activity of Abd-B-like Hox genes is correlated with their strong
ability to block hematopoietic differentiation. Conversely, coexpression of the
Hox cofactor Meis1 alleviated the requirement of a strong intrinsic
Hox-transforming potential to induce leukemia. Our results support a model in
which many if not all Hox genes can be leukemogenic and point to striking
functional overlap not previously appreciated, presumably reflecting common
regulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC350554
PMID: 14966272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2003 Nov-Dec;5(6):604-15. Epub 2003 Oct 31.

Temporal transcription of two antennapedia class homeobox genes in the marine
copepod Calanus helgolandicus.

Lindeque PK(1), Smerdon GR.

Author information: 
(1)Plymouth Marine Laboratory, Prospect Place, West Hoe, Plymouth, Devon PL1 3DH,
UK. pkw@pml.ac.uk

DNA sequence information has been obtained for 2 genes implicated in playing
critical roles in copepod development. The first ( Cal-antp) was obtained by
screening a Calanus helgolandicus genomic library. It shows homology to
Antennapedia homeobox genes from a number of organisms including the centipede
(76.8% over 250 bp) and the brine shrimp (75.5% over 220 bp). A second sequence
(Hox 12) was obtained through reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) of a solid-phase cDNA library constructed from Calanus eggs, and subsequent
inverse PCR using a genomic DNA template. The Hox 12 sequence is homologous to
the Antennapedia class of genes and shares homology with the chicken HoxB3 gene
(71% over 187 bp) and with the fruit fly Sex Combs Reduced ( Scr) homeotic gene
(66% identity over 223 bp). Using sequence data from Cal-Antp and Hox 12,
specific primers were designed to investigate the temporal expression of these
genes by PCR analysis of 10 stage-specific cDNA libraries.

PMID: 14583812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5191-201. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Hox3 genes coordinate mechanisms of genetic suppression and activation in the
generation of branchial and somatic motoneurons.

Gaufo GO(1), Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

In the developing hindbrain, the functional loss of individual Hox genes has
revealed some of their roles in specifying rhombomere (r) identity. However, it
is unclear how Hox genes act in concert to confer the unique identity to multiple
rhombomeres. Moreover, it remains to be elucidated how these genes interact with 
other transcriptional programs to specify distinct neuronal lineages within each 
rhombomere. We demonstrate that in r5, the combined mutation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
result in a loss of Pax6- and Olig2-expressing progenitors that give rise to
somatic motoneurons of the abducens nucleus. In r6, the absence of any
combination of the Hox3 paralogous genes results in ectopic expression of the
r4-specific determinant Hoxb1. This ectopic expression in turn results in the
differentiation of r4-like facial branchiomotoneurons within this rhombomere.
These studies reveal that members of the Hox1 and Hox3 paralogous groups
participate in a 'Hox code' that is necessary for coordinating both suppression
and activation mechanisms that ensure distinction between the multiple
rhombomeres in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 12954718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Biol. 2003 Jun 15;258(2):419-31.

c-jun regulation and function in the developing hindbrain.

Mechta-Grigoriou F(1), Giudicelli F, Pujades C, Charnay P, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Expression génétique et maladies, CNRS URA 1644, Institut Pasteur 25,
rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 15, Paris Cedex, France. fmechta@pasteur.fr

Hindbrain development is a well-characterised segmentation process in
vertebrates. The bZip transcription factor MafB/kreisler is specifically
expressed in rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6 of the developing vertebrate hindbrain and
is required for proper caudal hindbrain segmentation. Here, we provide evidence
that the mouse protooncogene c-jun, which encodes a member of the bZip family, is
coexpressed with MafB in prospective r5 and r6. Analysis of mouse mutants
suggests that c-jun expression in these territories is dependent on MafB but
independent of the zinc-finger transcription factor Krox20, another essential
determinant of r5 development. Loss- and gain-of-function studies, performed in
mouse and chick embryos, respectively, demonstrate that c-Jun participates,
together with MafB and Krox20, in the transcriptional activation of the Hoxb3
gene in r5. The action of c-Jun is likely to be direct, since c-Jun homodimers
and c-Jun/MafB heterodimers can bind to essential regulatory elements within the 
transcriptional enhancer responsible for Hoxb3 expression in r5. These data
indicate that c-Jun acts both as a downstream effector and a cofactor of MafB and
belongs to the complex network of factors governing hindbrain patterning.

PMID: 12798298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(11):3872-83.

Reduced proliferative capacity of hematopoietic stem cells deficient in Hoxb3 and
Hoxb4.

Björnsson JM(1), Larsson N, Brun AC, Magnusson M, Andersson E, Lundström P,
Larsson J, Repetowska E, Ehinger M, Humphries RK, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden.

Several homeobox transcription factors, such as HOXB3 and HOXB4, have been
implicated in regulation of hematopoiesis. In support of this, studies show that 
overexpression of HOXB4 strongly enhances hematopoietic stem cell regeneration.
Here we find that mice deficient in both Hoxb3 and Hoxb4 have defects in
endogenous hematopoiesis with reduced cellularity in hematopoietic organs and
diminished number of hematopoietic progenitors without perturbing lineage
commitment. Analysis of embryonic day 14.5 fetal livers revealed a significant
reduction in the hematopoietic stem cell pool, suggesting that the reduction in
cellularity observed postnatally is due to insufficient expansion during fetal
development. Primitive Lin(-) ScaI(+) c-kit(+) hematopoietic progenitors lacking 
Hoxb3 and Hoxb4 displayed impaired proliferative capacity in vitro. Similarly, in
vivo repopulating studies of Hoxb3/Hoxb4-deficient hematopoietic cells resulted
in lower repopulating capability compared to normal littermates. Since no defects
in homing were observed, these results suggest a slower regeneration of mutant
HSC. Furthermore, treatment with cytostatic drugs demonstrated slower cell cycle 
kinetics of hematopoietic stem cells deficient in Hoxb3 and Hoxb4, resulting in
increased tolerance to antimitotic drugs. Collectively, these data suggest a
direct physiological role of Hoxb4 and Hoxb3 in regulating stem cell regeneration
and that these genes are required for maximal proliferative response.

PMCID: PMC155209
PMID: 12748289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 May 1;31(9):2297-304.

CpG oligodeoxynucleotide 5mer-induced apoptosis in MOLT-4 leukaemia cells does
not require caspase 3 or new protein synthesis.

Tidd DM(1), Broughton CM, Clark RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
dmtidd@liv.ac.uk

We have established that CpG oligodeoxynucleotide 5mers, of sequence type CGNNN
(N = A, G, C or T), rapidly induce apoptosis/cell cycle arrest in human leukaemia
lines. The 5'-CpG is obligatory for these effects. Induction of apoptosis in
MOLT-4 cells did not require new protein synthesis and was insensitive to the
caspase 3 inhibitor, Ac-DEVD-CHO, although the latter abrogated DNA laddering,
phosphatidylserine externalization and collapse of the mitochondrial
transmembrane potential. A subline of MOLT-4 cells, MOLT-4CpGR, was selected for 
acquired resistance to CpG 5mers. Differences in gene expression between MOLT-4
and MOLT-4CpGR cells were identified following three independent reciprocal cDNA 
subtractions, consensus selection and virtual cloning through targeted display.
Several known genes were implicated in the action of or resistance to CpG
oligodeoxynucleotide 5mers. Their protein products listed below immediately
suggest cell signalling pathways/processes worthy of further investigation in
elucidating the mechanism of CpG 5mer activity: caspase 2, the transcription
factors Atf4, Hic, HoxB3 and Rqcd1, the splicing factors Rbmx, Sfrs5 and Sfrs7,
the DNA replication factors Mcm5 and Brd4, phosphoinositide-3-kinase, annexin A1,
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation 1 and three enzymes
involved in protein ubiquitylation, Siah1, Gsa7 and Nin283.

PMCID: PMC154220
PMID: 12711674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Biol. 2002 Dec 15;252(2):287-300.

Auto/cross-regulation of Hoxb3 expression in posterior hindbrain and spinal cord.

Yau TO(1), Kwan CT, Jakt LM, Stallwood N, Cordes S, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Faculty of Medicine
Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The complex and dynamic pattern of Hoxb3 expression in the developing hindbrain
and the associated neural crest of mouse embryos is controlled by three separate 
cis-regulatory elements: element I (region A), element IIIa, and the r5 enhancer 
(element IVa). We have examined the cis-regulatory element IIIa by transgenic and
mutational analysis to determine the upstream trans-acting factors and mechanisms
that are involved in controlling the expression of the mouse Hoxb3 gene in the
anterior spinal cord and hindbrain up to the r5/r6 boundary, as well as the
associated neural crest which migrate to the third and posterior branchial arches
and to the gut. By deletion analysis, we have identified the sequence
requirements within a 482-bp element III482. Two Hox binding sites are identified
in element III482 and we have shown that in vitro both Hoxb3 and Hoxb4 proteins
can interact with these Hox binding sites, suggesting that auto/cross-regulation 
is required for establishing the expression of Hoxb3 in the neural tube domain.
Interestingly, we have identified a novel GCCAGGC sequence motif within element
III482, which is also required to direct gene expression to a subset of the
expression domains except for rhombomere 6 and the associated neural crest
migrating to the third and posterior branchial arches. Element III482 can direct 
a higher level of reporter gene expression in r6, which led us to investigate
whether kreisler is involved in regulating Hoxb3 expression in r6 through this
element. However, our transgenic and mutational analysis has demonstrated that,
although kreisler binding sites are present, they are not required for the
establishment or maintenance of reporter gene expression in r6. Our results have 
provided evidence that the expression of Hoxb3 in the neural tube up to the r5/r6
boundary is auto/cross-regulated by Hox genes and expression of Hoxb3 in r6 does 
not require kreisler.

PMID: 12482716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Pathol. 2002 Dec;161(6):2099-109.

Sustained expression of homeobox D10 inhibits angiogenesis.

Myers C(1), Charboneau A, Cheung I, Hanks D, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of California 
at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are master regulatory genes that direct organogenesis and
maintain differentiated tissue function. As HoxD3 and HoxB3 promote angiogenesis,
we investigated whether endothelial cells use other Hox genes to maintain a
mature quiescent phenotype. HoxD10 expression was higher in quiescent as compared
to tumor-associated angiogenic endothelium. Microarray analysis of
HoxD10-overexpressing endothelial cells revealed a pattern of gene expression
consistent with a nonangiogenic phenotype. Moreover, sustained expression of
HoxD10 impaired endothelial cell migration and blocked angiogenesis induced by
basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in the
chick chorioallantoic membrane in vivo. HoxD10-overexpressing human endothelial
cells also failed to form new vessels when implanted into immunocompromised mice.
These results indicate a role for HoxD10 in maintaining a nonangiogenic state in 
the endothelium.

PMCID: PMC1850921
PMID: 12466126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5103-15.

Initiating Hox gene expression: in the early chick neural tube differential
sensitivity to FGF and RA signaling subdivides the HoxB genes in two distinct
groups.

Bel-Vialar S(1), Itasaki N, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Initiation of Hox genes requires interactions between numerous factors and
signaling pathways in order to establish their precise domain boundaries in the
developing nervous system. There are distinct differences in the expression and
regulation of members of Hox genes within a complex suggesting that multiple
competing mechanisms are used to initiate their expression domains in early
embryogenesis. In this study, by analyzing the response of HoxB genes to both RA 
and FGF signaling in neural tissue during early chick embryogenesis (HH stages
7-15), we have defined two distinct groups of Hox genes based on their reciprocal
sensitivity to RA or FGF during this developmental period. We found that the
expression domain of 5' members from the HoxB complex (Hoxb6-Hoxb9) can be
expanded anteriorly in the chick neural tube up to the level of the otic vesicle 
following FGF treatment and that these same genes are refractory to RA treatment 
at these stages. Furthermore, we showed that the chick caudal-related genes, cdxA
and cdxB, are also responsive to FGF signaling in neural tissue and that their
anterior expansion is also limited to the level of the otic vesicle. Using a
dominant negative form of a Xenopus Cdx gene (XcadEnR) we found that the effect
of FGF treatment on 5' HoxB genes is mediated in part through the activation and 
function of CDX activity. Conversely, the 3' HoxB genes (Hoxb1 and Hoxb3-Hoxb5)
are sensitive to RA but not FGF treatments at these stages. We demonstrated by in
ovo electroporation of a dominant negative retinoid receptor construct (dnRAR)
that retinoid signaling is required to initiate expression. Elevating CDX
activity by ectopic expression of an activated form of a Xenopus Cdx gene
(XcadVP16) in the hindbrain ectopically activates and anteriorly expands Hoxb4
expression. In a similar manner, when ectopic expression of XcadVP16 is combined 
with FGF treatment, we found that Hoxb9 expression expands anteriorly into the
hindbrain region. Our findings suggest a model whereby, over the window of early 
development we examined, all HoxB genes are actually competent to interpret an
FGF signal via a CDX-dependent pathway. However, mechanisms that axially restrict
the Cdx domains of expression, serve to prevent 3' genes from responding to FGF
signaling in the hindbrain. FGF may have a dual role in both modulating the
accessibility of the HoxB complex along the axis and in activating the expression
of Cdx genes. The position of the shift in RA or FGF responsiveness of Hox genes 
may be time dependent. Hence, the specific Hox genes in each of these
complementary groups may vary in later stages of development or other tissues.
These results highlight the key role of Cdx genes in integrating the input of
multiple signaling pathways, such as FGFs and RA, in controlling initiation of
Hox expression during development and the importance of understanding regulatory 
events/mechanisms that modulate Cdx expression.

PMID: 12399303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Growth Differ. 2002 Apr;13(4):195-203.

Increased gene expression of lung marker proteins in the homeobox
B3-overexpressed fetal lung cell line M3E3/C3.

Nakamura N(1), Yoshimi T, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 192-0392, Japan.

Homeobox (Hox)-containing factors have been shown to play regulatory roles on
lung development. Although HoxB3 gene expression is detected in the prenatal lung
during development, its function has not been clarified precisely. We constructed
an expression vector of a hamster HoxB3 coding region, which was cloned from
hamster fetal lung cell line M3E3/C3. Sixteen-base deletion was found in the
hamster HoxB3 coding sequence when compared with the mouse sequence. Under
conditions of differentiation, cells transfected transiently with HoxB3 augmented
the retinol-induced gene expression of Clara cell-specific secretory protein,
whereas the cells showed reduced expression of surfactant-associated protein C.
These alterations were attenuated by the transfection with HoxB3 antisense
nucleotide. The results show that the cells with overexpressed HoxB3 were
reinforced to have characteristics of Clara cells but did not have the
characteristics of alveolar type II cells, and that HoxB3 played a stimulatory
role on Clara cell differentiation in M3E3/C3 cells. In addition, the expression 
of Clara cell-specific secretory protein and surfactant-associated protein C
genes was enhanced upon transfer of cells to collagen substrate, suggesting that 
collagen substrate has some regulatory functions on lung cell differentiation
through cell adhesion.

PMID: 11971819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1645-55.

spiel ohne grenzen/pou2 is required for zebrafish hindbrain segmentation.

Hauptmann G(1), Belting HG, Wolke U, Lunde K, Söll I, Abdelilah-Seyfried S,
Prince V, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie I, Hauptstrasse 1, 
D-79104 Freiburg i. Br., Germany.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain leads to the formation of a series of
rhombomeres with distinct identities. In mouse, Krox20 and kreisler play
important roles in specifying distinct rhombomeres and in controlling segmental
identity by directly regulating rhombomere-specific expression of Hox genes. We
show that spiel ohne grenzen (spg) zebrafish mutants develop rhombomeric
territories that are abnormal in both size and shape. Rhombomere boundaries are
malpositioned or absent and the segmental pattern of neuronal differentiation is 
perturbed. Segment-specific expression of hoxa2, hoxb2 and hoxb3 is severely
affected during initial stages of hindbrain development in spg mutants and the
establishment of krx20 (Krox20 ortholog) and valentino (val; kreisler ortholog)
expression is impaired. spg mutants carry loss-of-function mutations in the pou2 
gene. pou2 is expressed at high levels in the hindbrain primordium of wild-type
embryos prior to activation of krx20 and val. Widespread overexpression of Pou2
can rescue the segmental krx20 and val domains in spg mutants, but does not
induce ectopic expression of these genes. This suggests that spg/pou2 acts in a
permissive manner and is essential for normal expression of krx20 and val. We
propose that spg/pou2 is an essential component of the regulatory cascade
controlling hindbrain segmentation and acts before krx20 and val in the
establishment of rhombomere precursor territories.

PMID: 11923201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2002 Mar;129(6):1477-85.

Requirement for downregulation of kreisler during late patterning of the
hindbrain.

Theil T(1), Ariza-McNaughton L, Manzanares M, Brodie J, Krumlauf R, Wilkinson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Pattern formation in the hindbrain is governed by a segmentation process that
provides the basis for the organisation of cranial motor nerves. A cascade of
transcriptional activators, including the bZIP transcription factor encoded by
the kreisler gene controls this segmentation process. In kreisler mutants, r5
fails to form and this correlates with abnormalities in the neuroanatomical
organisation of the hindbrain. Studies of Hox gene regulation suggest that
kreisler may regulate the identity as well as the formation of r5, but such a
role cannot be detected in kreisler mutants since r5 is absent. To gain further
insights into the function of kreisler we have generated transgenic mice in which
kreisler is ectopically expressed in r3 and for an extended period in r5. In
these transgenic mice, the Fgf3, Krox20, Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes have ectopic or
prolonged expression domains in r3, indicating that it acquires molecular
characteristics of r5. Prolonged kreisler expression subsequently causes
morphological alterations of r3/r5 that are due to an inhibition of neuronal
differentiation and migration from the ventricular zone to form the mantle layer.
We find that these alterations in r5 correlate with an arrest of facial
branchiomotor neurone migration from r4 into the caudal hindbrain, which is
possibly due to the deficiency in the mantle layer through which they normally
migrate. We propose that the requirement for the downregulation of segmental
kreisler expression prior to neuronal differentiation reflects the stage-specific
roles of this gene and its targets.

PMID: 11880356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 2002 Feb 1;21(3):365-76.

Krox20 and kreisler co-operate in the transcriptional control of segmental
expression of Hoxb3 in the developing hindbrain.

Manzanares M(1), Nardelli J, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Marshall H, Giudicelli F,
Martínez-Pastor MT, Krumlauf R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In the segmented vertebrate hindbrain, the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes are expressed at
high relative levels in the rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6, and 5, respectively. The
single enhancer elements responsible for these activities have been identified
previously and shown to constitute direct targets of the transcription factor
kreisler, which is expressed in r5 and r6. Here, we have analysed the
contribution of the transcription factor Krox20, present in r3 and r5. Genetic
analyses demonstrated that Krox20 is required for activity of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, but not of the Hoxa3 r5/6 enhancer. Mutational analysis of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, together with ectopic expression experiments, revealed that Krox20
binds to the enhancer and synergizes with kreisler to promote Hoxb3
transcription, restricting enhancer activity to their domain of overlap, r5.
These analyses also suggested contributions from an Ets-related factor and from
putative factors likely to heterodimerize with kreisler. The integration of
multiple independent inputs present in overlapping domains by a single enhancer
is likely to constitute a general mechanism for the patterning of subterritories 
during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC125344
PMID: 11823429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3595-607.

Independent regulation of initiation and maintenance phases of Hoxa3 expression
in the vertebrate hindbrain involve auto- and cross-regulatory mechanisms.

Manzanares M(1), Bel-Vialar S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Ferretti E, Marshall H,
Maconochie MM, Blasi F, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During development of the vertebrate hindbrain, Hox genes play multiple roles in 
the segmental processes that regulate anteroposterior (AP) patterning. Paralogous
Hox genes, such as Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, generally have very similar patterns
of expression, and gene targeting experiments have shown that members of paralogy
group 3 can functionally compensate for each other. Hence, distinct functions for
individual members of this family may primarily depend upon differences in their 
expression domains. The earliest domains of expression of the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes in hindbrain rhombomeric (r) segments are transiently regulated by
kreisler, a conserved Maf b-Zip protein, but the mechanisms that maintain
expression in later stages are unknown. In this study, we have compared the
segmental expression and regulation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 in mouse and chick embryos
to investigate how they are controlled after initial activation. We found that
the patterns of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 expression in r5 and r6 in later stages during
mouse and chick hindbrain development were differentially regulated. Hoxa3
expression was maintained in r5 and r6, while Hoxb3 was downregulated. Regulatory
comparisons of cis-elements from the chick and mouse Hoxa3 locus in both
transgenic mouse and chick embryos have identified a conserved enhancer that
mediates the late phase of Hoxa3 expression through a conserved
auto/cross-regulatory loop. This block of similarity is also present in the human
and horn shark loci, and contains two bipartite Hox/Pbx-binding sites that are
necessary for its in vivo activity in the hindbrain. These HOX/PBC sites are
positioned near a conserved kreisler-binding site (KrA) that is involved in
activating early expression in r5 and r6, but their activity is independent of
kreisler. This work demonstrates that separate elements are involved in
initiating and maintaining Hoxa3 expression during hindbrain segmentation, and
that it is regulated in a manner different from Hoxb3 in later stages. Together, 
these findings add further strength to the emerging importance of positive auto- 
and cross-regulatory interactions between Hox genes as a general mechanism for
maintaining their correct spatial patterns in the vertebrate nervous system.

PMID: 11566863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 1;232(1):176-90.

Regulatory analysis of the mouse Hoxb3 gene: multiple elements work in concert to
direct temporal and spatial patterns of expression.

Kwan CT(1), Tsang SL, Krumlauf R, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 5 Sassoon Road, Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam, China.

The expression pattern of the mouse Hoxb3 gene is exceptionally complex and
dynamic compared with that of other members of the Hoxb cluster. There are
multiple types of transcripts for Hoxb3 gene, and the anterior boundaries of its 
expression vary at different stages of development. Two enhancers flanking Hoxb3 
on the 3' and 5' sides regulate Hoxb2 and Hoxb4, respectively, and these control 
regions define the two ends of a 28-kb interval in and around the Hoxb3 locus. To
assay the regulatory potential of DNA fragments in this interval we have used
transgenic analysis with a lacZ reporter gene to locate cis-elements for
directing the dynamic patterns of Hoxb3 expression. Our detailed analysis has
identified four new and widely spaced cis-acting regulatory regions that can
together account for major aspects of the Hoxb3 expression pattern. Elements Ib, 
IIIa, and IVb control gene expression in neural and mesodermal tissues; element
Va controls mesoderm-specific gene expression. The most anterior neural
expression domain of Hoxb3 is controlled by an r5 enhancer (element IVa); element
IIIa directs reporter expression in the anterior spinal cord and hindbrain up to 
r6, and the region A enhancer (in element I) mediates posterior neural
expression. Hence, the regulation of segmental expression of Hoxb3 in the
hindbrain is different from that of Hoxa3, as two separate enhancer elements
contribute to expression in r5 and r6. The mesoderm-specific element (Va) directs
reporter expression to prevertebra C1 at 12.5 dpc, which is the anterior limit of
paraxial mesoderm expression for Hoxb3. When tested in combinations, these
cis-elements appear to work as modules in an additive manner to recapitulate the 
major endogenous expression patterns of Hoxb3 during embryogenesis. Together our 
study shows that multiple control elements direct reporter gene expression in
diverse tissue-, temporal-, and spatially restricted subset of the endogenous
Hoxb3 expression domains and work in concert to control the neural and mesodermal
patterns of expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11254356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hum Mutat. 2001 Feb;17(2):156-7.

A novel intronic polymorphism (intron 2 +130 (CT)n) in the human homeobox gene
HOXB3.

Copeland-Yates S, Michaelis R.

PMID: 11180611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(1):224-34.

Defining roles for HOX and MEIS1 genes in induction of acute myeloid leukemia.

Thorsteinsdottir U(1), Kroon E, Jerome L, Blasi F, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Complex genetic and biochemical interactions between HOX proteins and members of 
the TALE (i.e., PBX and MEIS) family have been identified in embryonic
development, and some of these interactions also appear to be important for
leukemic transformation. We have previously shown that HOXA9 collaborates with
MEIS1 in the induction of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In this report, we
demonstrate that HOXB3, which is highly divergent from HOXA9, also genetically
interacts with MEIS1, but not with PBX1, in generating AML. In addition, we show 
that the HOXA9 and HOXB3 genes play key roles in establishing all the main
characteristics of the leukemias, while MEIS1 functions only to accelerate the
onset of the leukemic transformation. Contrasting the reported functional
similarities between PREP1 and MEIS1, such as PBX nuclear retention, we also show
that PREP1 overexpression is incapable of accelerating the HOXA9-induced AML,
suggesting that MEIS1 function in transformation must entail more than PBX
nuclear localization. Collectively, these data demonstrate that MEIS1 is a common
leukemic collaborator with two structurally and functionally divergent HOX genes 
and that, in this collaboration, the HOX gene defines the identity of the
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC88796
PMID: 11113197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mech Dev. 2000 Nov;98(1-2):165-9.

Regulation of Hoxb3 expression in the hindbrain and pharyngeal arches by rae28, a
member of the mammalian Polycomb group of genes.

Tomotsune D(1), Shirai M, Takihara Y, Shimada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, 565-0871, Osaka, Japan. dtomo@bcm.tmc.edu

During animal development, Hox genes are expressed in characteristic, spatially
restricted patterns and specify regional identities along the anterior-posterior 
(A-P) axis. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins in Drosophila repress Hox expression
and maintain the expression patterns during development. Mice deficient for
homologues of the Drosophila PcG genes, such as M33, bmi1, mel18, rae28 and eed, 
show altered Hox expression patterns. In this study, we examined the time course 
of Hoxb3 expression during late gastrulation and early segmentation of
rae28-deficient mice. Hoxb3 was expressed ectopically in pharyngeal arch and
hindbrain from embryonic day (E) 9.5 and 10.5, respectively. The anterior
boundary of ectopic expression in the hindbrain extended gradually in the rostral
direction as development proceeded from E10.5 to E12.5. Expression of kreisler
and Krox20, which function as positive regulators of Hoxb3 expression, was not
affected in rae28-deficient embryos. Analysis of a neural crest marker, p75, in
rae28-deficient mice revealed that the neural crest cells begin to ectopically
express Hoxb3 after leaving the hindbrain. Our results suggest that rae28 is not 
required for the establishment but maintenance of Hoxb3 expression.

PMID: 11044623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):307-17.

Regulation of mouse lens fiber cell development and differentiation by the Maf
gene.

Ring BZ(1), Cordes SP, Overbeek PA, Barsh GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford,
California 94305-5428, USA.

Maf is a basic domain/leucine zipper domain protein originally identified as a
proto-oncogene whose consensus target site in vitro, the T-MARE, is an extended
version of an AP-1 site normally recognized by Fos and Jun. Maf and the closely
related family members Neural retina leucine zipper (Nrl), L-Maf, and Krml1/MafB 
have been implicated in a wide variety of developmental and physiologic roles;
however, mutations in vivo have been described only for Krml1/MafB, in which a
loss-of-function causes abnormalities in hindbrain development due to failure to 
activate the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes. We have used gene targeting to replace Maf
coding sequences with those of lacZ, and have carried out a comprehensive
analysis of embryonic expression and the homozygous mutant phenotype in the eye. 
Maf is expressed in the lens vesicle after invagination, and becomes highly
upregulated in the equatorial zone, the site at which self-renewing anterior
epithelial cells withdraw from the cell cycle and terminally differentiate into
posterior fiber cells. Posterior lens cells in Maf(lacZ) mutant mice exhibit
failure of elongation at embryonic day 11.5, do not express (&agr;)A- and all of 
the (beta)-crystallin genes, and display inappropriately high levels of DNA
synthesis. This phenotype partially overlaps with those reported for gene
targeting of Prox1 and Sox1; however, expression of these genes is grossly
normal, as is expression of Eya1, Eya2, Pax6, and Sox2. Recombinant Maf protein
binds to T-MARE sites in the (alpha)A-, (beta)B2-, and (beta)A4-crystallin
promoters but fails to bind to a point mutation in the (alpha)A-crystallin
promoter that has been shown previously to be required for promoter function. Our
results indicate that Maf directly activates many if not all of the
(beta)-crystallin genes, and suggest a model for coordinating cell cycle
withdrawal with terminal differentiation.

PMID: 10603348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 1999 Feb;126(4):759-69.

Conserved and distinct roles of kreisler in regulation of the paralogous Hoxa3
and Hoxb3 genes.

Manzanares M(1), Cordes S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Sadl V, Maruthainar K, Barsh G,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During anteroposterior patterning of the developing hindbrain, the anterior
expression of 3' Hox genes maps to distinct rhombomeric boundaries and, in many
cases, is upregulated in specific segments. Paralogous genes frequently have
similar anterior boundaries of expression but it is not known if these are
controlled by common mechanisms. The expression of the paralogous Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes extends from the posterior spinal cord up to the rhombomere (r) 4/5
boundary and both genes are upregulated specifically in r5. However, in this
study, we have found that Hoxa3 expression is also upregulated in r6, showing
that there are differences in segmental expression between paralogues. We have
used transgenic analysis to investigate the mechanisms underlying the pattern of 
segmental expression of Hoxa3. We found that the intergenic region between Hoxa3 
and Hoxa4 contains several enhancers, which summed together mediate a pattern of 
expression closely resembling that of the endogenous Hoxa3 gene. One enhancer
specifically directs expression in r5 and r6, in a manner that reflects the
upregulation of the endogenous gene in these segments. Deletion analysis
localized this activity to a 600 bp fragment that was found to contain a single
high-affinity binding site for the Maf bZIP protein Krml1, encoded by the
kreisler gene. This site is necessary for enhancer activity and when multimerized
it is sufficient to direct a kreisler-like pattern in transgenic embryos.
Furthermore the r5/r6 enhancer activity is dependent upon endogenous kreisler and
is activated by ectopic kreisler expression. This demonstrates that Hoxa3, along 
with its paralog Hoxb3, is a direct target of kreisler in the mouse hindbrain.
Comparisons between the Krml1-binding sites in the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 enhancers
reveal that there are differences in both the number of binding sites and way
that kreisler activity is integrated and restricted by these two control regions.
Analysis of the individual sites revealed that they have different requirements
for mediating r5/r6 and dorsal roof plate expression. Therefore, the restriction 
of Hoxb3 to r5 and Hoxa3 to r5 and r6, together with expression patterns of Hoxb3
in other vertebrate species suggests that these regulatory elements have a common
origin but have later diverged during vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 9895323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Hematol. 1998 Dec;68(4):343-53.

Homeobox genes in normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis.

Chiba S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Tokyo Hospital, Japan.
schiba-tky@umin.ac.jp

Homeobox genes are broadly classified into two subclasses: HOX and non-HOX
homeobox genes. A number of genes in both classes are expressed in a variety of
hematopoietic cells. Two major categories of evidence implying the involvement of
these genes in normal hematopoiesis have been demonstrated. First, the expression
pattern of the homeobox genes in hematopoietic cells is lineage- and
differentiation-stage specific. Second, enforced and suppressed expression of
various homeobox genes cause defects in the hematopoietic cells of specific
lineages. The reduction in myeloid, erythroid and B cell progenitors is found in 
mice with a disrupted HOXA9 gene. The thymuses of HOXB3-overexpressed marrow
recipients contain a markedly decreased number of CD4/CD8 double-positive T
cells. These examples suggest that the proper level of expression and timely
down-regulation of some homeobox genes are necessary for normal hematopoiesis.
Homeobox genes are also implicated in human and mouse leukemias. In human
leukemias, a HOX gene (HOXA9) and two non-HOX homeobox genes (PBX1 and HOX11) are
involved in chromosomal translocations. In mouse leukemias, provirus integrations
cause aberrant expression of several HOX and non-HOX genes. Currently available
information will be discussed separately on HOX and non-HOX genes, in normal and 
leukemic hematopoiesis, respectively.

PMID: 9885434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6201-12.

Definition of the transcriptional activation domains of three human HOX proteins 
depends on the DNA-binding context.

Viganò MA(1), Di Rocco G, Zappavigna V, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)TIGET, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Hox proteins control developmental patterns and cell differentiation in
vertebrates by acting as positive or negative regulators of still unidentified
downstream target genes. The homeodomain and other small accessory sequences
encode the DNA-protein and protein-protein interaction functions which ultimately
dictate target recognition and functional specificity in vivo. The effector
domains responsible for either positive or negative interactions with the cell
transcriptional machinery are unknown for most Hox proteins, largely due to a
lack of physiological targets on which to carry out functional analysis. We
report the identification of the transcriptional activation domains of three
human Hox proteins, HOXB1, HOXB3, and HOXD9, which interact in vivo with the
autoregulatory and cross-regulatory enhancers of the murine Hoxb-1 and human
HOXD9 genes. Activation domains have been defined both in a homologous context,
i.e., within a HOX protein binding as a monomer or as a HOX-PBX heterodimer to
the specific target, and in a heterologous context, after translocation to the
yeast Gal4 DNA-binding domain. Transfection analysis indicates that activation
domains can be identified in different regions of the three HOX proteins
depending on the context in which they interact with the DNA target. These
results suggest that Hox proteins may be multifunctional transcriptional
regulators, interacting with different cofactors and/or components of the
transcriptional machinery depending on the structure of their target regulatory
elements.

PMCID: PMC109207
PMID: 9774637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 2;16(26):3403-12.

Cellular proliferation and transformation induced by HOXB4 and HOXB3 proteins
involves cooperation with PBX1.

Krosl J(1), Baban S, Krosl G, Rozenfeld S, Largman C, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The products of PBX homeobox genes, which were initially discovered in reciprocal
translocations occurring in human leukemias, have been shown to cooperate in the 
in vitro DNA binding with HOX proteins. Despite the growing body of data
implicating Hox genes in the development of various cancers, little is known
about the role of HOX-PBX interactions in the regulation of proliferation and
induction of transformation of mammalian cells. We build on the existing model of
Hox-induced transformation of Rat-1 cells to show that both cellular
transformation and proliferation induced by Hoxb4 and Hoxb3 are greatly modulated
by the levels of available PBX1 present in these cells. Furthermore, we show that
the transforming capacity of these two HOX proteins depends on their conserved
tetrapeptide and homeodomain regions which mediate binding to PBX and DNA,
respectively. Taken together, results of this study demonstrate that cooperation 
between HOX and PBX proteins modulates cellular proliferation and strongly
suggest that cooperative DNA binding by these two groups of proteins represent
the basis for Hox-induced cellular transformation.

PMID: 9692548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 1;273(18):11092-9.

Regulatory interactions between the human HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 proteins and
the upstream sequence of the Otx2 gene in embryonal carcinoma cells.

Guazzi S(1), Pintonello ML, Viganò A, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, H. San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy. guazzis@dibit.hsr.it

Vertebrate Hox and Otx genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors 
thought to transduce positional information along the body axis in the segmental 
portion of the trunk and in the rostral brain, respectively. Moreover, Hox and
Otx2 genes show a complementary spatial regulation during embryogenesis. In this 
report, we show that a 1821-base pair (bp) upstream DNA fragment of the Otx2 gene
is positively regulated by co-transfection with expression vectors for the human 
HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 proteins in an embryonal carcinoma cell line (NT2/D1) and
that a shorter fragment of only 534 bp is able to drive this regulation. We also 
identified the HOXB1, HOXB2, and HOXB3 DNA-binding region on the 534-bp Otx2
genomic fragment using nuclear extracts from Hox-transfected COS cells and 12.5
days postcoitum mouse embryos or HOXB3 homeodomain-containing bacterial extracts.
HOXB1, HOXB3, and nuclear extracts from 12.5 days postcoitum mouse embryos bind
to a sequence containing two palindromic TAATTA sites, which bear four copies of 
the ATTA core sequence, a common feature of most HOM-C/HOX binding sites. HOXB2
protected an adjacent site containing a direct repeat of an ACTT sequence, quite 
divergent from the ATTA consensus. The region bound by the three homeoproteins is
strikingly conserved through evolution and necessary (at least for HOXB1 and
HOXB3) to mediate the up-regulation of the Otx2 transcription. Taken together,
our data support the hypothesis that anteriorly expressed Hox genes might play a 
role in the refinement of the Otx2 early expression boundaries in vivo.

PMID: 9556594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Biol. 1998 Mar 1;195(1):1-15.

Hox group 3 paralogs regulate the development and migration of the thymus,
thyroid, and parathyroid glands.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112-5331.

The thymus, thyroid, and parathyroid glands in vertebrates develop from the
pharyngeal region, with contributions both from pharyngeal endoderm and from
neural crest cells in the pharyngeal arches. Hoxa3 mutant homozygotes have
defects in the development of all three organs. Roles for the Hoxa3 paralogs,
Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, were investigated by examining various mutant combinations. The 
thyroid defects seen in Hoxa3 single mutants are exacerbated in double mutants
with either of its paralogs, although none of the double-mutant combinations
resulted in thyroid agenesis. The results indicate that the primary role of these
genes in thyroid development is their effect on the development and migration of 
the ultimobranchial bodies, which contribute the parafollicular or C-cells to the
thyroid. Hoxb3, Hoxd3 double mutants show no obvious defects in the thymus or
parathyroids. However, the removal of one functional copy of Hoxa3 from the
Hoxb3, Hoxd3 double mutants (Hoxa3 +/-, Hoxb3-/-, Hoxd3-/-) results in the
failure of the thymus and parathyroid glands to migrate to their normal positions
in the throat. Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms used to
mediate the movement of tissues during development. These results indicate that
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3 have highly overlapping functions in mediating the
migration of pharyngeal organ primordia. In addition, Hoxa3 has a unique function
with respect to its paralogs in thymus, parathyroid, and thyroid development.
This unique function may be conferred by the expression of Hoxa3, but not Hoxb3
nor Hoxd3, in the pharyngeal pouch endoderm.

PMID: 9520319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):274-88.

Hox group 3 paralogous genes act synergistically in the formation of somitic and 
neural crest-derived structures.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that are used to regionalize the mammalian
embryo. Analysis of mice carrying targeted mutations in individual and multiple
Hox genes is beginning to reveal a complex network of interactions among these
closely related genes which is responsible for directing the formation of
spatially restricted tissues and structures. In this report we present an
analysis of the genetic interactions between all members of the third paralogous 
group, Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3. Previous analysis has shown that although mice
homozygous for loss-of-function mutations in either Hoxa3 or Hoxd3 have no
defects in common, mice mutant for both genes demonstrate that these two genes
strongly interact in a dosage-dependent manner. To complete the analysis of this 
paralogous gene family, mice with a targeted disruption of the Hoxb3 gene were
generated. Homozygous mutants have minor defects at low penetrance in the
formation of both the cervical vertebrae and the IXth cranial nerve. Analysis and
comparison of all double-mutant combinations demonstrate that all three members
of this paralogous group interact synergistically to affect the development of
both neuronal and mesenchymal neural crest-derived structures, as well as somitic
mesoderm-derived structures. Surprisingly, with respect to the formation of the
cervical vertebrae, mice doubly mutant for Hoxa3 and Hoxd3 or Hoxb3 and Hoxd3
show an indistinguishable defect, loss of the entire atlas. This suggests that
the identity of the specific Hox genes that are functional in a given region may 
not be as critical as the total number of Hox genes operating in that region.

PMID: 9441667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Gastroenterology. 1997 Aug;113(2):472-7.

Differences in expression of homeobox transcription factors in proximal and
distal human small intestine.

Walters JR(1), Howard A, Rumble HE, Prathalingam SR, Shaw-Smith CJ, Legon S.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Royal Postgraduate Medical School, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, England. jwalters@rpms.ac.uk

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 1997 Aug;113(2):680-2.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Different digestive enzymes and transporters are present in
the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum, but the factors determining region-specific
gene expression are not yet understood. Homeobox transcription factors are
important in defining gradients of cellular differentiation. The aim of this
study was to investigate whether their expression differs between proximal
(duodenal) and distal (ileal) regions of human small intestine.
METHODS: Intestinal RNA was prepared from surgical patients, and
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) performed with mixed
sequence oligonucleotide primers based on conserved regions. PCR products were
identified by cloning and sequencing. Transcript abundance was determined by
Northern blotting.
RESULTS: The human homologues were identified as Cdx-1, Cdx-2 (or Cdx-3), Pdx-1
(previously named Islet/duodenal homeobox [Idx]-1, Ipf-1, or Stf-1), and 13 human
homeodomain cluster genes, including HOXB3, HOXB4, and HOXA6. The relative
abundance of some of these differed between duodenum and ileum. Pdx-1 transcripts
were found only in duodenum, Cdx-2, Cdx-1, and HOXB3 were readily detectable in
both regions, with Cdx-1 having a more marked distal expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Many homeobox genes are expressed in human adult small intestinal
mucosa, and some are found predominantly in one region.

PMID: 9247466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 1;11(7):900-13.

Positive cross-regulation and enhancer sharing: two mechanisms for specifying
overlapping Hox expression patterns.

Gould A(1), Morrison A, Sproat G, White RA, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC)
National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

Vertebrate Hox genes display nested and overlapping patterns of expression.
During mouse hindbrain development, Hoxb3 and Hoxb4 share an expression domain
caudal to the boundary between rhombomeres 6 and 7. Transgenic analysis reveals
that an enhancer (CR3) is shared between both genes and specifies this domain of 
overlap. Both the position of CR3 within the complex and its sequence are
conserved from fish to mammals, suggesting it has a common role in regulating the
vertebrate HoxB complex. CR3 mediates transcriptional activation by multiple Hox 
genes, including Hoxb4, Hoxd4, and Hoxb5 but not Hoxb1. It also functions as a
selective HOX response element in Drosophila, where activation depends on
Deformed, Sex combs reduced, and Antennapedia but not labial. Taken together,
these data show that a Deformed/Hoxb4 autoregulatory loop has been conserved
between mouse and Drosophila. In addition, these studies reveal the existence of 
positive cross-regulation and enhancer sharing as two mechanisms for reinforcing 
the overlapping expression domains of vertebrate Hox genes. In contrast,
Drosophila Hox genes do not appear to share enhancers and where they overlap in
expression, negative cross-regulatory interactions are observed. Therefore,
despite many well documented aspects of Hox structural and functional
conservation, there are mechanistic differences in Hox complex regulation between
arthropods and vertebrates.

PMID: 9106661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Immunity. 1997 Jan;6(1):13-22.

Overexpression of HOXB3 in hematopoietic cells causes defective lymphoid
development and progressive myeloproliferation.

Sauvageau G(1), Thorsteinsdottir U, Hough MR, Hugo P, Lawrence HJ, Largman C,
Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

HOXB3 mRNA levels are high in the earliest CD34+ lineage- bone marrow cells and
low to undetectable in later CD34+/CD34- cells. To gain some insight into the
role this gene may play in hematopoiesis, HOXB3 was overexpressed in murine bone 
marrow cells using retroviral gene transfer. Thymi of HOXB3 marrow recipients
were reduced in size compared with control transplant recipients, with a 24-fold 
decrease in the absolute number of CD4+ CD8+ cells and a 3-fold increase in the
number of CD4- CD8- thymocytes that contained a high proportion of gammadelta
TCR+ cells. B cell differentiation was also perturbed in these mice, as indicated
by the virtual absence of transduced IL-7-responsive pre-B clonogenic
progenitors. Recipients of HOXB3-transduced cells also had elevated numbers of
mature granulocyte macrophage colony-forming cells in their bone marrow and
spleen. Together these results suggest roles for HOXB3 in proliferation and
differentiation processes of both early myeloid and lymphoid developmental
pathways.

PMID: 9052833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem J. 1996 Nov 1;319 ( Pt 3):669-74.

Oct-1 interacts with conserved motifs in the human thyroid transcription factor 1
gene minimal promoter.

Bingle CD(1), Gowan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, St. Bartholomew's School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
U.K.

The homeodomain containing thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is a lung- and 
thyroid-enriched protein implicated in the regulation of a number of pulmonary
specific genes. Within the lung TTF-1 is expressed within the epithelial cells.
Although the molecular mechanisms that govern this tight cell-type-specific
distribution are unclear, transient transfection studies have suggested that
tissue specificity is conferred in part by regions of the proximal promoter.
Further studies have shown that two functionally important regions (BS1 and BS2) 
are sites for activation of the TTF-1 gene by the homeodomain protein HoxB3,
raising the possibility that Hox proteins might function in the regulation of
TTF-1 in vivo. The different cellular distributions of the two proteins within
the lung suggest, however, that proteins distinct from HoxB3 might be the
mediators of expression through these sites. In the present study we have used
gel-mobility-shift experiments to show that in a pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell
line (NCI-H441) that expresses TTF-1, the same single protein binds to both of
these sites. The binding of this protein is competed for specifically by the
addition of oligonucleotides containing a range of octamer-binding sites but not 
by a variety of non-related binding sites. Using specific antiserum we have
identified this protein as being the ubiquitously expressed POU-domain protein
Oct-1. Reverse transcriptase-PCR performed with degenerated primers suggests that
Oct-1 is the major POU-domain-containing protein expressed in H441 cells. These
results suggest that BS1 and BS2 are functional octamer sites and might therefore
be implicated in the basal rather than the tissue-restricted expression of the
TTF-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1217841
PMID: 8920965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Stem Cells. 1996 May;14(3):281-91.

The role of HOX homeobox genes in normal and leukemic hematopoiesis.

Lawrence HJ(1), Sauvageau G, Humphries RK, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

A sizable amount of new data points to a role for the HOX family of homeobox
genes in hematopoiesis. Recent studies have demonstrated that HOXA and HOXB genes
are expressed in human CD34+ cells, and are downregulated as cells leave the
CD34+ compartment. In addition, expression of certain genes, including HOXB3 and 
HOXB4, is largely restricted to the long-term culture-initiating cell enriched
pool, containing the putative stem cell population. Studies have also shown that 
HOX genes appear to be important for normal T lymphocyte and activated natural
killer cell function. Overexpression of Hox-b4 in transplanted murine marrow cell
results in a dramatic expansion of stem cells, while maintaining normal
peripheral blood counts. In contrast, overexpression of Hox-a10 resulted in
expansion of progenitor pools, accompanied by unique changes in the
differentiation patterns of committed progenitors. Overexpression of Hox-a10 or
Hox-b8 led to the development of myeloid leukemias, while animals transfected
with marrow cells overexpressing Hox-b4 do not appear to develop malignancies.
Blockade of HOX gene function using antisense oligonucleotides has revealed that 
several HOX genes appear to influence either myeloid or erythroid colony
formation. Mice homozygous for a targeted disruption of the HOX-a9 gene show
reduced numbers of granulocytes and lymphocytes, smaller spleens and thymuses,
and reduced numbers of committed progenitors. These studies demonstrate that HOX 
homeobox genes play a role in both the early stem cell function as well as in
later stages of hematopoietic differentiation, and that perturbations of HOX gene
expression can be leukemogenic.

PMID: 8724694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Genes Dev. 1995 Jul 15;9(14):1753-65.

Overexpression of HOXB4 in hematopoietic cells causes the selective expansion of 
more primitive populations in vitro and in vivo.

Sauvageau G(1), Thorsteinsdottir U, Eaves CJ, Lawrence HJ, Largman C, Lansdorp
PM, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

Hox genes were first recognized for their role in embryonic development and may
also play important lineage-specific functions in a variety of somatic tissues
including the hematopoietic system. We have recently shown that certain members
of the Hox A and B clusters, such as HOXB3 and HOXB4, are preferentially
expressed in subpopulations of human bone marrow that are highly enriched for the
most primitive hematopoietic cell types. To assess the role these genes may play 
in regulating the proliferation and/or differentiation of such cells, we
engineered the overexpression of HOXB4 in murine bone marrow cells by retroviral 
gene transfer and analyzed subsequent effects on the behavior of various
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell populations both in vitro and in vivo.
Serial transplantation studies revealed a greatly enhanced ability of
HOXB4-transduced bone marrow cells to regenerate the most primitive hematopoietic
stem cell compartment resulting in 50-fold higher numbers of transplantable
totipotent hematopoietic stem cells in primary and secondary recipients, compared
with serially passaged neo-infected control cells. This heightened expansion in
vivo of HOXB4-transduced hematopoietic stem cells was not accompanied by
identifiable anomalies in the peripheral blood of these mice. Enhanced
proliferation in vitro of day-12 CFU-S and clonogenic progenitors was also
documented. These results indicate HOXB4 to be an important regulator of very
early but not late hematopoietic cell proliferation and suggest a new approach to
the controlled amplification of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cell
populations.

PMID: 7622039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 6;91(25):12223-7.

Differential expression of homeobox genes in functionally distinct CD34+
subpopulations of human bone marrow cells.

Sauvageau G(1), Lansdorp PM, Eaves CJ, Hogge DE, Dragowska WH, Reid DS, Largman
C, Lawrence HJ, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Canada.

Class I homeobox (Hox) genes encode a major group of transcription factors
controlling embryonic development and have been implicated in the continuing
process of hematopoietic cell differentiation. They are clustered on four
chromosomes and, in early development, exhibit spatially restricted expression
with respect to their 3'-->5' chromosomal position. By using an improved
PCR-based method for amplifying total cDNA derived from limited cell numbers, we 
now describe the expression of class I Hox genes in highly purified CD34+ cell
subpopulations isolated from normal human bone marrow that represent functionally
distinct stem and progenitor cell compartments. Our data indicate that at least
16 different Hox genes, mainly from the A and the B clusters, are expressed in
one or more of these subpopulations of human hematopoietic cells. Moreover,
markedly elevated expression of some of the Hox genes found at the 3' end of the 
A and B clusters (e.g., HoxB3) was a unique feature of the subpopulations that
contained the most primitive functionally defined cells, whereas genes located in
the 5' region of each cluster (e.g., HoxA10) were found to be expressed at nearly
equal levels in the CD34+ subpopulations analyzed. In contrast to the findings
for CD34+ cells, expression of two selected Hox genes, HoxB3 and HoxA10, was
virtually extinguished in the CD34- fraction of bone marrow cells. These results 
demonstrate the expression of a broad range of Hox genes in primitive
hematopoietic cells and point to the existence of a regulated program of Hox gene
expression during their normal development.

PMCID: PMC45409
PMID: 7527557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Gene. 1994 Nov 18;149(2):381-2.

Chick HoxB3: deduced amino-acid sequence and embryonic gene expression.

Rex M(1), Scotting PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Queen's Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, 
UK.

The deduced amino-acid sequence of chick HoxB3 shows 70% homology to the murine
HoxB3. The major difference is that the chick sequence lacks a run of Gly
residues present in mouse and human HoxB3. The basic pattern of expression of
HoxB3 in the embryonic nervous system is conserved between mice and chicks.

PMID: 7959024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. EMBO J. 1994 Jul 15;13(14):3339-47.

The thyroid transcription factor-1 gene is a candidate target for regulation by
Hox proteins.

Guazzi S(1), Lonigro R, Pintonello L, Boncinelli E, Di Lauro R, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele,
Milano, Italy.

Vertebrate Hox homeobox genes are transcription factors which regulate
antero-posterior axial identity in embryogenesis, presumably through activation
and/or repression of downstream target genes. Some of these targets were reported
to code for molecules involved in cell-cell interactions, whereas no relationship
has yet been demonstrated between Hox genes and other transcription factors
involved in determining and/or maintaining tissue specificity. The thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a homeodomain-containing protein required for
expression of thyroid-specific genes. A 862 bp 5' genomic fragment of the rat
TTF-1 gene, conferring thyroid-specific expression to a reporter gene, was
sufficient to mediate transactivation by the human HOXB3 gene in co-transfection 
assay in both NIH3T3 or HeLa cells. HOXB3 is expressed in early mammalian
embryogenesis in the anterior neuroectoderm, branchial arches and their
derivatives, including the area of the thyroid primordia and thyroid gland.
Transcription of the TTF-1 promoter is induced only by HOXB3, while its
paralogous gene HOXD3 or other Hox genes expressed more posteriorly (HOXA4,
HOXD4, HOXC5, HOXC6, HOXC8 and Hoxd-8) have no effect. Transactivation by HOXB3
is mediated by two binding sites containing an ATTA core located at -100 and +30 
from the transcription start site. DNase I footprinting experiments show that the
two sites bind HOXB3 protein synthesized in both Escherichia coli and eukaryotic 
cells, as well as nuclear factor(s) present in protein extracts obtained from
mouse embryonic tissues which express group 3 Hox genes and TTF-1. Some of the
DNA-protein complexes formed by the embryonic extracts are indistinguishable from
those generated by HOXB3.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC395231
PMID: 7913891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 7;91(12):5335-9.

Inhibition of retinoic acid-induced activation of 3' human HOXB genes by
antisense oligonucleotides affects sequential activation of genes located
upstream in the four HOX clusters.

Faiella A(1), Zappavigna V, Mavilio F, Boncinelli E.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, S. Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Most homeobox genes belonging to the Hox family are sequentially activated in
embryonal carcinoma cells upon treatment with retinoic acid. Genes located at the
3' end of each one of the four Hox clusters are activated first, whereas upstream
Hox genes are activated progressively later. This activation has been extensively
studied for human HOX genes in the NT2/D1 cell line and shown to take place at
the transcriptional level. To understand the molecular mechanisms of sequential
HOX gene activation in these cells, we tried to modulate the expression of 3' HOX
genes through the use of antisense oligonucleotides added to the culture medium. 
We chose the HOXB locus. A 5- to 15-fold reduction of the expression of HOXB1 and
HOXB3 was sufficient to produce a significant inhibition of the activation of the
upstream HOXB genes, as well as of their paralogs in the HOXA, HOXC, and HOXD
clusters. Conversely, no effect was detectable on downstream HOX genes. The
extent of this inhibition increased for progressively more-5' genes. The
stability of the corresponding mRNAs appeared to be unaffected, supporting the
idea that the observed effect might be mediated at the transcriptional level.
These data suggest a cascade model of progressive activation of Hox genes, with a
3'-to-5' polarity.

PMCID: PMC43989
PMID: 7911240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Development. 1992 Nov;116(3):653-61.

An amphioxus homeobox gene: sequence conservation, spatial expression during
development and insights into vertebrate evolution.

Holland PW(1), Holland LZ, Williams NA, Holland ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, UK.

The embryology of amphioxus has much in common with vertebrate embryology,
reflecting a close phylogenetic relationship between the two groups. Amphioxus
embryology is simpler in several key respects, however, including a lack of
pronounced craniofacial morphogenesis. To gain an insight into the molecular
changes that accompanied the evolution of vertebrate embryology, and into the
relationship between the amphioxus and vertebrate body plans, we have undertaken 
the first molecular level investigation of amphioxus embryonic development. We
report the cloning, complete DNA sequence determination, sequence analysis and
expression analysis of an amphioxus homeobox gene, AmphiHox3, evolutionarily
homologous to the third-most 3' paralogous group of mammalian Hox genes. Sequence
comparison to a mammalian homologue, mouse Hox-2.7 (HoxB3), reveals several
stretches of amino acid conservation within the deduced protein sequences. Whole 
mount in situ hybridization reveals localized expression of AmphiHox3 in the
posterior mesoderm (but not in the somites), and region-specific expression in
the dorsal nerve cord, of amphioxus neurulae, later embryos and larvae. The
anterior limit to expression in the nerve cord is at the level of the four/five
somite boundary at the neurula stage, and stabilises to just anterior to the
first nerve cord pigment spot to form. Comparison to the anterior expression
boundary of mouse Hox-2.7 (HoxB3) and related genes suggests that the vertebrate 
brain is homologous to an extensive region of the amphioxus nerve cord that
contains the cerebral vesicle (a region at the extreme rostral tip) and extends
posterior to somite four.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1363226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


