
1. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):75-80. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Effect of overexpression of HOX genes on its invasive tendency in cerebral
glioma.

Guo YB(1), Shao YM(2), Chen J(3), Xu SB(1), Zhang XD(4), Wang MR(5), Liu HY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Surgery, Central Hospital of
Changchun, Changchun, Jilin 130011, P.R. China. (3)Department of Orthopedics,
China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130033, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Anatomy, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (5)Department of Clinical
Medicine, College of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Transcription factors encoded by HOX genes are vital in the determination of cell
fate and identity during embryonic development. In certain malignancies, HOX
genes also behave as oncogenes. The present study demonstrated suppression of the
invasive tendency of glioblastoma multiforme U-118 and U-138 cells by the
introduction of the antisense fragments of HOXA6 and B13 genes using
electroporation. The invasion index indicated 79 and 72% reductions in the
invasive ability of antisense HOXA6 and B13, respectively. No significant
differences in the invasive index of the parental and mock cells of each HOX gene
were observed (invasive index, 0.75-0.91; P=0.05). A reduction in invasion
tendency was also observed following betulinic acid (BA) treatment: The results
from the matrigel assay analysis clearly demonstrated a significant inhibition in
the invasive behaviour of U-118 and U-138 cell lines from day 15 following BA
treatment, with a maximum effect on day 30. The invasion index demonstrated 62
and 65% reductions in invasion ability in the U-118 and U-138 cell lines,
respectively. The suppression of HOXC6 and B13 expression by the introduction of 
the corresponding antisense fragments in addition to BA reduced invasion tendency
in U-118 and U-138 cell lines. The mechanism underlying the association between
the HOX gene and invasive behavior in glioma cells is yet to be understood.
However, the anti-invasive behavior of BA may aid understanding of the mechanism 
in future studies.

PMCID: PMC4727036
PMID: 26870170  [PubMed]


2. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2015 Dec 31. doi: 10.1111/cga.12153. [Epub ahead of print]

Homeobox family Hoxc localization during murine palate formation.

Hirata A(1), Katayama K(2), Tsuji T(3), Imura H(4), Natsume N(4), Sugahara T(4), 
Kunieda T(3), Nakamura H(5), Otsuki Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka Medical
College, 2-7, Daigaku-machi, Takatsuki, Osaka, 569-8686, Japan. (2)Division of
Functional Morphology, Department of Basic Veterinary Medicine, School of
Veterinary Medicine, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science University, 1-7-1,
Kyonancho, Musashino, Tokyo, 180-8602, Japan. (3)Department of Animal Science,
Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama University, 1-1-1,
Tsushima-naka, kita-ku, Okayama, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan. (4)Division of
Research and Treatment for Oral and Maxillofacial Congenital Anomalies, School of
Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University, 2-11, Suemori-dori, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya,
Aichi, 464-8651, Japan. (5)Department of Oral Histology, School of Dentistry,
Matsumoto Dental University, 1780, Hirooka-gobara, Shiojiri, Nagano, 399-0781,
Japan. (6)Osaka Medical College, 2-7, Daigaku-machi, Takatsuki, Osaka, 569-8686, 
Japan.

Homeobox genes play important roles in craniofacial morphogenesis. However, the
characteristics of the transcription factor Hoxc during palate formation remain
unclear. We examined the immunolocalization patterns of Hoxc5, Hoxc4, and Hoxc6
in palatogenesis of cleft palate (Eh/Eh) mice. On the other hand, mutations in
the FGF/FGFR pathway are exclusively associated with syndromic forms of cleft
palate. We also examined the immunolocalization of Fgfr1 and Erk1/2 to clarify
their relationships with Hoxc in palatogenesis. Some palatal epithelial cells
showed Hoxc5 labeling, while almost no labeling of mesenchymal cells was observed
in +/+ mice. As palate formation progressed in +/+ mice, Hoxc5, Hoxc4, and Hoxc6 
were observed in medial epithelial seam cells. Hoxc5 and Hoxc6 were detected in
the oral epithelium. The palatal mesenchyme also showed intense staining for
Fgfr1and Erk1/2 with progression of palate formation. In contrast, the palatal
shelves of Eh/Eh mice exhibited impaired horizontal growth and failed to fuse,
resulting in a cleft. Hoxc5 was observed in a few epithelial cells and diffusely 
in the mesenchyme of Eh/Eh palatal shelves. No or little labeling of Fgfr1 and
Erk1/2 was detected in the cleft palate of Eh/Eh mice. These findings suggest
that Hoxc genes are involved in palatogenesis. Furthermore, there may be the
differences in the localization pattern between Hoxc5, Hoxc4, and Hoxc6.
Additionally, Hoxc distribution in palatal cells during palate development may be
correlated with FGF signaling. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26718736  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015 Dec 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Differential Genes Expression Profiles and Pathways of Bone
Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells of Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis Patients by
Microarray and Integrated Gene Network Analysis.

Zhuang Q(1), Mao W, Xu P, Li H, Sun Z, Li S, Qiu G, Li J, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Orthopedics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing,
P.R. China †Center of Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P.R. China.

STUDY DESIGN: Microarray approach and integrated gene network analysis.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the differential genetic expression profile, Go terms and
KEGG pathways in bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) of AIS and non-AIS 
controls.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: The pathogenesis of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS) and the accompanying generalized osteopenia remain unclear. Our previous
study suggested increased proliferation ability and decreased osteogenic
differentiation ability of BM-MSCs of AIS. Therefore, we hypothesized that that
MSCs may play a significant role in the etiology and pathogenesis of AIS.
METHODS: In this study, microarray analysis was used to identify differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) of BM-MSCs from AIS patients compared with those from
healthy individuals. Comprehensive bioinformatics analyses were then used to
enrich datasets for Gene Ontology and pathway. Based on the gene signal
transduction network analysis of DEGs contained in significant pathways, 24
potential crucial genes were selected for validation by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: There are 1,027 previously unrecognized DEGs in BM-MSCs from AIS
patients. Pathway analysis revealed dys-regulated MAPK signaling pathway;
PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, Calcium signaling pathway, PPAR signaling pathway,
Ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, and Notch signaling pathway, all of which have
been reported to play important role in regulating the osteogenic or adipogenic
differentiation of MSCs. Furthermore, gene signal transduction networks analysis 
indicated that MAP2K, SMAD3, HOXC6, HSPA6, GTF2I, CREBBP, PIK3R2 and DUSP2 may
play essential roles in AIS pathogenesis and accompanied osteopenia.
CONCLUSION: This study reports the differential genes expression profiles of
BM-MSCs from AIS patients and related potential pathways for the first time.
These previously unrecognized genes and molecular pathways might play a
significant role, in not only the causal mechanism of osteopenia in AIS, but also
the AIS initiation and development. The identification of these candidate genes
provide novel insight into the underlying etiological mechanisms of AIS.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A.

PMID: 26679893  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Development. 2015 Nov 15;142(22):3859-68. doi: 10.1242/dev.126888. Epub 2015 Oct 
8.

Mesenchymal Hox6 function is required for mouse pancreatic endocrine cell
differentiation.

Larsen BM(1), Hrycaj SM(2), Newman M(2), Li Y(3), Wellik DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA Cellular and Molecular
Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA. (3)Department of Cell and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA Cellular and Molecular
Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA Department
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2200, USA dwellik@umich.edu.

Despite significant advances in our understanding of pancreatic endocrine cell
development, the function of the pancreatic mesodermal niche in this process is
poorly understood. Here we report a novel role for mouse Hox6 genes in pancreatic
organogenesis. Hox6 genes are expressed exclusively in the mesoderm of the
developing pancreas. Genetic loss of all three Hox6 paralogs (Hoxa6, Hoxb6 and
Hoxc6) leads to a dramatic loss of endoderm-derived endocrine cells, including
insulin-secreting ß-cells, and to mild delays and disruptions in pancreatic
branching and exocrine differentiation. Ngn3-expressing pan-endocrine progenitor 
cells are specified normally in Hox6 mutant pancreata, but fail to mature into
hormone-producing cells. Reduced expression of Wnt5a is observed in mutant
pancreatic mesenchyme, leading to subsequent loss of expression of the crucial
Wnt inhibitors Sfrp3 and Dkk1 in endocrine progenitor cells. These results reveal
a key role for Hox6 genes in establishing Wnt mesenchymal-epithelial crosstalk in
pancreatic development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712882 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26450967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Anticancer Res. 2015 Oct;35(10):5443-51.

Signatures of Adverse Pathological Features, Androgen Insensitivity and
Metastatic Potential in Prostate Cancer.

Tolkach Y(1), Merseburger A(1), Herrmann T(1), Kuczyk M(1), Serth J(1), Imkamp
F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (2)Clinic for Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany imkamp.florian@mh-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The genetic characterization of prostate tumors is important for 
personalized therapy. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of
previously described prostate cancer-related genes in the genetic
characterization of prostate tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-two genes were selected for expression analysis
(real time-quantitative polymerase chain reaction). One normal prostatic
epithelial cell line and three standardized prostate cancer cell lines were used.
Twenty-eight patients treated with radical prostatectomy were included in the
study.
RESULTS: The following genes appeared to be possibly related to the metastatic
potential of the tumor: ELOVL fatty acid elongase 7 (ELOVL7), enhancer of zeste 2
polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit (EZH2), gastrulation brain homeobox 2
(GBX2), golgi membrane protein 1 (GOLM1), homeobox C6 (HOXC6), minichromosome
maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6), marker of proliferation Ki-67 (MKI67),
mucin 1, cell surface associated (MUC1), MYC binding protein 2, E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase (MYCBP2), somatostatin receptor 1 (SSTR1), topoisomerase (DNA) II 
alpha 170 kDa (TOP2A) and exportin 6 (XPO6). Six genes were differentially
expressed in patients with localized and locally advanced cancer (GOLM1, GBX2,
XPO6, SSTR1, TOP2A and cell division cycle associated 5, CDCA5) and three genes
(HOXC6, Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) and MYC binding protein 2, 
E3 ubiquitin protein ligase, MYCBP2) in patients with a low vs. high Gleason
grade/sum.
CONCLUSION: Some of the investigated genes show promising prognostic and
classification features, which might be useful in a clinical setting, warranting 
for further validation.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26408707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Prostate. 2015 Dec;75(16):1868-76. doi: 10.1002/pros.23065. Epub 2015 Aug 27.

The role of HOXC6 in prostate cancer development.

Hamid AR(1,)(2,)(3), Hoogland AM(4), Smit F(5), Jannink S(5), van Rijt-van de
Westerlo C(1,)(2), Jansen CF(1,)(2), van Leenders GJ(4), Verhaegh GW(1,)(2),
Schalken JA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (2)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Urology, Cipto Mangunkusumo Hospital, Department
Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(4)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)NovioGendix BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (HOX) genes, which are involved in organ development and
homeostasis, have been shown to be involved in normal prostate- and PCa
development. In this study, we investigate the expression levels of the HOX A-D
genes in PCa. The functional relevance and potential of HOX gene as biomarkers
are explored.
METHODS: We evaluated HOX gene expression in prostate tissues of different grade 
and stage and related the outcome to clinical parameters. We analyzed AR
regulation and function of HOXC6 in PCa cell lines. We developed a urine-based
HOXC6 mRNA assay for diagnostic purposes.
RESULTS: HOXC6 was one of the most upregulated HOX genes in all primary,
metastasized, and castration-resistant PCa. HOXC6 upregulation was specific to
the epithelial component of PCa, and HOXC6 was shown to be involved in epithelial
cell proliferation. HOXC6 expression was not influenced by androgens nor by
treatments targeting the AR signaling pathway. HOXC6 expression was not related
to a prognosis after radical prostatectomy, that is, biochemical or local
recurrence. We successfully developed an assay for HOXC6 mRNA detection in urine 
and confirmed that HOXC6 levels are higher in PCa patients.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXC6 has a role in all PCa stages, particularly in PCa cell
proliferation. Due to its stable expression, HOXC6 is a novel candidate biomarker
for PCa not only in early detection but also for monitoring of progression or
response to therapy.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26310814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Ukr Biochem J. 2015 Mar-Apr;87(2):76-87.

INHIBITION OF ERN1 SIGNALING ENZYME AFFECTS HYPOXIC REGULATION OF THE EXPRESSION 
OF E2F8, EPAS1, HOXC6, ATF3, TBX3 AND FOXF1 GENES IN U87 GLIOMA CELLS.

Minchenko OH, Tsymbal DO, Minchenko DO, Kovalevska OV, Karbovskyi LL, Bikfalvi A.

Hypoxia as well as the endoplasmic reticulum stress are important factors of
malignant tumor growth and control of the expression of genes, which regulate
numerous metabolic processes and cell proliferation. Furthermore, blockade of
ERN1 (endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus 1) suppresses cell proliferation and tumor
growth. We studied the effect of hypoxia on the expression of genes encoding the 
transcription factors such as E2F8 (E2F transcription factor 8), EPAS1
(endothelial PAS domain protein 1), TBX3 (T-box 3), ATF3 (activating
transcription factor 3), FOXF1 (forkhead box F), and HOXC6 (homeobox C6) in U87
glioma cells with and without ERN1 signaling enzyme function. We have established
that hypoxia enhances the expression of HOXC6, E2F8, ATF3, and EPAS1 genes but
does not change TBX3 and FOXF1 gene expression in glioma cells with ERNI
function. At the same time, the expression level of all studied genes is strongly
decreased, except for TBX3 gene, in glioma cells without ERN1 function. Moreover,
the inhibition of ERN1 signaling enzyme function significantly modifies the
effect of hypoxia on the expression of these transcription factor genes. removes 
or introduces this regulation as well as changes a direction or magnitude of
hypoxic regulation. Present study demonstrates that fine-tuning of the expression
of proliferation related genes depends upon hypoxia and ERN1-mediated endoplasmic
reticulum stress signaling and correlates with slower proliferation rate of
glioma cells without ERN1 function.

PMID: 26255341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Invest. 2015;33(7):303-11. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2015.1041641. Epub 2015
Jun 5.

Downregulation of HOXC6 in Serous Ovarian Cancer.

Tait DL(1), Bahrani-Mostafavi Z, Vestal CG, Richardson C, Mostafavi MT.

Author information: 
(1)Carolinas Medical Center, Levine Cancer Institute, Division of Gynecologic
Oncology , Charlotte, North Carolina , USA 1 .

Homeobox (HOX) genes encode transcription factors critical to morphogenesis and
cell differentiation. Although dysregulation of several HOX genes in ovarian
cancer has been reported, little is known about HOXC6 expression in epithelial
ovarian cancer. In this report, analysis of laser capture microdissected samples 
determined HOXC6 expression patterns in normal versus malignant serous ovarian
carcinoma tissues. HOXC6 protein was quantified by ELISA in parallel serum
samples and further validated in a larger cohort of serum samples collected from 
women with and without serous ovarian carcinoma. These data demonstrate
significant downregulation of HOXC6 in serous ovarian cancer.

PMID: 26046583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 1;21(13):3061-70. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3334.
Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Identification of a Candidate Gene Panel for the Early Diagnosis of Prostate
Cancer.

Leyten GH(1), Hessels D(2), Smit FP(2), Jannink SA(2), de Jong H(2), Melchers
WJ(3), Cornel EB(4), de Reijke TM(5), Vergunst H(6), Kil P(7), Knipscheer BC(8), 
Hulsbergen-van de Kaa CA(9), Mulders PF(1), van Oort IM(1), Schalken JA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Urology, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands. (2)Noviogendix, Department of Research and Development,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (3)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Department of Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Noviogendix, Department of
Research and Development, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (4)ZGT Hospital, Department 
of Urology, Hengelo, the Netherlands. (5)AMC University Medical Centre,
Department of Urology, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (6)CWZ Hospital, Department of
Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (7)St Elisabeth Hospital, Department of
Urology, Tilburg, the Netherlands. (8)Scheper Hospital, Department of Urology,
Emmen, the Netherlands. (9)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department
of Pathology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (10)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Department of Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Noviogendix, Department
of Research and Development, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
jack.schalken@radboudumc.nl.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2015 May;12(5):242.

PURPOSE: Serum PSA (sPSA) testing has led to the identification of patients with 
indolent prostate cancer, and inevitably overtreatment has become a concern.
Progensa PCA3 urine testing was shown to improve the diagnosis of prostate
cancer, but its diagnostic value for aggressive prostate cancer is limited.
Therefore, urinary biomarkers that can be used for prediction of Gleason score =7
prostate cancer in biopsies are urgently needed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using gene expression profiling data, 39 prostate cancer
biomarkers were identified. After quantitative PCR analysis on tissue specimens
and urinary sediments, eight promising biomarkers for the urinary detection of
prostate cancer were selected (ONECUT2, HOXC4, HOXC6, DLX1, TDRD1, NKAIN1,
MS4A8B, PPFIA2). The hypothesis that biomarker combinations improve the
diagnostic value for aggressive prostate cancer was tested on 358 urinary
sediments of an intention-to-treat cohort.
RESULTS: A urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) had higher accuracy 
[area under the curve (AUC), 0.77; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.71-0.83] to
predict Gleason score =7 prostate cancer in biopsies compared with Progensa PCA3 
(AUC, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.62-0.75) or sPSA (AUC, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.65-0.78). Combining 
the three-gene panel with sPSA further improved the predictive accuracy (AUC,
0.81; 95% CI, 0.75-0.86). The accuracy of the three-gene predictive model was
maintained in subgroups with low sPSA concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) represents a
promising tool to identify patients with aggressive prostate cancer, also in
those with low sPSA values. The combination of the urinary three-gene panel with 
sPSA bears great potential for the early diagnosis of patients with clinically
significant prostate cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25788493  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jun;1849(6):697-708. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.02.003. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Bisphenol-A induces expression of HOXC6, an estrogen-regulated
homeobox-containing gene associated with breast cancer.

Hussain I(1), Bhan A(1), Ansari KI(1), Deb P(1), Bobzean SA(2), Perrotti LI(2),
Mandal SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA. (2)Department of Psychology, The University 
of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA. (3)Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.
Electronic address: smandal@uta.edu.

HOXC6 is a homeobox-containing gene associated with mammary gland development and
is overexpressed in variety of cancers including breast and prostate cancers.
Here, we have examined the expression of HOXC6 in breast cancer tissue,
investigated its transcriptional regulation via estradiol (E2) and bisphenol-A
(BPA, an estrogenic endocrine disruptor) in vitro and in vivo. We observed that
HOXC6 is differentially over-expressed in breast cancer tissue. E2 induces HOXC6 
expression in cultured breast cancer cells and in mammary glands of Sprague
Dawley rats. HOXC6 expression is also induced upon exposure to BPA both in vitro 
and in vivo. Estrogen-receptor-alpha (ERa) and ER-coregulators such as
MLL-histone methylases are bound to the HOXC6 promoter upon exposure to E2 or BPA
and that resulted in increased histone H3K4-trimethylation, histone acetylation, 
and recruitment of RNA polymerase II at the HOXC6 promoter. HOXC6 overexpression 
induces expression of tumor growth factors and facilitates growth 3D-colony
formation, indicating its potential roles in tumor growth. Our studies
demonstrate that HOXC6, which is a critical player in mammary gland development, 
is upregulated in multiple cases of breast cancer, and is transcriptionally
regulated by E2 and BPA, in vitro and in vivo.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4437882 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25725483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hepatogastroenterology. 2014 Nov-Dec;61(136):2215-8.

Comparison analysis in synchronous and metachronous metastatic colorectal cancer 
based on microarray expression profile.

Wang DD, Xu Y, Tu YL, Tan XL, Zhu ZM, Han MM, Dou CQ, Zeng JP, Tan JW, Du JD,
Jiao HB, Cai SW.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies, 
and liver metastasis is one of the major causes of death of CRC. This study aimed
to compare the genetic difference between metachronous lesions (MC) and
synchronous lesions (SC) and explore the molecular pathology of CRC metastasis.
METHODOLOGY: Microarray expression profile data (GSE10961) including 8 MC and 10 
SC was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. The differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between the two groups were identified based on T test. Furthermore,
GO enrichment analysis was performed for the down-regulated DEGs using DAVID.
Finally, Classify validation of known CRC genes based on previous studies between
MC and SC samples was conducted.
RESULTS: Total of 36 DEGs including 35 down-regulated DEGs and 1 up-regulated
DEGs were identified. The expressional differences of the 5 informative
oncogenes: EGFr, PIK3R1, PTGS2 (COX-2), PTGS1 (COX1), and ALOX5AP between SC and 
MC were really tiny.
CONCLUSIONS: Some DEGs, such as NFAT5, OLR1, ERAP2, HOXC6 and TWIST1 might play
crucial roles in the regulation of CRC metastasis (both SC and MC) and by
disrupting some pathways. However, our results indeed demand further research and
experiment.

PMID: 25699354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):1-2.

Andrés Carrasco (1946-2014).

Blumberg B.

PMID: 25275141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Br J Cancer. 2014 Aug 12;111(4):781-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.337. Epub 2014 Jun
17.

DNA methylation status is more reliable than gene expression at detecting cancer 
in prostate biopsy.

Paziewska A(1), Dabrowska M(2), Goryca K(2), Antoniewicz A(3), Dobruch J(4),
Mikula M(2), Jarosz D(5), Zapala L(3), Borowka A(4), Ostrowski J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical Center for Postgraduate
Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Genetics, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, 02-781 Warsaw,
Poland. (3)Department of Urology, Multidisciplinary Hospital Warsaw-Miedzylesie, 
04-749 Warsaw, Poland. (4)Department of Urology, Medical Center for Postgraduate 
Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland. (5)1] Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Medical Center for Postgraduate Education, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland [2] 
Department of Genetics, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, 02-781 Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: We analysed critically the potential usefulness of RNA- and DNA-based
biomarkers in supporting conventional histological diagnostic tests for prostate 
carcinoma (PCa) detection.
METHODS: Microarray profiling of gene expression and DNA methylation was
performed on 16 benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and 32 cancerous and
non-cancerous prostate samples extracted by radical prostatectomy. The predictive
value of the selected biomarkers was validated by qPCR-based methods using tissue
samples extracted from the 58 prostates and, separately, using 227 prostate core 
biopsies.
RESULTS: HOXC6, AMACR and PCA3 expression showed the best discrimination between 
PCa and BPH. All three genes were previously reported as the most promising
mRNA-based markers for distinguishing cancerous lesions from benign prostate
lesions; however, none were sufficiently sensitive and specific to meet the
criteria for a PCa diagnostic biomarker. By contrast, DNA methylation levels of
the APC, TACC2, RARB, DGKZ and HES5 promoter regions achieved high discriminating
sensitivity and specificity, with area under the curve (AUCs) reaching 0.95-1.0. 
Only a small overlap was detected between the DNA methylation levels of
PCa-positive and PCa-negative needle biopsies, with AUCs ranging between 0.854
and 0.899.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation-based biomarkers reflect the prostate malignancy and
might be useful in supporting clinical decisions for suspected PCa following an
initial negative prostate biopsy.

PMCID: PMC4134497
PMID: 24937670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Epigenetics. 2014 Jul;9(7):1031-46. doi: 10.4161/epi.29025. Epub 2014 May 1.

Key tumor suppressor genes inactivated by "greater promoter" methylation and
somatic mutations in head and neck cancer.

Guerrero-Preston R(1), Michailidi C(2), Marchionni L(3), Pickering CR(4),
Frederick MJ(4), Myers JN(4), Yegnasubramanian S(5), Hadar T(2), Noordhuis MG(6),
Zizkova V(7), Fertig E(8), Agrawal N(9), Westra W(2), Koch W(2), Califano J(10), 
Velculescu VE(5), Sidransky D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery; Johns Hopkins
University; School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology; University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine; Río Piedras, Puerto
Rico. (2)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery; Johns Hopkins
University; School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA. (3)Department of Oncology
Biostatistics; Johns Hopkins University; School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA.
(4)Department of Head and Neck Surgery; University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center; Houston, TX USA. (5)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center; Johns
Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD USA. (6)Department of Otolaryngology and Head
and Neck Surgery; Johns Hopkins University; School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD
USA; Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery; University of
Groningen; University Medical Center; Groningen, The Netherlands. (7)Department
of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery; Johns Hopkins University; School of 
Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; Laboratory of Molecular Pathology and Institute of
Molecular and Translational Medicine; Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry; Palacky 
University; Olomouc, Czech Republic. (8)Division of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics; Department of Oncology; Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center; Baltimore, MD USA. (9)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck
Surgery; Johns Hopkins University; School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; Sidney 
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center; Johns Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD USA. 
(10)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery; Johns Hopkins
University; School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; Milton J. Dance Head and Neck 
Center; Greater Baltimore Medical Center; Baltimore, MD USA.

Tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) are commonly inactivated by somatic mutation and/or
promoter methylation; yet, recent high-throughput genomic studies have not
identified key TSGs inactivated by both mechanisms. We pursued an integrated
molecular analysis based on methylation binding domain sequencing (MBD-seq), 450K
Methylation arrays, whole exome sequencing, and whole genome gene expression
arrays in primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors and
matched uvulopalatopharyngoplasty tissue samples (UPPPs). We uncovered 186
downregulated genes harboring cancer specific promoter methylation including PAX1
and PAX5 and we identified 10 key tumor suppressor genes (GABRB3, HOXC12, PARP15,
SLCO4C1, CDKN2A, PAX1, PIK3AP1, HOXC6, PLCB1, and ZIC4) inactivated by both
promoter methylation and/or somatic mutation. Among the novel tumor suppressor
genes discovered with dual mechanisms of inactivation, we found a high frequency 
of genomic and epigenomic alterations in the PAX gene family of transcription
factors, which selectively impact canonical NOTCH and TP53 pathways to determine 
cell fate, cell survival, and genome maintenance. Our results highlight the
importance of assessing TSGs at the genomic and epigenomic level to identify key 
pathways in HNSCC, deregulated by simultaneous promoter methylation and somatic
mutations.

PMCID: PMC4143405
PMID: 24786473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMC Cancer. 2014 Apr 5;14:244. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-244.

Evaluation of protein biomarkers of prostate cancer aggressiveness.

Rizzardi AE, Rosener NK, Koopmeiners JS, Isaksson Vogel R, Metzger GJ, Forster
CL, Marston LO, Tiffany JR, McCarthy JB, Turley EA, Warlick CA, Henriksen JC,
Schmechel SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Mailcode 359791, 908
Jefferson St, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. sschmech@uw.edu.

BACKGROUND: Prognostic multibiomarker signatures in prostate cancer (PCa) may
improve patient management and provide a bridge for developing novel therapeutics
and imaging methods. Our objective was to evaluate the association between
expression of 33 candidate protein biomarkers and time to biochemical failure
(BF) after prostatectomy.
METHODS: PCa tissue microarrays were constructed representing 160 patients for
whom clinicopathologic features and follow-up data after surgery were available. 
Immunohistochemistry for each of 33 proteins was quantified using automated
digital pathology techniques. Relationships between clinicopathologic features,
staining intensity, and time to BF were assessed. Predictive modeling using
multiple imputed datasets was performed to identify the top biomarker candidates.
RESULTS: In univariate analyses, lymph node positivity, surgical margin
positivity, non-localized tumor, age at prostatectomy, and biomarkers CCND1,
HMMR, IGF1, MKI67, SIAH2, and SMAD4 in malignant epithelium were significantly
associated with time to BF. HMMR, IGF1, and SMAD4 remained significantly
associated with BF after adjusting for clinicopathologic features while
additional associations were observed for HOXC6 and MAP4K4 following adjustment. 
In multibiomarker predictive models, 3 proteins including HMMR, SIAH2, and SMAD4 
were consistently represented among the top 2, 3, 4, and 5 most predictive
biomarkers, and a signature comprised of these proteins best predicted BF at 3
and 5 years.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides rationale for investigation of HMMR, HOXC6,
IGF1, MAP4K4, SIAH2, and SMAD4 as biomarkers of PCa aggressiveness in larger
cohorts.

PMCID: PMC4101830
PMID: 24708576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Hum Mutat. 2014 Jul;35(7):841-50. doi: 10.1002/humu.22547. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Molecular analysis, pathogenic mechanisms, and readthrough therapy on a large
cohort of Kabuki syndrome patients.

Micale L(1), Augello B, Maffeo C, Selicorni A, Zucchetti F, Fusco C, De Nittis P,
Pellico MT, Mandriani B, Fischetto R, Boccone L, Silengo M, Biamino E, Perria C, 
Sotgiu S, Serra G, Lapi E, Neri M, Ferlini A, Cavaliere ML, Chiurazzi P, Monica
MD, Scarano G, Faravelli F, Ferrari P, Mazzanti L, Pilotta A, Patricelli MG,
Bedeschi MF, Benedicenti F, Prontera P, Toschi B, Salviati L, Melis D, Di
Battista E, Vancini A, Garavelli L, Zelante L, Merla G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo Della Sofferenza Hospital, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a multiple congenital anomalies syndrome characterized by
characteristic facial features and varying degrees of mental retardation, caused 
by mutations in KMT2D/MLL2 and KDM6A/UTX genes. In this study, we performed a
mutational screening on 303 Kabuki patients by direct sequencing, MLPA, and
quantitative PCR identifying 133 KMT2D, 62 never described before, and four KDM6A
mutations, three of them are novel. We found that a number of KMT2D truncating
mutations result in mRNA degradation through the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay,
contributing to protein haploinsufficiency. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the
reduction of KMT2D protein level in patients' lymphoblastoid and skin fibroblast 
cell lines carrying KMT2D-truncating mutations affects the expression levels of
known KMT2D target genes. Finally, we hypothesized that the KS patients may
benefit from a readthrough therapy to restore physiological levels of KMT2D and
KDM6A proteins. To assess this, we performed a proof-of-principle study on 14
KMT2D and two KDM6A nonsense mutations using specific compounds that mediate
translational readthrough and thereby stimulate the re-expression of full-length 
functional proteins. Our experimental data showed that both KMT2D and KDM6A
nonsense mutations displayed high levels of readthrough in response to gentamicin
treatment, paving the way to further studies aimed at eventually treating some
Kabuki patients with readthrough inducers.

© 2014 The Authors. *Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4234006
PMID: 24633898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Surg Res. 2014 May 15;188(2):442-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2014.01.017. Epub 2014 
Jan 17.

The survival predictive significance of HOXC6 and HOXC8 in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.

Du YB(1), Dong B(2), Shen LY(1), Yan WP(1), Dai L(1), Xiong HC(1), Liang Z(1),
Kang XZ(1), Qin B(1), Chen KN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery I, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital, Peking
University School of Oncology, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department
of Pathology, Beijing Cancer Hospital, Peking University School of Oncology,
Beijing, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery I, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), 
Beijing Cancer Hospital, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China. Electronic address: chenkeneng@bjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIM: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), a common disease in 
China, is mainly treated surgically. We established a prospective database of
patients with esophageal cancer between January 2000 and December 2010, including
486 subjects with ESCC who underwent surgical treatment. In this study, we
explored the prognostic significance of the expressions of HOXC6 and HOXC8,
responsible for embryonic development, by studying the specimens collected from
clinical subjects during strict follow-up periods.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to detect the expressions of
HOXC6 and HOXC8 in 274 ESCC subjects including 138 ESCC subjects treated with
surgery alone and 136 ESCC subjects treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Survival analysis was performed from the day of surgery to August 2013.
RESULTS: The 5-y survival rate of the 274 ESCC subjects was 44.2%, with a median 
survival time of 44.12 mo. For the 274 ESCC subjects involved in the
investigation of HOXC6 and HOXC8 expressions, the median survival time of
subjects with high-level expressions of HOXC6 and HOXC8 was shorter than that for
subjects with low-level expressions (P = 0.001, P < 0.001, respectively). Similar
results were obtained from the analysis of the prognostic value of HOXC6 and
HOXC8 in the group treated with surgery alone and the group treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Multivariate analysis demonstrated that HOXC6 and HOXC8
expressions were independent prognostic factors in patients with ESCC.
CONCLUSIONS: The HOXC6 and HOXC8 genes can be used as prognostic markers in
patients with ESCC, but prospective studies are still needed to confirm.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Epigenetics. 2014 May;9(5):704-17. doi: 10.4161/epi.28006. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Deregulation of an imprinted gene network in prostate cancer.

Ribarska T(1), Goering W(1), Droop J(1), Bastian KM(1), Ingenwerth M(2), Schulz
WA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany;
Institute for Anatomy II; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany.

Multiple epigenetic alterations contribute to prostate cancer progression by
deregulating gene expression. Epigenetic mechanisms, especially differential DNA 
methylation at imprinting control regions (termed DMRs), normally ensure the
exclusive expression of imprinted genes from one specific parental allele. We
therefore wondered to which extent imprinted genes become deregulated in prostate
cancer and, if so, whether deregulation is due to altered DNA methylation at
DMRs. Therefore, we selected presumptive deregulated imprinted genes from a
previously conducted in silico analysis and from the literature and analyzed
their expression in prostate cancer tissues by qRT-PCR. We found significantly
diminished expression of PLAGL1/ZAC1, MEG3, NDN, CDKN1C, IGF2, and H19, while
LIT1 was significantly overexpressed. The PPP1R9A gene, which is imprinted in
selected tissues only, was strongly overexpressed, but was expressed
biallelically in benign and cancerous prostatic tissues. Expression of many of
these genes was strongly correlated, suggesting co-regulation, as in an imprinted
gene network (IGN) reported in mice. Deregulation of the network genes also
correlated with EZH2 and HOXC6 overexpression. Pyrosequencing analysis of all
relevant DMRs revealed generally stable DNA methylation between benign and
cancerous prostatic tissues, but frequent hypo- and hyper-methylation was
observed at the H19 DMR in both benign and cancerous tissues. Re-expression of
the ZAC1 transcription factor induced H19, CDKN1C and IGF2, supporting its
function as a nodal regulator of the IGN. Our results indicate that a group of
imprinted genes are coordinately deregulated in prostate cancers, independently
of DNA methylation changes.

PMCID: PMC4063830
PMID: 24513574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Exp Hematol. 2014 Feb;42(2):114-25.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.10.004. Epub
2013 Oct 26.

Ectopic expression of HOXC6 blocks myeloid differentiation and predisposes to
malignant transformation.

Wurm M(1), Kowalski J(1), Heckl D(2), Zhang XB(1), Nelson V(1), Beard BC(3), Kiem
HP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Clinical Research Division,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (4)Clinical Research Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: hkiem@fhcrc.org.

Insertional mutagenesis resulting from the integration of retroviral vectors has 
led to the discovery of many oncogenes associated with leukemia. We investigated 
the role of HOXC6, identified by proximal provirus integration in a large animal 
hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy study, for a potential involvement in
hematopoietic stem cell activity and hematopoietic cell fate decision. HOXC6 was 
overexpressed in the murine bone marrow transplantation model and tested in a
competitive repopulation assay in comparison to the known hematopoietic stem cell
expansion factor, HOXB4. We have identified HOXC6 as a factor that enhances
competitive repopulation capacity in vivo and colony formation in vitro. Ectopic 
HOXC6 expression also induced strong myeloid differentiation and expansion of
granulocyte-macrophage progenitors/common myeloid progenitors (GMPs/CMPs) in
vivo, resulting in myeloid malignancies with low penetrance (3 of 17 mice),
likely in collaboration with Meis1 because of a provirus integration mapped to
the 3' region in the malignant clone. We characterized the molecular basis of
HOXC6-induced myeloid differentiation and malignant cell transformation with
complementary DNA microarray analysis. Overexpression of HOXC6 induced a gene
expression signature similar to several acute myeloid leukemia subtypes when
compared with normal GMPs/CMPs. These results demonstrate that HOXC6 acts as a
regulator in hematopoiesis and is involved in malignant transformation.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4062101
PMID: 24513167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Actas Urol Esp. 2014 Apr;38(3):143-9. doi: 10.1016/j.acuro.2013.07.012. Epub 2013
Oct 25.

Gene expression profiles in prostate cancer: identification of candidate
non-invasive diagnostic markers.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Mengual L(1), Ars E(2), Lozano JJ(3), Burset M(4), Izquierdo L(4), Ingelmo-Torres
M(4), Gaya JM(2), Algaba F(2), Villavicencio H(2), Ribal MJ(4), Alcaraz A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio y Servicio de Urología, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona,
España. Electronic address: lmengual@clinic.ub.es. (2)Laboratorio de Biología
Molecular, Servicio de Anatomía Patológica y Servicio de Urología, Fundació
Puigvert, Barcelona, España. (3)CIBERehd, Plataforma de Bioinformática, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas, Hospital
Clínic, Barcelona, España. (4)Laboratorio y Servicio de Urología, Hospital
Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS),
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, España.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze gene expression profiles of prostate cancer (PCa) with the 
aim of determining the relevant differentially expressed genes and subsequently
ascertain whether this differential expression is maintained in post-prostatic
massage (PPM) urine samples.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty-six tissue specimens (36 from PCa patients and 10
controls) and 158 urine PPM-urines (113 from PCa patients and 45 controls) were
collected between December 2003 and May 2007. DNA microarrays were used to
identify genes differentially expressed between tumour and control samples. Ten
genes were technically validated in the same tissue samples by quantitative
RT-PCR (RT-qPCR). Forty two selected differentially expressed genes were
validated in an independent set of PPM-urines by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: Multidimensional scaling plot according to the expression of all the
microarray genes showed a clear distinction between control and tumour samples. A
total of 1047 differentially expressed genes (FDR=.1) were indentified between
both groups of samples. We found a high correlation in the comparison of
microarray and RT-qPCR gene expression levels (r=.928, P<.001). Thirteen genes
maintained the same fold change direction when analyzed in PPM-urine samples and 
in four of them (HOXC6, PCA3, PDK4 and TMPRSS2-ERG), these differences were
statistically significant (P<.05).
CONCLUSION: The analysis of PCa by DNA microarrays provides new putative mRNA
markers for PCa diagnosis that, with caution, can be extrapolated to PPM-urines.

Copyright © 2013 AEU. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24206626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 22;3:2178. doi: 10.1038/srep02178.

Hox genes are involved in vascular wall-resident multipotent stem cell
differentiation into smooth muscle cells.

Klein D(1), Benchellal M, Kleff V, Jakob HG, Ergün S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
University Hospital, 45122 Essen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

Human vascular wall-resident CD44+ multipotent stem cells (VW-MPSCs) within the
vascular adventitia are capable to differentiate into pericytes and smooth muscle
cells (SMC). This study demonstrates HOX-dependent differentiation of CD44(+)
VW-MPSCs into SMC that involves epigenetic modification of transgelin as a
down-stream regulated gene. First, HOXB7, HOXC6 and HOXC8 were identified to be
differentially expressed in VW-MPSCs as compared to terminal differentiated human
aortic SMC, endothelial cells and undifferentiated pluripotent embryonic stem
cells. Silencing these HOX genes in VW-MPSCs significantly reduced their
sprouting capacity and increased expression of the SMC markers transgelin and
calponin and the histone gene histone H1. Furthermore, the methylation pattern of
the TAGLN promoter was altered. In summary, our findings suggest a role for
certain HOX genes in regulating differentiation of human VW-MPSC into SMCs that
involves epigenetic mechanisms. This is critical for understanding
VW-MPSC-dependent vascular disease processes such as neointima formation and
tumor vascularization.

PMCID: PMC3804857
PMID: 24145756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Vet Comp Oncol. 2015 Sep;13(3):322-36. doi: 10.1111/vco.12062. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Characterization of HOX gene expression in canine mammary tumour cell lines from 
spontaneous tumours.

DeInnocentes P(1,)(2), Perry AL(1), Graff EC(1,)(3), Lutful Kabir FM(1,)(2),
Curtis Bird R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(2)AURIC-Auburn University Research Initiative in Cancer, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Physiology and Pharmacology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.

Spatial/temporal controls of development are regulated by the homeotic (HOX) gene
complex and require integration with oncogenes and tumour suppressors regulating 
cell cycle exit. Spontaneously derived neoplastic canine mammary carcinoma cell
models were investigated to determine if HOX expression profiles were associated 
with neoplasia as HOX genes promote neoplastic potential in human cancers.
Comparative assessment of human and canine breast cancer expression profiles
revealed remarkable similarity for all four paralogous HOX gene clusters and
several unlinked HOX genes. Five canine HOX genes were overexpressed with
expression profiles consistent with oncogene-like character (HOXA1, HOXA13,
HOXD4, HOXD9 and SIX1) and three HOX genes with underexpressed profiles (HOXA11, 
HOXC8 and HOXC9) were also identified as was an apparent nonsense mutation in
HOXC6. This data, as well as a comparative analysis of similar data from human
breast cancers suggested expression of selected HOX genes in canine mammary
carcinoma could be contributing to the neoplastic phenotype.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 24034269  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS Genet. 2013 Aug;9(8):e1003727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003727. Epub 2013 
Aug 29.

Cross-species array comparative genomic hybridization identifies novel oncogenic 
events in zebrafish and human embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.

Chen EY(1), Dobrinski KP, Brown KH, Clagg R, Edelman E, Ignatius MS, Chen JY,
Brockmann J, Nielsen GP, Ramaswamy S, Keller C, Lee C, Langenau DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Human cancer genomes are highly complex, making it challenging to identify
specific drivers of cancer growth, progression, and tumor maintenance. To bypass 
this obstacle, we have applied array comparative genomic hybridization (array
CGH) to zebrafish embryonal rhabdomyosaroma (ERMS) and utilized cross-species
comparison to rapidly identify genomic copy number aberrations and novel
candidate oncogenes in human disease. Zebrafish ERMS contain small, focal regions
of low-copy amplification. These same regions were commonly amplified in human
disease. For example, 16 of 19 chromosomal gains identified in zebrafish ERMS
also exhibited focal, low-copy gains in human disease. Genes found in amplified
genomic regions were assessed for functional roles in promoting continued tumor
growth in human and zebrafish ERMS--identifying critical genes associated with
tumor maintenance. Knockdown studies identified important roles for Cyclin D2
(CCND2), Homeobox Protein C6 (HOXC6) and PlexinA1 (PLXNA1) in human ERMS cell
proliferation. PLXNA1 knockdown also enhanced differentiation, reduced migration,
and altered anchorage-independent growth. By contrast, chemical inhibition of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling reduced angiogenesis and
tumor size in ERMS-bearing zebrafish. Importantly, VEGFA expression correlated
with poor clinical outcome in patients with ERMS, implicating inhibitors of the
VEGF pathway as a promising therapy for improving patient survival. Our results
demonstrate the utility of array CGH and cross-species comparisons to identify
candidate oncogenes essential for the pathogenesis of human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3757044
PMID: 24009521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 4;288(40):28801-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.474254. Epub 2013
Aug 13.

Cytochrome p450 cyp26a1 alters spinal motor neuron subtype identity in
differentiating embryonic stem cells.

Ricard MJ(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pharmacology and.

The ability to differentiate embryonic stem cells (ESCs) into specific cell types
is critical for improved regenerative medicine strategies, cancer
chemotherapeutic approaches, and regimens to combat chronic diseases associated
with aging. Subclasses of motor neurons (MNs) are generated at different
positions along the rostrocaudal axis of the spinal cord, and the signals that
specify MN subtype fates remain poorly defined. We show here that the cytochrome 
P450 enzyme Cyp26a1, which metabolizes all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) and thereby
reduces RA levels, plays a crucial role in specifying MN columnar subtypes. Lack 
of Cyp26a1 in ESCs during differentiation to spinal MNs increases Aldh1a2
(RALDH2) and Hoxc6, markers of the Hox-dependent, lateral motor column (LMC)
subtype identity. In contrast, Lhx3, a marker for median motor column identity,
showed lower expression in Cyp26a1(-/-)-derived MNs compared with WT. Without
Cyp26a1, an increase in intracellular RA concentration plus sonic hedgehog
agonist treatment confer an LMC fate on differentiating MNs. Our data suggest a
strategy for increasing LMC-type MNs from ESCs by blocking Cyp26a1 in cell
replacement/ESC differentiation therapy to treat neurodegenerative diseases, such
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3789976
PMID: 23946489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Neoplasma. 2013;60(4):439-45. doi: 10.4149/neo_2013_057.

Upregulated Hoxc6 expression is associated with poor survival in gastric cancer
patients.

Zhang Q(1), Jin XS, Yang ZY, Wei M, Liu BY, Gu QL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Surgery,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Human Hox genes (Homeobox) have crucial roles in development and differentiation,
regulating numerous processes including apoptosis, receptor signalling,
differentiation, motility and angiogenesis. Aberrant expression of Hoxc6 gene has
been reported in several tumor tissues and cancer cell lines. The prognostic
significance of Hoxc6 in gastric cancer remains largely unknown.This study was
aimed to investigate the clinical significance of Hoxc6 in gastric cancer.Total
RNA of paired tissue samples (n=25) and a tissue microarray containing 161 paired
tissues from patients with gastric cancers at different stages were collected.
Quantitative real-time PCR and immunochemistry assay were carried out to
investigate the expression of Hoxc6. Hoxc6 mRNA was increased in gastric cancer
tissues ( 16 of 25) compared with the adjacent normal mucosa (P<0.05).
Immunohistochemical detection showed that expression of Hoxc6 was associated with
the depth of tumor invasion (P<0.05). Patients with higher expression levels of
Hoxc6 had a shorter overall survival rate (P<0.05).Hoxc6 might contribute to the 
progression of gastric carcinogenesis and may be a significant predictor of poor 
survival in patients with gastric cancer after curative operations.

PMID: 23581417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003184. Epub 2013 Jan 
24.

Genetic and functional modularity of Hox activities in the specification of
limb-innervating motor neurons.

Lacombe J(1), Hanley O, Jung H, Philippidou P, Surmeli G, Grinstein J, Dasen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, NYU School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

A critical step in the assembly of the neural circuits that control tetrapod
locomotion is the specification of the lateral motor column (LMC), a diverse
motor neuron population targeting limb musculature. Hox6 paralog group genes have
been implicated as key determinants of LMC fate at forelimb levels of the spinal 
cord, through their ability to promote expression of the LMC-restricted genes
Foxp1 and Raldh2 and to suppress thoracic fates through exclusion of Hoxc9. The
specific roles and mechanisms of Hox6 gene function in LMC neurons, however, are 
not known. We show that Hox6 genes are critical for diverse facets of LMC
identity and define motifs required for their in vivo specificities. Although
Hox6 genes are necessary for generating the appropriate number of LMC neurons,
they are not absolutely required for the induction of forelimb LMC molecular
determinants. In the absence of Hox6 activity, LMC identity appears to be
preserved through a diverse array of Hox5-Hox8 paralogs, which are sufficient to 
reprogram thoracic motor neurons to an LMC fate. In contrast to the apparently
permissive Hox inputs to early LMC gene programs, individual Hox genes, such as
Hoxc6, have specific roles in promoting motor neuron pool diversity within the
LMC. Dissection of motifs required for Hox in vivo specificities reveals that
either cross-repressive interactions or cooperativity with Pbx cofactors are
sufficient to induce LMC identity, with the N-terminus capable of promoting
columnar, but not pool, identity when transferred to a heterologous homeodomain. 
These results indicate that Hox proteins orchestrate diverse aspects of cell fate
specification through both the convergent regulation of gene programs regulated
by many paralogs and also more restricted actions encoded through specificity
determinants in the N-terminus.

PMCID: PMC3554521
PMID: 23359544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Evol Dev. 2013 Jan;15(1):18-27. doi: 10.1111/ede.12011.

Development of the marsupial shoulder girdle complex: a case study in Monodelphis
domestica.

Hübler M(1), Molineaux AC, Keyte A, Schecker T, Sears KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Integrative Biology, University of
Illinois, 505 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL, 61801, USA.

During their embryogenesis, marsupials transiently develop a unique structure,
the shoulder arch, which provides the structural support and muscle-attachments
necessary for the newborn's crawl to the teat. One of the most pronounced and
functionally important aspects of the shoulder arch is an enlarged coracoid. The 
goal of this study is to determine the molecular basis of shoulder arch formation
in marsupials. To achieve this goal, this study investigates the relative
expression of several genes with known roles in shoulder girdle morphogenesis in 
a marsupial-the opossum, Monodelphis domestica-and a placental, the mouse, Mus
musculus. Results indicate that Hoxc6, a gene involved in coracoid patterning, is
expressed for a longer period of time and at higher levels in opossum relative to
mouse. Functional manipulation suggests that these differences in Hoxc6
expression are independent of documented differences in retinoic acid signaling
in opossum and mouse forelimbs. Results also indicate that Emx2, a gene involved 
in scapular blade condensation, is upregulated in opossum relative to mouse.
However, several other genes involved in shoulder girdle patterning (e.g., Gli3, 
Pax1, Pbx1, Tbx15) are comparably expressed in these species. These findings
suggest that the upregulation of Hoxc6 and Emx2 occurs through independent
genetic modifications in opossum relative to mouse. In summary, this study
documents a correlation between gene expression and the divergent shoulder girdle
morphogenesis of marsupial (i.e., opossum) and placental (i.e., mouse) mammals,
and thereby provides a foundation for future research into the genetic basis of
shoulder girdle morphogenesis in marsupials. Furthermore, this study supports the
hypothesis that the mammalian shoulder girdle is a highly modular structure whose
elements are relatively free to evolve independently.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23331914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Diabetes. 2012 Dec;61(12):3322-32. doi: 10.2337/db11-1653. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

Impact of an exercise intervention on DNA methylation in skeletal muscle from
first-degree relatives of patients with type 2 diabetes.

Nitert MD(1), Dayeh T, Volkov P, Elgzyri T, Hall E, Nilsson E, Yang BT, Lang S,
Parikh H, Wessman Y, Weishaupt H, Attema J, Abels M, Wierup N, Almgren P, Jansson
PA, Rönn T, Hansson O, Eriksson KF, Groop L, Ling C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University Diabetes Centre, Lund
University, CRC, Scania University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

To identify epigenetic patterns, which may predispose to type 2 diabetes (T2D)
due to a family history (FH) of the disease, we analyzed DNA methylation
genome-wide in skeletal muscle from individuals with (FH(+)) or without (FH(-))
an FH of T2D. We found differential DNA methylation of genes in biological
pathways including mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), insulin, and calcium 
signaling (P = 0.007) and of individual genes with known function in muscle,
including MAPK1, MYO18B, HOXC6, and the AMP-activated protein kinase subunit
PRKAB1 in skeletal muscle of FH(+) compared with FH(-) men. We further validated 
our findings from FH(+) men in monozygotic twin pairs discordant for T2D, and 40%
of 65 analyzed genes exhibited differential DNA methylation in muscle of both
FH(+) men and diabetic twins. We further examined if a 6-month exercise
intervention modifies the genome-wide DNA methylation pattern in skeletal muscle 
of the FH(+) and FH(-) individuals. DNA methylation of genes in retinol
metabolism and calcium signaling pathways (P < 3 × 10(-6)) and with known
functions in muscle and T2D including MEF2A, RUNX1, NDUFC2, and THADA decreased
after exercise. Methylation of these human promoter regions suppressed reporter
gene expression in vitro. In addition, both expression and methylation of several
genes, i.e., ADIPOR1, BDKRB2, and TRIB1, changed after exercise. These findings
provide new insights into how genetic background and environment can alter the
human epigenome.

PMCID: PMC3501844
PMID: 23028138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Oct;97(10):E1958-77. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1890.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Clinical review: Genome-wide association studies of skeletal phenotypes: what we 
have learned and where we are headed.

Hsu YH(1), Kiel DP.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew SeniorLife Institute for Aging Research, 1200 Centre Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02131, USA.

CONTEXT: The primary goals of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are to
discover new molecular and biological pathways involved in the regulation of bone
metabolism that can be leveraged for drug development. In addition, the
identified genetic determinants may be used to enhance current risk factor
profiles.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: There have been more than 40 published GWAS on skeletal
phenotypes, predominantly focused on dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry-derived
bone mineral density (BMD) of the hip and spine.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Sixty-six BMD loci have been replicated across all the
published GWAS, confirming the highly polygenic nature of BMD variation. Only
seven of the 66 previously reported genes (LRP5, SOST, ESR1, TNFRSF11B,
TNFRSF11A, TNFSF11, PTH) from candidate gene association studies have been
confirmed by GWAS. Among 59 novel BMD GWAS loci that have not been reported by
previous candidate gene association studies, some have been shown to be involved 
in key biological pathways involving the skeleton, particularly Wnt signaling
(AXIN1, LRP5, CTNNB1, DKK1, FOXC2, HOXC6, LRP4, MEF2C, PTHLH, RSPO3, SFRP4,
TGFBR3, WLS, WNT3, WNT4, WNT5B, WNT16), bone development: ossification (CLCN7,
CSF1, MEF2C, MEPE, PKDCC, PTHLH, RUNX2, SOX6, SOX9, SPP1, SP7),
mesenchymal-stem-cell differentiation (FAM3C, MEF2C, RUNX2, SOX4, SOX9, SP7),
osteoclast differentiation (JAG1, RUNX2), and TGF-signaling (FOXL1, SPTBN1,
TGFBR3). There are still 30 BMD GWAS loci without prior molecular or biological
evidence of their involvement in skeletal phenotypes. Other skeletal phenotypes
that either have been or are being studied include hip geometry, bone ultrasound,
quantitative computed tomography, high-resolution peripheral quantitative
computed tomography, biochemical markers, and fractures such as vertebral,
nonvertebral, hip, and forearm.
CONCLUSIONS: Although several challenges lie ahead as GWAS moves into the next
generation, there are prospects of new discoveries in skeletal biology. This
review integrates findings from previous GWAS and provides a roadmap for future
directions building on current GWAS successes.

PMCID: PMC3674343
PMID: 22965941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 11;32(28):3339-49. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.354. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

Transcriptional regulation of MDR-1 by HOXC6 in multidrug-resistant cells.

Kim KJ(1), Moon SM, Kim SA, Kang KW, Yoon JH, Ahn SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Dentistry, Chosun University, Gwangju,
Republic of Korea.

Resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs is a significant clinical problem in the
treatment of cancer and this resistance has been linked to the cellular
expression of multidrug-efflux transporters. The aim of this study was to explore
the role of HOXC6 in the regulation of multidrug resistance (MDR) to
chemotherapeutic drugs. The HOXC6 gene was identified as being overexpressed in
drug-resistant cells compared with parental cell lines. Transfection assays
demonstrated that HOXC6 activated MDR-1 promoter activity. A series of MDR-1
promoter deletion mutants was examined and the minimal HOXC6-responsive region
was identified to be in the TAAT motif (-2243 bp) of the MDR-1 promoter.
Interestingly, overexpression of HOXC6 in the parental cell lines resulted in the
upregulation of MDR-1 expression. The inhibition of HOXC6 using small interfering
RNA led to the repression of MDR-1. We determined that knockdown of HOXC6
expression in MDR cells increased their sensitivity to paclitaxel. Flow cytometry
analysis suggested that siHOXC6 could induce paclitaxel-induced apoptosis and
that this was accompanied by an increased accumulation and a decreased release of
paclitaxel. Taken together, our findings suggest that HOXC6 expression is an
important mechanism of chemotherapeutic drug resistance via its regulation of
MDR-1.

PMID: 22907429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):35678-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.361675. Epub
2012 Aug 15.

HOXC6 is deregulated in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and modulates
Bcl-2 expression.

Moon SM(1), Kim SA, Yoon JH, Ahn SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Dentistry, Chosun University, Gwangju,
501-759, Republic of Korea.

Homeobox C6 (HOXC6) genes belong to the homeoprotein family of transcription
factors, which play an important role in morphogenesis and cellular
differentiation during embryonic development. The aim of this study was to
explore the role of HOXC6 in the regulation of Bcl-2 in human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The HOXC6 and Bcl-2 gene were identified as
being overexpressed in HNSCC tissue and cell lines. Transfection assays
demonstrated that HOXC6 increased the levels of Bcl-2 mRNA and protein. A
luciferase reporter assay suggested that HOXC6 induced activity of the Bcl-2
promoter. A series of Bcl-2 promoter deletion mutants were examined and the
minimal HOXC6-responsive region was identified to be in the TAAT motif (-420 bp) 
of the Bcl-2 promoter. Interestingly, the inhibition of HOXC6 using siRNA led to 
the repression of Bcl-2 expression and induced caspase-3-dependent apoptosis;
overexpression of HOXC6 in HNSCC cells increased the resistance to
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Together, our findings suggest that HOXC6 is an
important mechanism of the anti-apoptotic pathway via regulation of Bcl-2
expression.

PMCID: PMC3471680
PMID: 22896703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Sep;6(3):466-72. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.956. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Identification of androgen-regulated genes in human prostate.

Vaarala MH(1), Hirvikoski P, Kauppila S, Paavonen TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Oulu University Hospital, and Department of Pathology, 
University of Oulu, FIN-90029 Oulu, Finland. markku.vaarala@oulu.fi

Androgens are essential for the development of the prostate and prostate cancer. 
We examined androgen-regulated gene expression in the human prostate. Samples
from benign and malignant prostate tissue and samples containing prostate tissue 
obtained from prostate cancer patients three days after surgical castration were 
further processed as probes for a GeneChip array. The comparison of gene
expression profiles in castrated samples and in benign or malignant prostate
tissue samples revealed androgen-regulated genes. We further evaluated the genes 
which were differentially expressed in benign and malignant prostate samples. The
androgen-regulated expression of dual specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1) was
confirmed in the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line, as the expression of DUSP1
increased with androgen treatment over the course of time. The expression of the 
genes CRISP3, PCA3, OR51E2, HOXC6, AGR3, AMACR and SLC14A1 was affected by
castration in addition to differential expression in the benign and malignant
prostate. These sample results require further investigation for the role of AGR3
and SLC14A1 in prostate cancer as these associations have not been reported
previously.

PMCID: PMC3493087
PMID: 22735730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Growth Differ. 2011 Dec;53(9):982-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-169X.2011.01307.x. 
Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Analyzing the function of a hox gene: an evolutionary approach.

Michaut L(1), Jansen HJ, Bardine N, Durston AJ, Gehring WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel,
Switzerland.

We present an evolutionary approach to dissecting conserved developmental
mechanisms. We reason that important mechanisms for making the bodyplan will act 
early, to generate the major features of the body and that they will be conserved
in evolution across many metazoa, and thus, that they will be available in very
different animals. This led to our specific approach of microarrays to screen for
very early conserved developmental regulators in parallel in an insect,
Drosophila and a vertebrate, Xenopus. We screened for the earliest conserved
targets of the ectopically expressed hox gene Hoxc6/Antennapedia in both species 
and followed these targets up, using in situ hybridization, in the Xenopus
system. The results indicate that relatively few of the early Hox target genes
are conserved: these are mainly involved in the specification of the
antero-posterior body axis and in gastrulation.

© 2011 The Authors. Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2011 Japanese Society
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 22150153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Mol Biol. 2011 Aug 12;411(2):334-49. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.05.050. Epub 2011 
Jun 12.

HOXC6 Is transcriptionally regulated via coordination of MLL histone methylase
and estrogen receptor in an estrogen environment.

Ansari KI(1), Hussain I, Shrestha B, Kasiri S, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, 700 Planetarium Place, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.

Homeobox (HOX)-containing gene HOXC6 is a critical player in mammary gland
development and milk production, and is overexpressed in breast and prostate
cancers. We demonstrated that HOXC6 is transcriptionally regulated by estrogen
(E2). HOXC6 promoter contains two putative estrogen response elements (EREs),
termed as ERE1(1/2) and ERE2(1/2). Promoter analysis using luciferase-based
reporter assay demonstrated that both EREs are responsive to E2, with ERE1(1/2)
being more responsive than ERE2(1/2). Estrogen receptors (ERs) ERa and ERß bind
to these EREs in an E2-dependent manner, and antisense-mediated knockdown of ERs 
suppressed the E2-dependent activation of HOXC6 expression. Similarly, knockdown 
of histone methylases MLL2 and MLL3 decreased the E2-mediated activation of
HOXC6. However, depletion of MLL1 or MLL4 showed no significant effect. MLL2 and 
MLL3 were bound to the HOXC6 EREs in an E2-dependent manner. In contrast, MLL1
and MLL4 that were bound to the HOXC6 promoter in the absence of E2 decreased
upon exposure to E2. MLL2 and MLL3 play key roles in histone H3 lysine-4
trimethylation and in the recruitment of general transcription factors and RNA
polymerase II in the HOXC6 promoter during E2-dependent transactivation. Nuclear 
receptor corepressors N-CoR and SAFB1 were bound in the HOXC6 promoter in the
absence of E2, and that binding was decreased upon E2 treatment, indicating their
critical roles in suppressing HOXC6 gene expression under nonactivated
conditions. Knockdown of either ERa or ERß abolished E2-dependent recruitment of 
MLL2 and MLL3 into the HOXC6 promoter, demonstrating key roles of ERs in the
recruitment of these mixed lineage leukemias into the HOXC6 promoter. Overall,
our studies demonstrated that HOXC6 is an E2-responsive gene, and that histone
methylases MLL2 and MLL3, in coordination with ERa and ERß, transcriptionally
regulate HOXC6 in an E2-dependent manner.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3143278
PMID: 21683083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 28;6(3):e18010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018010.

XMeis3 is necessary for mesodermal Hox gene expression and function.

In der Rieden PM(1), Jansen HJ, Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Studiekring, Utrecht, Netherlands.

Hox transcription factors provide positional information during patterning of the
anteroposterior axis. Hox transcription factors can co-operatively bind with
PBC-class co-factors, enhancing specificity and affinity for their appropriate
binding sites. The nuclear localisation of these co-factors is regulated by the
Meis-class of homeodomain proteins. During development of the zebrafish
hindbrain, Meis3 has previously been shown to synergise with Hoxb1 in the
autoregulation of Hoxb1. In Xenopus XMeis3 posteriorises the embryo upon ectopic 
expression. Recently, an early temporally collinear expression sequence of Hox
genes was detected in Xenopus gastrula mesoderm (see intro. P3). There is
evidence that this sequence sets up the embryo's later axial Hox expression
pattern by time-space translation. We investigated whether XMeis3 is involved in 
regulation of this early mesodermal Hox gene expression. Here, we present
evidence that XMeis3 is necessary for expression of Hoxd1, Hoxb4 and Hoxc6 in
mesoderm during gastrulation. In addition, we show that XMeis3 function is
necessary for the progression of gastrulation. Finally, we present evidence for
synergy between XMeis3 and Hoxd1 in Hoxd1 autoregulation in mesoderm during
gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3065463
PMID: 21464931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancers (Basel). 2011 Sep 27;3(4):3714-25. doi: 10.3390/cancers3043714.

DNA Methylation and the HOXC6 Paradox in Prostate Cancer.

Vinarskaja A(1), Yamanaka M, Ingenwerth M, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Moorenstr. 5, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. wolfgang.schulz@uni-duesseldorf.de.

Overexpression of the classical homeobox transcription factor HOXC6 is frequent
in prostate cancers and correlates with adverse clinical parameters. Since
surprisingly many HOXC6 target genes are downregulated in prostate cancer, it has
been posited that oncogenic effects of HOXC6 in prostate cancer may be unmasked
by concurrent epigenetic downregulation of target genes exerting tumor
suppressive effects. To test this hypothesis, we have studied the expression of
three HOXC6 target genes, CNTN1 (encoding a cell adhesion protein), DKK3 and WIF1
(encoding WNT growth factor antagonists) as well as DNA methylation of DKK3 and
WIF1. HOXC6 upregulation and association with poor prognosis were confirmed in
our tissue series. The three target genes were each significantly downregulated
in cancer tissues and expression of each one correlated inversely with that of
HOXC6. Cases with lower WIF1 expression showed significantly earlier recurrence
(p = 0.021), whereas no statistical significance was reached for CNTN1 and DKK3. 
Hypermethylation of DKK3 or WIF1 gene promoters was observed in a subset of
cancers with downregulated expression, but was often weak. Our data support the
hypothesis that HOXC6 target genes exerting tumor-suppressive effects are
epigenetically downregulated in prostate cancer, but DNA methylation appears to
follow or bolster rather than to cause their transcriptional inactivation.

PMCID: PMC3763392
PMID: 24213107  [PubMed]


37. BMC Genet. 2010 Dec 21;11:112. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-11-112.

Genomic regions associated with kyphosis in swine.

Lindholm-Perry AK(1), Rohrer GA, Kuehn LA, Keele JW, Holl JW, Shackelford SD,
Wheeler TL, Nonneman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, U,S, Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE 68933-0166, USA. 
amanda.lindholm@ars.usda.gov

BACKGROUND: A back curvature defect similar to kyphosis in humans has been
observed in swine herds. The defect ranges from mild to severe curvature of the
thoracic vertebrate in split carcasses and has an estimated heritability of 0.3. 
The objective of this study was to identify genomic regions that affect this
trait.
RESULTS: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associations performed with 198
SNPs and microsatellite markers in a Duroc-Landrace-Yorkshire resource population
(U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, USMARC resource population) of swine provided 
regions of association with this trait on 15 chromosomes. Positional candidate
genes, especially those involved in human skeletal development pathways, were
selected for SNP identification. SNPs in 16 candidate genes were genotyped in an 
F2 population (n = 371) and the USMARC resource herd (n = 1,257) with kyphosis
scores. SNPs in KCNN2 on SSC2, RYR1 and PLOD1 on SSC6 and MYST4 on SSC14 were
significantly associated with kyphosis in the resource population of swine (P =
0.05). SNPs in CER1 and CDH7 on SSC1, PSMA5 on SSC4, HOXC6 and HOXC8 on SSC5,
ADAMTS18 on SSC6 and SOX9 on SSC12 were significantly associated with the
kyphosis trait in the F2 population of swine (P = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that this kyphosis trait may be affected by
several loci and that these may differ by population. Carcass value could be
improved by effectively removing this undesirable trait from pig populations.

PMCID: PMC3018398
PMID: 21176156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 9;5(6):e11033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011033.

Switch from stress response to homeobox transcription factors in adipose tissue
after profound fat loss.

Dankel SN(1), Fadnes DJ, Stavrum AK, Stansberg C, Holdhus R, Hoang T, Veum VL,
Christensen BJ, Våge V, Sagen JV, Steen VM, Mellgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: In obesity, impaired adipose tissue function may promote secondary
disease through ectopic lipid accumulation and excess release of adipokines,
resulting in systemic low-grade inflammation, insulin resistance and organ
dysfunction. However, several of the genes regulating adipose tissue function in 
obesity are yet to be identified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to identify novel candidate genes that
may regulate adipose tissue function, we analyzed global gene expression in
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue before and one year after bariatric surgery
(biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch, BPD/DS) (n = 16). Adipose tissue
from lean healthy individuals was also analyzed (n = 13). Two different
microarray platforms (AB 1700 and Illumina) were used to measure the differential
gene expression, and the results were further validated by qPCR. Surgery reduced 
BMI from 53.3 to 33.1 kg/m(2). The majority of differentially expressed genes
were down-regulated after profound fat loss, including transcription factors
involved in stress response, inflammation, and immune cell function (e.g., FOS,
JUN, ETS, C/EBPB, C/EBPD). Interestingly, a distinct set of genes was
up-regulated after fat loss, including homeobox transcription factors (IRX3,
IRX5, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB5, HOXC6, EMX2, PRRX1) and extracellular matrix
structural proteins (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, COL6A3).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The data demonstrate a marked switch of transcription
factors in adipose tissue after profound fat loss, providing new molecular
insight into a dichotomy between stress response and metabolically favorable
tissue development. Our findings implicate homeobox transcription factors as
important regulators of adipose tissue function.

PMCID: PMC2882947
PMID: 20543949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 15;11:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-176.

The embryonic genes Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 identify muscle types in a
diet-independent and fiber-type unrelated way.

de Wilde J(1), Hulshof MF, Boekschoten MV, de Groot P, Smit E, Mariman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Nutrigenomics Consortium, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. j.dewilde@hb.unimaas.nl

BACKGROUND: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types
that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every
muscle type has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. 
To find novel genes involved in specifying muscle types, we used microarray
analysis to compare the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps from mice fed a low fat
diet (LFD) or high fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. Additional qPCR analysis were
performed in the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus muscle from mice fed an LFD
or HFD for 20 weeks.
RESULTS: In mice fed the 8-week LFD 162 genes were differentially expressed in
the gastrocnemius vs. the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest differences in
expression were markers for oxidative fiber types (e.g. Tnni1) and genes which
are known to be involved in embryogenesis (Dkk3, Hoxd8,Hoxd9 and Tbx1). Also
Dkk2, Hoxa5, Hoxa10, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Hoxc6 and Tbx15 were detectably, but not
differentially expressed in adult muscle tissue. Expression of differentially
expressed genes was not influenced by an 8-week or 20-week HFD. Comparing
gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus, expression of Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was not
related with expression of markers for the four different fiber types. We found
that the expression of both Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was much higher in the gastrocnemius 
than in the quadriceps or soleus, whereas the expression of Dkk3 was high in
quadriceps, but low in both gastrocnemius and soleus. Finally, expression of Tbx1
was high in quadriceps, intermediate in soleus and low in gastrocnemius.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that genes from the Dkk family, Hox family and Tbx family
are detectably expressed in adult mouse muscle. Interestingly, expression of
Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 was highly different between gastrocnemius,
quadriceps and soleus. In fact, every muscle type showed a unique combination of 
expression of these four genes which was not influenced by diet. Altogether, we
conclude that genes important for embryogenesis identify mouse muscle types in a 
diet-independent and fiber type-unrelated manner.

PMCID: PMC2847971
PMID: 20230627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 11;5(2):e9163. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009163.

Lsh mediated RNA polymerase II stalling at HoxC6 and HoxC8 involves DNA
methylation.

Tao Y(1), Xi S, Briones V, Muegge K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, SAIC-Frederick, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, Maryland, United States of America.

DNA cytosine methylation is an important epigenetic mechanism that is involved in
transcriptional silencing of developmental genes. Several molecular pathways have
been described that interfere with Pol II initiation, but at individual genes the
molecular mechanism of repression remains uncertain. Here, we study the molecular
mechanism of transcriptional regulation at Hox genes in dependence of the
epigenetic regulator Lsh that controls CpG methylation at selected Hox genes.
Wild type cells show a nucleosomal deprived region around the transcriptional
start site at methylated Hox genes and mediate gene silencing via Pol II
stalling. Hypomethylation in Lsh-/- cells is associated with efficient
transcriptional elongation and splicing, in part mediated by the chromodomain
protein Chd1. Dynamic modulation of DNA methylation in Lsh-/- and wild type cells
demonstrates that catalytically active DNA methyltransferase activity is required
for Pol II stalling. Taken together, the data suggests that DNA methylation can
be compatible with Pol II binding at selected genes and Pol II stalling can act
as alternate mechanism to explain transcriptional silencing associated with DNA
methylation.

PMCID: PMC2820093
PMID: 20161795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jan;239(1):126-39. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22020.

Xwnt8 directly initiates expression of labial Hox genes.

In der Rieden PM(1), Vilaspasa FL, Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratorium, Nederlands Instituut voor Ontwikkelingsbiologie,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Hox transcription factors play an essential role in patterning the
anteroposterior axis during embryogenesis and exhibit a complex array of spatial 
and temporal patterns of expression. Their earliest onset of expression in
vertebrates is during gastrulation in a temporally collinear sequence in the
presomitic/ventrolateral mesoderm, and it is not clear which upstream signal
transduction events initiate this expression. Using Xenopus, we present evidence 
that Xwnt8 is necessary for initiation of this collinear sequence by activating
Hox-1 expression in three Hox clusters: hoxd, hoxa, and hoxb. All three labial
genes appear to be direct targets of canonical Wnt signaling through Tcf/Lef. In 
addition, Xwnt8 loss- and gain-of-function leads to indirect regulation of other 
Hox genes: Hoxb4, Hoxd4, Hoxa7, Hoxc6, and Hoxc8. These findings shed new light
on the early role of Wnt8 as well as of a proposed WNT gradient in patterning the
Xenopus central nervous system (Kiecker and Niehrs [2001] Development
128:4189-4201).

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19623617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;17(1):141-5.

[Effect of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6
genes in the proliferation of lymphocytic progenitor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng JQ(1), Liu WJ, Chen HY, Guo QL, Chen A, Chen SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou 
646000, China.

The objective of this study was to observe the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6
genes in the process of differentiation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) to
colony forming unit-T Lymphocyte (CFU-TL) in vitro. and to explore the possible
mechanism of HCMV-induced maldevelopment of human cord blood CFU-TL on genetic
level through effecting the differentiation progress by human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV) with and/or all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), Normal CFU-TL culture was used
as blank control. After detection with MTT, mRNA expression levels in the human
cord blood CFU-TL hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes following HCMV infection and ATRA
treatment were detected by fluorogenic quantitative reserve transcription
polymerize chain reaction (FQ-RT-PCR) method. HCMV of 10(6) plaque formation unit
(PFU)/ml was diluted to 0.1 ml 10(5) PFU/ml and added into the infected group.
The results showed that the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes in the
differentiation process increased slightly on day 3, and were up to the most on
day 7 (p < 0.05), while became lower on day 12 respectively in normal group, HCMV
group and ATRA group. Compared with the expression of hoxc6, the expression of
hoxc4 was obviously higher in each group (p < 0.05). Compared with the expression
of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes in normal group, the expressions of hoxc4 and hoxc6 in
ATRA group were up-regulated remarkably (p < 0.05), while the expressions of
hoxc4 and hoxc6 in group HCMV were down-regulated (p < 0.05). It is concluded
that the regular expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes mRNA appeared in each group.
A positive co-relationship exits between hoxc4/hoxc6 genes and lymphocytic
progenitor hematopoiesis. Compared with the expression of hoxc6 gene, the
expression of hoxc4 gene is obviously higher in each group. HCMV can
down-regulate the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes and lead to suppression
effect on cell morphology, which confirms that the normal hematopoietic lineage
determination and maturation rely on the stable and consistent expression of
homeobox gene. At the same condition, ATRA (6 x 10(-8) mol/L at 60 nmol/ml) can
up-regulate hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes expression. ATRA can up-regulate the expression
of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes.

PMID: 19236766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dev Dyn. 2009 Mar;238(3):755-65. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21889.

Two Hoxc6 transcripts are differentially expressed and regulate primary
neurogenesis in Xenopus laevis.

Bardine N(1), Donow C, Korte B, Durston AJ, Knöchel W, Wacker SA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Hox genes are key players in defining positional information along the main body 
axis of vertebrate embryos. In Xenopus laevis, Hoxc6 was the first homeobox gene 
isolated. It encodes two isoforms. We analyzed in detail their spatial and
temporal expression pattern during early development. One major expression domain
of both isoforms is the spinal cord portion of the neural tube. Within the spinal
cord and its populations of primary neurons, Hox genes have been found to play a 
crucial role for defining positional information. Here we report that a
loss-of-function of either one of the Hoxc6 products does not affect neural
induction, the expression of general neural markers is not modified. However,
Hoxc6 does widely affect the formation of primary neurons within the developing
neural tissue. Manipulations of Hoxc6 expression severly changes the expression
of the neuronal markers N-tubulin and Islet-1. Formation of primary neurons and
formation of cranial nerves are affected. Hence, Hoxc6 functions are not
restricted to the expected role in anterior-posterior pattern formation, but they
also regulate N-tubulin, thereby having an effect on the initial formation of
primary neurons in Xenopus laevis embryos.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19235717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2009 Jan;136(2):231-40. doi: 10.1242/dev.028043. Epub 2008 Dec 4.

Nolz1 is induced by retinoid signals and controls motoneuron subtype identity
through distinct repressor activities.

Ji SJ(1), Periz G, Sockanathan S.

Author information: 
(1)The Solomon Snyder Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 725 N Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The acquisition and maintenance of final neuronal identity depends in part upon
the implementation of fate-specification programs in postmitotic neurons;
however, the mechanisms involved remain unclear. In the developing spinal cord,
retinoic acid (RA) signaling pathways specify the columnar and divisional
identities of postmitotic motoneurons (MNs). Here we show that RA signals induce 
expression of the NET transcriptional regulator Nolz1 in differentiated chick
MNs, where it regulates the progressive specification of prospective
Lim3-negative motor columns. Nolz1 controls the initial formation of forelimb and
thoracic Lim3-negative motor columns by downregulating Lim3 expression and
maintaining the expression of key homeodomain proteins necessary for MN identity 
and survival. At forelimb levels, Nolz1 specifies lateral motor column (LMC)
identity by inducing the expression of the postmitotic LMC determinant Hoxc6, and
implements the partial specification of lateral LMC identity through Lim1
induction. The specificity of Nolz1 function depends upon distinct repressor
activities that require, in part, the modulatory activity of Grg5, an atypical
member of the Gro-TLE family of co-repressors. Thus, RA signals regulate diverse 
events in MN subtype specification by inducing the expression of a key
transcriptional regulator that controls multiple developmental pathways via
functionally distinct repressor complexes.

PMCID: PMC2685968
PMID: 19056829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Gastroenterology. 2008 Sep;135(3):907-16, 916.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.06.034. Epub 2008 Jul 23.

Hoxc6 is overexpressed in gastrointestinal carcinoids and interacts with JunD to 
regulate tumor growth.

Fujiki K(1), Duerr EM, Kikuchi H, Ng A, Xavier RJ, Mizukami Y, Imamura T, Kulke
MH, Chung DC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02114, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The molecular alterations that underlie carcinoid tumor
pathogenesis remain poorly defined. The homeobox gene HOXC6 was highly
up-regulated in human gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors, and we sought to define 
its pathogenic role.
METHODS: The functional and physical properties of Hoxc6 were investigated by
establishing carcinoid cells that stably overexpressed Hoxc6 or were deficient in
Hoxc6. Cellular proliferation assays, luciferase reporter assays, Western
blotting, immunoprecipitation, DNA affinity precipitation, and DNA microarray
studies were performed.
RESULTS: Expression of Hoxc6 in cultured human BON1 carcinoid cells enhanced
their proliferation, and knock-down of Hoxc6 inhibited their growth. Hoxc6
activated the oncogenic activator protein-1 signaling pathway through a physical 
interaction with JunD. Mutations in the homeodomain of Hoxc6 blocked this
interaction and inhibited proliferation of carcinoid cells. Of note, Hoxc6
induced the expression of genes that characteristically are up-regulated in
carcinoid tumors, including neurotensin and connective tissue growth factor.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel molecular pathway has been identified that links Hoxc6 with 
oncogenic signaling through the activator protein-1 pathway in carcinoid
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3777410
PMID: 18655788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cancer Res. 2008 Mar 15;68(6):1988-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5843.

Genome-wide analysis of the homeobox C6 transcriptional network in prostate
cancer.

McCabe CD(1), Spyropoulos DD, Martin D, Moreno CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Homeobox transcription factors are developmentally regulated genes that play
crucial roles in tissue patterning. Homeobox C6 (HOXC6) is overexpressed in
prostate cancers and correlated with cancer progression, but the downstream
targets of HOXC6 are largely unknown. We have performed genome-wide localization 
analysis to identify promoters bound by HOXC6 in prostate cancer cells. This
analysis identified 468 reproducibly bound promoters whose associated genes are
involved in functions such as cell proliferation and apoptosis. We have
complemented these data with expression profiling of prostates from mice with
homozygous disruption of the Hoxc6 gene to identify 31 direct regulatory target
genes of HOXC6. We show that HOXC6 directly regulates expression of bone
morphogenic protein 7, fibroblast growth factor receptor 2, insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 3, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha
(PDGFRA) in prostate cells and indirectly influences the Notch and Wnt signaling 
pathways in vivo. We further show that inhibition of PDGFRA reduces proliferation
of prostate cancer cells, and that overexpression of HOXC6 can overcome the
effects of PDGFRA inhibition. HOXC6 regulates genes with both oncogenic and tumor
suppressor activities as well as several genes such as CD44 that are important
for prostate branching morphogenesis and metastasis to the bone microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC2584783
PMID: 18339881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Cell Mol Med. 2007 Mar-Apr;11(2):299-306.

HOXC6 and HOXC11 increase transcription of S100beta gene in BrdU-induced in vitro
differentiation of GOTO neuroblastoma cells into Schwannian cells.

Zhang X(1), Hamada J, Nishimoto A, Takahashi Y, Murai T, Tada M, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15 Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.
doggirl999@hotmail.com

HOX genes encode transcription factors that play a key role in morphogenesis and 
cell differentiation during embryogenesis of animals. Human neuroblastoma cells
are known to be chemically induced to differentiate into neuronal or Schwannian
cells. In the present study, we investigated the roles of HOX genes in
differentiation of GOTO neuroblastoma cells into Schwannian cells. When GOTO
cells were grown in the presence of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU), they
increased the expressions of two HOX genes (HOXC6 and HOXC11) and marker genes
for Schwannian cells (S100beta and myelin basic protein). Forced expression of
HOXC11 alone or both HOXC6 isoform 1 and HOXC11 induced the expression of
S100beta in GOTO cells. In transient transfection experiments, the overexpression
of HOXC6 and HOXC11 transactivated the S100beta promoter-reporter construct.
Taken together, our results suggest that HOXC6 and HOXC11 are associated with
differentiation of GOTO cells into Schwannian cells through the transcriptional
activation of S100beta gene.

PMCID: PMC3822828
PMID: 17488478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oncol Res. 2006;16(5):217-24.

Aberrant expression of HOX genes in oral dysplasia and squamous cell carcinoma
tissues.

Hassan NM(1), Hamada J, Murai T, Seino A, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Zhang X,
Kashiwazaki H, Yamazaki Y, Inoue N, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Human HOX genes consist of 39 genes and encode transcription factors that
function as master developmental regulators. We hypothesized that the
misexpression of HOX genes was associated with carcinogenesis and malignant
progression. The expression levels of 39 HOX genes in 31 human oral squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), 11 dysplasia, and 10 normal mucosa tissues were quantified by
the real-time RT-PCR method. The expression levels of 18 HOX genes in the SCC
tissues were significantly higher than those in the normal mucosa tissues. The
dysplasia tissues showed higher expression of HOXA2, A3, B3, and D10 than normal 
mucosa tissues whereas they showed lower expression of HOXA1, B7, B9, and C8 than
SCC. The SCC with lymph node metastasis showed high expression of HOXC6 compared 
to the SCC without it. These results suggest that misexpressions of particular
HOX genes are implicated in the development of oral dysplasia and SCC.

PMID: 17294802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Environ Res. 2006 Jan;100(1):86-92. Epub 2005 Jul 18.

Gene expression profiling reveals novel regulation by bisphenol-A in estrogen
receptor-alpha-positive human cells.

Singleton DW(1), Feng Y, Yang J, Puga A, Lee AV, Khan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Vontz Center for
Molecular Studies, University of Cincinnati, 3125 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45267-0521, USA.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) shows proliferative actions in uterus and mammary glands and
may influence the development of male and female reproductive tracts in utero or 
during early postnatal life. Because of its ability to function as an estrogen
receptor (ER) agonist, BPA has the potential to disrupt normal endocrine
signaling through regulation of ER target genes. Some genes are regulated by both
estradiol (E2) and BPA, but those exclusive to either agent have not been
described. Using a yeast strain incorporating a vitellogenin A2 ERE-LacZ reporter
gene into the genome, we found that BPA induced expression of the reporter in
colonies transformed with the ERalpha expression plasmid, illustrating
BPA-mediated regulation within a chromatin context. Additionally, a reporter gene
transiently transfected into the endometrial cancer (Ishikawa) cell line also
showed BPA activity, although at 100-fold less potency than E2. To compare global
gene expression in response to BPA and E2, we used a variant of the MCF-7 breast 
cancer cell line stably expressing HA-tagged ERalpha. Cultures were treated for
3h with an ethanol vehicle, E2 (10(-8)M), or BPA (10(-6)M), followed by isolation
of RNA and microarray analysis with the human U95A probe array (Affymetrix, Santa
Clara, CA, USA). More than 300 genes were changed 2-fold or more by either or
both agents, with roughly half being up-regulated and half down-regulated. A
number of growth- and development-related genes, such as HOXC1 and C6, Wnt5A,
Frizzled, TGFbeta-2, and STAT inhibitor 2, were found to be affected exclusively 
by BPA. We used quantitative real-time PCR to verify regulation of the HOXC6
gene, which showed decreased expression of approximately 2.5-fold by BPA. These
results reveal novel effects by BPA and E2, raising interesting possibilities
regarding the role of endocrine disruptors in sexual development.

PMID: 16029874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Hum Pathol. 2005 May;36(5):494-504.

Differential gene expression in anaplastic lymphoma kinase-positive and
anaplastic lymphoma kinase-negative anaplastic large cell lymphomas.

Thompson MA(1), Stumph J, Henrickson SE, Rosenwald A, Wang Q, Olson S, Brandt SJ,
Roberts J, Zhang X, Shyr Y, Kinney MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
37332, USA. mary.ann.thompson@vanderbilt.edu

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is an aggressive large T- or null-cell
lymphoma. Most ALCLs arising in children and young adults express a
constitutively active receptor tyrosine kinase, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK).
Anaplastic large cell lymphomas lacking ALK are clinically heterogeneous and
their pathogenesis is unknown. This study is the first complementary DNA (cDNA)
microarray analysis using RNA extracted from tumor tissue (7 ALK+ ALCLs and 7
ALK- ALCLs) to identify genes differentially expressed or shared between the ALK+
and ALK- tumors. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using the top 11 most
statistically significant discriminator cDNAs correctly grouped all ALK+ and ALK-
tumors. Hierarchical clustering analysis using the 44 cDNAs with the greatest
differential expression between ALK+ and ALK- RNAs grouped 6 of 7 ALK+ ALCLs
together and 1 ALK+ ALCL with the ALK- group. In general, ALK+ tumors overexpress
genes encoding signal transduction molecules (SYK , LYN , CDC37) and underexpress
transcription factor genes (including HOXC6 and HOX A3 ) compared with the ALK-
group. Cyclin D3 was overexpressed in the ALK+ group and the cell cycle inhibitor
p19INK4D was decreased in the ALK- group, suggesting different mechanisms of
promoting G 1 /S transition. Both groups had similar proliferation rates. Genes
highly expressed in both ALK- and ALK+ ALCLs included kinases (LCK, protein
kinase C, vav2, and NKIAMRE) and antiapoptotic molecules, suggesting possible
common pathogenetic mechanisms as well.

PMID: 15948116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):227-39.

Developmental genetic basis for the evolution of pelvic fin loss in the
pufferfish Takifugu rubripes.

Tanaka M(1), Hale LA, Amores A, Yan YL, Cresko WA, Suzuki T, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Paired appendages were a key developmental innovation among vertebrates and they 
eventually evolved into limbs. Ancient developmental control systems for paired
fins and limbs are broadly conserved among gnathostome vertebrates. Some lineages
including whales, some salamanders, snakes, and many ray-fin fish, independently 
lost the pectoral, pelvic, or both appendages over evolutionary time. When
different taxa independently evolve similar developmental morphologies, do they
use the same molecular genetic mechanisms? To determine the developmental genetic
basis for the evolution of pelvis loss in the pufferfish Takifugu rubripes
(fugu), we isolated fugu orthologs of genes thought to be essential for limb
development in tetrapods, including limb positioning (Hoxc6, Hoxd9), limb bud
initiation (Pitx1, Tbx4, Tbx5), and limb bud outgrowth (Shh, Fgf10), and studied 
their expression patterns during fugu development. Results showed that bud
outgrowth and initiation fail to occur in fugu, and that pelvis loss is
associated with altered expression of Hoxd9a, which we show to be a marker for
pelvic fin position in three-spine stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus. These
results rule out changes in appendage outgrowth and initiation genes as the
earliest developmental defect in pufferfish pelvic fin loss and suggest that
altered Hoxd9a expression in the lateral mesoderm may account for pelvis loss in 
fugu. This mechanism appears to be different from the mechanism for pelvic loss
in stickleback, showing that different taxa can evolve similar phenotypes by
different mechanisms.

PMID: 15893975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 May 15;304(3):229-37.

Regionalization of axial skeleton in the lungfish Neoceratodus forsteri (Dipnoi).

Johanson Z(1), Sutija M, Joss J.

Author information: 
(1)Palaeontology, Australian Museum, 6 College Street, Sydney, NSW 2010,
Australia. zerinaj@austmus.gov.au

Differentiation of the axial skeleton into distinct regions, once thought to be
characteristic of the Tetrapoda, also occurs in the actinopterygian Danio rerio. 
In these taxa, the boundary between the cervical-thoracic regions correlates with
Hoxc6 expression and morphological features such as position of the pectoral fin 
and associated nerves, and the absence of ribs. In the lungfish Neoceratodus, a
member of the extant sister taxon to the Tetrapoda, the first vertebral element
to chondrify is situated well posterior to the skull, developing from somites 6
and 7 (6/7) and associated with an enlarged cranial rib and nerves innervating
the pectoral fin. Two vertebral elements develop later and more anteriorly,
associated with somites 4/5 and 5/6. These three elements become incorporated
into the occipital region of the skull during Neoceratodus ontogeny, until the
cranial rib itself articulates to the rear of the skull. These features of early 
development indicate a regionalization of the Neoceratodus vertebral column: the 
cranial rib marks the boundary between the cervical and thoracic regions, the two
more anterior vertebrae lacking ribs represent the cervical region, while somites
1-4 (cranial half), lacking any vertebral development, represent the occipital
region. However, the cervical region of the vertebral column is effectively lost 
during ontogeny of Neoceratodus. A recognizable cervical region in the tetrapod
vertebral column, as in zebrafish, suggests that cervical vertebrae are not
incorporated into the skull but maintained as distinct elements of the column,
representing an important shift in relative developmental timing and the
influence of heterochrony in this region during the fish-tetrapod transition.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15880607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2005 Apr;132(7):1611-21.

Retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 and Hoxc8 are required in the murine brachial
spinal cord for the specification of Lim1+ motoneurons and the correct
distribution of Islet1+ motoneurons.

Vermot J(1), Schuhbaur B, Le Mouellic H, McCaffery P, Garnier JM, Hentsch D,
Brûlet P, Niederreither K, Chambon P, Dollé P, Le Roux I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

Retinoic acid (RA) activity plays sequential roles during the development of the 
ventral spinal cord. Here, we have investigated the functions of local RA
synthesis in the process of motoneuron specification and early differentiation
using a conditional knockout strategy that ablates the function of the
retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Raldh2) synthesizing enzyme essentially in
brachial motoneurons, and later in mesenchymal cells at the base of the forelimb.
Mutant (Raldh2L-/-) embryos display an early embryonic loss of a subset of Lim1+ 
brachial motoneurons, a mispositioning of Islet1+ neurons and inappropriate
axonal projections of one of the nerves innervating extensor limb muscles, which 
lead to an adult forepaw neuromuscular defect. The molecular basis of the
Raldh2L-/- phenotype relies in part on the deregulation of Hoxc8, which in turn
regulates the RA receptor RARbeta. We further show that Hoxc8 mutant mice, which 
exhibit a similar congenital forepaw defect, display at embryonic stages
molecular defects that phenocopy the Raldh2L-/- motoneuron abnormalities. Thus,
interdependent RA signaling and Hox gene functions are required for the
specification of brachial motoneurons in the mouse.

PMID: 15753214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1044-9.

Expression of 11 HOX genes is deregulated in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen KN(1), Gu ZD, Ke Y, Li JY, Shi XT, Xu GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China 100 036. chenkeneng@yahoo.com.cn

PURPOSE: HOX genes are vital for all aspects of mammalian growth and
differentiation, and recent data have shown that their deregulated expression is 
related to carcinogenesis. To date, there has been no systemic study on
expression of HOX genes in esophageal carcinoma. We investigated the expression
pattern of 39 known HOX genes in cancerous and noncancerous tissue from 36
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma to determine whether their
expression is altered in esophageal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty-six patients with resectable esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) were enrolled in this study. Specific primers were designed for 
each of 39 HOX genes, and reverse transcription-PCR was done in cancerous and
noncancerous samples of these 36 patients. Furthermore, the expression of HOXA9
protein was subjected to Western blot analysis in all 36 paired tissue samples.
RESULTS: Eight of 39 HOX genes were expressed in cancerous but not in
noncancerous tissue. Five of 39 HOX genes were expressed both in cancerous and
noncancerous tissue. Of the latter, expression of HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXC6 was
significantly higher in cancerous tissue (P < 0.05). The remaining 26 HOX genes
were not detected in either types of tissue. HOXA9 protein was expressed in both 
kinds of tissue (cancer tissue versus noncancerous mucosa: 0.34 +/- 0.32 versus
0.24 +/- 0.27, P = 0.121).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive survey of 39 HOX gene expression in 
ESCC and noncancerous mucosa. Five of the 39 HOX genes were expressed in both
types of tissue indicating their possible role in maintaining normal structure
and function of adult esophageal mucosa. Eleven of the 39 HOX genes were
deregulated in cancer tissue. These genes possibly participate in the
carcinogenesis of ESCC.

PMID: 15709170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 6;24(1):188-98.

Loss of HOXC6 expression induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.

Ramachandran S(1), Liu P, Young AN, Yin-Goen Q, Lim SD, Laycock N, Amin MB,
Carney JK, Marshall FF, Petros JA, Moreno CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

We have performed whole genome expression profiling of 28 patient prostate tumor 
samples and 12 normal prostate samples and identified 55 upregulated and 60
downregulated genes significantly changed in prostate tumor samples compared to
normal prostate tissues. Among the members of the upregulated gene set was the
developmental transcription factor Homeobox C6 (HOXC6). Silencing of HOXC6
expression using small-interfering RNA (siRNA) resulted in decreased
proliferation rates for both androgen-dependent LnCaP cells and the LnCaP-derived
androgen-independent C4-2 cell line. Flow cytometry and immunoblotting for the
caspase-cleaved form of poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) determined that the
decrease in cell numbers was due to increased apoptosis. To validate the
specificity of the siRNA-induced apoptosis, LnCaP cells were cotransfected with
siRNA specific to the HOXC6 3'UTR and a mammalian expression vector containing
the HOXC6 open reading frame, but lacking the 3'UTR. Overexpression of HOXC6
rescued the LnCaP cells from HOXC6 siRNA-induced apoptosis, and increased growth 
of control GFP siRNA-transfected cells. Expression profiling of HOXC6 siRNA
transfections and HOXC6 overexpression identified neutral endopeptidase (NEP) and
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) as potential proapoptotic 
repression targets of HOXC6. Our data suggest that HOXC6 may be a novel potential
therapeutic target for prostate cancer.

PMID: 15637592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell. 2004 Feb 27;13(4):587-97.

Menin associates with a trithorax family histone methyltransferase complex and
with the hoxc8 locus.

Hughes CM(1), Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Milne TA, Copeland TD, Levine SS, Lee JC, Hayes
DN, Shanmugam KS, Bhattacharjee A, Biondi CA, Kay GF, Hayward NK, Hess JL,
Meyerson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The cellular function of the menin tumor suppressor protein, product of the MEN1 
gene mutated in familial multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, has not been
defined. We now show that menin is associated with a histone methyltransferase
complex containing two trithorax family proteins, MLL2 and Ash2L, and other
homologs of the yeast Set1 assembly. This menin-associated complex methylates
histone H3 on lysine 4. A subset of tumor-derived menin mutants lacks the
associated histone methyltransferase activity. In addition, menin is associated
with RNA polymerase II whose large subunit carboxyl-terminal domain is
phosphorylated on Ser 5. Men1 knockout embryos and cells show decreased
expression of the homeobox genes Hoxc6 and Hoxc8. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments reveal that menin is bound to the Hoxc8 locus. These results suggest 
that menin activates the transcription of differentiation-regulating genes by
covalent histone modification, and that this activity is related to tumor
suppression by MEN1.

PMID: 14992727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nature. 2003 Oct 30;425(6961):926-33.

Motor neuron columnar fate imposed by sequential phases of Hox-c activity.

Dasen JS(1), Liu JP, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, 701 West
168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA. jd2009@columbia.edu

The organization of neurons into columns is a prominent feature of central
nervous system structure and function. In many regions of the central nervous
system the grouping of neurons into columns links cell-body position to axonal
trajectory, thus contributing to the establishment of topographic neural maps.
This link is prominent in the developing spinal cord, where columnar sets of
motor neurons innervate distinct targets in the periphery. We show here that
sequential phases of Hox-c protein expression and activity control the columnar
differentiation of spinal motor neurons. Hox expression in neural progenitors is 
established by graded fibroblast growth factor signalling and translated into a
distinct motor neuron Hox pattern. Motor neuron columnar fate then emerges
through cell autonomous repressor and activator functions of Hox proteins. Hox
proteins also direct the expression of genes that establish motor topographic
projections, thus implicating Hox proteins as critical determinants of spinal
motor neuron identity and organization.

PMID: 14586461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Leukemia. 2003 Dec;17(12):2454-9.

B-cell development in the presence of the MLL/AF4 oncoprotein proceeds in the
absence of HOX A7 and HOX A9 expression.

Bertrand FE(1), Spengeman JD, Shah N, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is frequently characterized by the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) cytogenetic abnormality encoding the MLL/AF4 oncogene, increased
HOX gene expression and a pro-B/monocytoid phenotype. We have previously
established a novel MLL/AF4-positive cell line, B-lineage 3 (BLIN-3), which
retains several features of normal B-lineage development (functional Ig gene
rearrangement and apoptotic sensitivity to stromal cell withdrawal) not generally
observed in infant ALL. We now use microarray analysis to identify patterns of
gene expression in BLIN-3 that may modulate MLL/AF4 oncogenesis and contribute to
the retention of normal B-lineage developmental characteristics. Comparison of
6815 expressed genes in BLIN-3 with published microarray data on leukemic blasts 
from t(4;11) patients indicated that BLIN-3 was unique in lacking the expression 
of certain HOX-A cluster genes. These results were validated by RT-PCR showing no
expression of HOX A7 or HOX A9 in BLIN-3. A HOX C8 promoter reporter was active
in BLIN-3, indicating that lack of HOX gene expression in BLIN-3 was not due to a
nonfunctional MLL/AF4. Our results suggest that B-lineage development can proceed
in t(4;11) leukemic blasts in the absence of HOX-A gene expression.

PMID: 14562113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 15;63(18):5879-88.

Aberrant HOXC expression accompanies the malignant phenotype in human prostate.

Miller GJ(1), Miller HL, van Bokhoven A, Lambert JR, Werahera PN, Schirripa O,
Lucia MS, Nordeen SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

Dysregulation of HOX gene expression has been implicated as a factor in
malignancies for a number of years. However, no consensus has emerged regarding
specific causative genes. Using a degenerate reverse transcription-PCR technique,
we show up-regulation of genes from the HOXC cluster in malignant prostate cell
lines and lymph node metastases. When relative expression levels of the four HOX 
clusters were examined, lymph node metastases and cell lines derived from lymph
node metastases exhibited very similar patterns, patterns distinct from those in 
benign cells or malignant cell lines derived from other tumor sites. Specific
reverse transcription-PCR for HOXC4, HOXC5, HOXC6, and HOXC8 confirmed
overexpression of these genes in malignant cell lines and lymph node metastases. 
Laser capture microdissection and examination of paired tumor/normal prostate
epithelial cells also indicated overexpression of these HOXC genes in primary
tumor cells. Our data indicate a possible link between expression of HOXC genes
and malignancy in prostate cells. Overexpression of HOXC8 in LNCaP prostate
cancer cells suppressed transactivation by androgen receptors. We speculate that 
HOXC overexpression may predispose tumor cells to androgen independence by
necessitating adaptation to diminished androgen signaling.

PMID: 14522913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Gynecol Oncol. 2003 Sep;90(3):512-8.

Expression of HOX gene products in normal and abnormal trophoblastic tissue.

Amesse LS(1), Moulton R, Zhang YM, Pfaff-Amesse T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine, Dayton, OH 45409, USA. lsamesse@mvh.org

OBJECTIVE: The expression pattern of three homeobox genes products, HOX A11, HOX 
B6, and HOX C6, was examined in normal human placental tissue and abnormal
trophoblastic tissue derived from complete hydatidiform moles and choriocarcinoma
tumors. We sought to determine whether expression of these gene products during
different states of trophoblastic differentiation and proliferation is constant
or demonstrates variation. Variation in expression of these respective homeobox
genes may provide insight into predicting which molar tissues are likely to
develop into choriocarcinoma tumors.
METHODS: Tissue sections from a total of 12 samples were studied. Among these,
six full-term human placentas, three complete hydatidiform moles, and three
choriocarcinoma tumors were examined for expression of the homeobox HOX A11, HOX 
B6, and HOX C6 gene products, using immunohistochemistry staining methods.
RESULTS: Expression of HOX homeobox gene products, HOX A11, HOX B6, and HOX C6,
was detected in full-term human placenta and tissue from complete hydatiform
moles. Abnormal trophoblasts from complete moles demonstrated an immunoreactivity
expression pattern comparable to that of normal trophoblasts from term
pregnancies. However, definitive expression of these respective homeobox genes
was not identified in tissue obtained from choriocarcinoma tumors.
CONCLUSION: Variation in expression of HOX homeobox gene products, HOX A11, HOX
B6, and HOX C6, was established in trophoblast tissue obtained from full-term
human placentas, complete hydatiform moles, and choriocarcinoma tumors. This
finding indicates that normal full-term trophoblasts and abnormal molar
trophoblasts may share similar fundamental regulatory control mechanisms. The
absence of definitive expression of these HOX gene products in trophoblastic
cells derived from choriocarcinoma tumors indicates that while HOX A11, HOX B6,
and HOX C6 genes may be involved in maintenance of some trophoblastic cell
states, they may be either downregulated or have alterations in their expression 
in trophoblasts from choriocarcinoma tumors.

PMID: 13678718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):4823-34. Epub 2003 Aug 13.

Enhancer timing of Hox gene expression: deletion of the endogenous Hoxc8 early
enhancer.

Juan AH(1), Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The proper expression of Hox genes is necessary for the accurate patterning of
the body plan. The elucidation of the developmental genetic basis of
transcriptional regulation of Hox genes by the study of their cis-regulatory
elements provides crucial information regarding the establishment of axial
specification. In this report, we investigate the role of the early enhancer (EE)
of the murine Hoxc8 gene to better understand its role in pattern formation.
Previous reports show that knockouts of the endogenous Hoxc8 coding region result
in a combination of neural, behavioral and skeletal phenotypes. In this report,
we limit ourselves to a consideration of the skeletal abnormalities. Early
reports from our laboratory based on exogenous transgenic reporter constructs
implicate a 200 bp non-coding element 3 kb upstream of the Hoxc8 promoter as a
crucial enhancer that regulates the transcription of Hoxc8. In the present work, 
we have deleted this regulatory region from the endogenous genome using embryonic
stem cell technology. Our results show that the deletion of the EE results in a
significant delay in the temporal expression of Hoxc8. We also show that the
deletion of the EE does not eliminate the expression of the Hoxc8 protein, but
delays the attainment of control levels of expression and anterior and posterior 
boundaries of expression on the AP axis. The temporal delay in Hoxc8 expression
is sufficient to produce phenocopies of many of the axial skeletal defects
associated with the complete absence of Hoxc8 gene product as previously reported
for the Hoxc8-null mutation. Our results are consistent with emerging evidence
that the precise temporal expression of Hox genes is crucial for the
establishment of regional identities. The fact that the EE deletion does not
eliminate Hoxc8 expression indicates the existence of a Hoxc8 transcriptional
regulatory apparatus independent to some degree of the Hoxc8 EE. In a comparison 
of our results with those reported previously by others investigating temporal
control of Hox gene expression, we have discovered a structural similarity
between the Hoxc8 EE reported here and a transcriptional control element located 
in the Hoxd11 region. We speculate that a distributed system of expression timing
control may exist that is similar the one we propose for Hoxc8. Last, our data is
consistent with the position that disparate regulatory pathways are responsible
for the expression of Hoxc8 in the organogenesis of somites, neural tube and limb
bud.

PMID: 12917291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Struct Funct Genomics. 2003;3(1-4):195-9.

Phylogenetic analysis of the mammalian Hoxc8 non-coding region.

Kim CB(1), Shashikant CS, Sumiyama K, Wang WC, Amemiya CT, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
PO Box 208103, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The non-coding intergenic regions of Hox genes are remarkably conserved among
mammals. To determine the usefulness of this sequence for phylogenetic
comparisons, we sequenced an 800-bp fragment of the Hoxc9-Hoxc8 intergenic region
from several species belonging to different mammalian clades. Results obtained
from the phylogenetic analysis are congruent with currently accepted mammalian
phylogeny. Additionally, we found a TC mini satellite repeat polymorphism unique 
to felines. This polymorphism may serve as a useful marker to differentiate
between mammalian species or as a genetic marker in feline matings. This study
demonstrates usefulness of a comparative approach employing non-coding regions of
Hox gene complexes.

PMID: 12836698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2003 Jan;67(1):59-67.

Defects in cervical vertebrae in boric acid-exposed rat embryos are associated
with anterior shifts of hox gene expression domains.

Wéry N(1), Narotsky MG, Pacico N, Kavlock RJ, Picard JJ, Gofflot F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we showed that prenatal exposure to boric acid (BA), an
industrial agent with large production, causes alterations of the axial skeleton 
in rat embryos, reminiscent of homeotic transformations. Indeed, Sprague-Dawley
rats exposed in utero to BA on gestation day 9 (GD 9) had only six, rather than
the normal seven, cervical vertebrae. This finding, observed in 91% of GD 21
fetuses, suggests posterior transformations of vertebrae. The present study
attempts to determine if these skeletal alterations could be explained by
modifications of the hox code, involved in the establishment of positional
information along the craniocaudal axis of the embryo.
METHODS: Pregnant rats were treated by gavage with BA (500 mg/kg, twice) on GD 9.
Embryos were collected on GD 11 or GD 13.5 and processed for in situ
hybridization. Several hox genes were selected according to the position of their
cranial limit of expression in the cervical and thoracic region.
RESULTS: At GD 13.5, we detected a cranial shift of the anterior limit of
expression of hoxc6 and hoxa6. We observed no difference between control and
treated embryos in the location of the cranial limit of expression of the other
genes: hoxd4, hoxa4, hoxc5, and hoxa5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that following in utero exposure to BA on GD
9, a disturbance of the expression of hox genes involved inthe specification of
most anterior vertebrae is observed at GD 13.5. Based on their expression domain 
and on their implication in the definition of the cervicothoracic vertebral
boundary, it is likely that the anteriorization of hoxc6 and hoxa6 reported here 
is correlated to the morphological phenotype observed in BA-exposed fetuses at GD
21.

PMID: 12749385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 2003 Jul 1;102(1):262-8. Epub 2003 Mar 13.

Gene expression signatures in MLL-rearranged T-lineage and B-precursor acute
leukemias: dominance of HOX dysregulation.

Ferrando AA(1), Armstrong SA, Neuberg DS, Sallan SE, Silverman LB, Korsmeyer SJ, 
Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Mayer-630, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 
Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Rearrangements of the MLL locus, located on human chromosome 11q23, are frequent 
in both infant and therapy-related leukemias. Gene expression analysis of
MLL-rearranged B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemias (MLL B-ALLs) has
identified these cases as a unique subtype of leukemia, characterized by the
expression of genes associated with both lymphoid and myeloid hematopoietic
lineages. Here we show that MLL fusions also generate a distinct genetic subtype 
of T-lineage ALL (MLL T-ALL), in which leukemic cells are characterized by an
early arrest in thymocyte differentiation, with suggestive evidence of commitment
to the gammadelta lineage. Interestingly, multiple genes linked to cell
proliferation (eg, PCNA, MYC, CDK2, and POLA) were down-regulated in MLL-fusion
samples, relative to those transformed by other T-ALL oncogenes (P <.000 001,
Fisher exact test). Overall, MLL T-ALL cases consistently demonstrated increased 
levels of expression of a subset of major HOX genes--HOXA9, HOXA10, and
HOXC6--and the MEIS1 HOX coregulator (P <.008, one-sided Wilcoxon test), a
pattern of gene expression that was reiterated in MLL B-ALLs. However, expression
of myeloid lineage genes, previously reported in MLL B-ALLs, was not identified
in T-lineage cases with this abnormality, suggesting that myeloid gene
dysregulation is dispensable in leukemic transformation mediated by MLL fusion
proteins. Our findings implicate dysregulation of HOX gene family members as a
dominant mechanism of leukemic transformation induced by chimeric MLL oncogenes.

PMID: 12637319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Nov;2(1-2):5-6.

Hoxc-8 expression shows left-right asymmetry in the posterior lateral plate
mesoderm.

Thickett C(1), Morgan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, St. George's Hospital Medical
School, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK.

XHoxc-8 is the Xenopus homologue of the mouse Hoxc-8 gene, a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that is expressed in the posterior
neural tube and adjacent tissues. Although XHoxc-8 has a very similar expression 
pattern to the Hoxc-8 gene in other species, it also displays distinct left/right
asymmetry at later stages of development, being expressed in the posterior
lateral mesoderm only on the left-hand side of the embryo.

PMID: 12617829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Development. 2002 Aug;129(16):3851-60.

Segmental relationship between somites and vertebral column in zebrafish.

Morin-Kensicki EM(1), Melancon E, Eisen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1254,
USA.

The segmental heritage of all vertebrates is evident in the character of the
vertebral column. And yet, the extent to which direct translation of pattern from
the somitic mesoderm and de novo cell and tissue interactions pattern the
vertebral column remains a fundamental, unresolved issue. The elements of
vertebral column pattern under debate include both segmental pattern and
anteroposterior regional specificity. Understanding how vertebral segmentation
and anteroposterior positional identity are patterned requires understanding
vertebral column cellular and developmental biology. In this study, we
characterized alignment of somites and vertebrae, distribution of individual
sclerotome progeny along the anteroposterior axis and development of the axial
skeleton in zebrafish. Our clonal analysis of zebrafish sclerotome shows that
anterior and posterior somite domains are not lineage-restricted compartments
with respect to distribution along the anteroposterior axis but support a 'leaky'
resegmentation in development from somite to vertebral column. Alignment of
somites with vertebrae suggests that the first two somites do not contribute to
the vertebral column. Characterization of vertebral column development allowed
examination of the relationship between vertebral formula and expression patterns
of zebrafish Hox genes. Our results support co-localization of the anterior
expression boundaries of zebrafish hoxc6 homologs with a cervical/thoracic
transition and also suggest Hox-independent patterning of regionally specific
posterior vertebrae.

PMID: 12135923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Jul;187(1):24-32.

Expression of homeobox gene transcripts in trophoblastic cells.

Zhang YM(1), Xu B, Rote N, Peterson L, Amesse LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine and College of Science and Mathematics, Dayton, Ohio 45409-2793, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to examine the dynamics of homeobox gene
expression in the differentiation of trophoblasts as a key to the understanding
of the regulatory mechanisms that are involved in placental development.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of homeobox genes was examined in primary trophoblastic 
cells and in the BeWo choriocarcinoma model cell lines by molecular and
immunocytochemistry techniques.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the expression of 3 homeobox genes (HOX B6, HOX C6, and 
HOX A11) in primary trophoblastic cells. BeWo cells showed an expression pattern 
similar to that of the primary cell lines. In both primary trophoblasts and BeWo 
cells, the HOX A11 gene, but not the HOX B6 or HOX C6 genes, were found to
down-regulate with differentiation from single- to multinucleate giant cells.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates a novel expression pattern for HOX A11 gene
in trophoblastic differentiation and suggests that the down-regulation of HOX A11
may be necessary for the differentiation of cytotrophoblasts into
syncytiotrophoblasts.

PMID: 12114884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Dev Biol. 2002 Mar;46(2):209-15.

Colinearity and non-colinearity in the expression of Hox genes in developing
chick skin.

Reid AI(1), Gaunt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge, UK.

Hox genes are usually expressed temporally and spatially in a colinear manner
with respect to their positions in the Hox complex. We found that these
characteristics apply to several Hox genes expressed in developing chick skin
(Hoxb-4, Hoxa-7 and Hoxc-8), and we classed this group of genes as regionally
restricted. To our surprise, we found that most of the Hox genes we examined are 
regionally unrestricted in their expression in the embryonic chick skin. This
second group includes the Hoxd genes, Hoxd-4 to Hoxd-13, Hoxa-11 and Hoxc-6.
Temporally, the expression of the regionally restricted genes can be observed by 
E5 within the epidermis, whereas the spatially unrestricted genes are not
expressed in the epidermis until E6.25. Unexpectedly, we found that all the
unrestricted genes are expressed concomitantly and therefore do not conform to
temporal colinearity. Moreover, the dermal expression for both groups occurs
later, but maintains the same anteroposterior patterning to that seen previously 
in the epidermis. During embryonic day 7-8, expression for all genes is
up-regulated within the dense dermis whilst being reduced within the inter-bud
regions. Later expression within the bud mesenchyme is down-regulated whilst high
levels of transcriptional activity are detectable within the epidermal sheath of 
each feather bud. These results indicate that the transcriptional activity of Hox
genes in the developing chick skin could be important during embryonic skin
patterning both by providing regionally restricted positional cues, and also by
imparting generic signals necessary for feather morphology.

PMID: 11934149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Prostate. 2002 Feb 15;50(3):162-9.

Overexpression of the homeobox gene HOXC8 in human prostate cancer correlates
with loss of tumor differentiation.

Waltregny D(1), Alami Y, Clausse N, de Leval J, Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University Hospital of Liège, Liège, Belgium. 
David.Waltregny@ulg.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (HOX)-containing proteins have been identified as regulators
controlling the coordinated expression of genes involved in development and
differentiation. Recent data also suggest a possible involvement of HOX genes in 
malignant transformation and/or progression. We have previously shown that HOXC8 
expression was selectively turned on in human cervix cancer cells compared with
normal keratinocytes, suggesting that HOXC8 may be involved in the process
leading to the transformation of cervix keratinocytes [Alami et al.: Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 257:738-745, 1999].
METHODS: RT-PCR and in situ hybridization experiments were performed to
investigate the expression and cell type localization of HOXC8 transcripts in
human prostate cancer cell lines and tissues. In situ hybridization was performed
with the use of an HOXC8 anti-sense digoxigenin-labeled probe to investigate
HOXC8 mRNA expression in 27 prostate cancer tissue specimens.
RESULTS: Out of the three human prostate cancer cell lines tested, DU-145 and PC3
but not LNCaP cells expressed detectable amount of HOXC8 transcripts. Results
from in situ hybridization experiments demonstrated that HOXC8 gene was expressed
mainly in malignant epithelial cells. Furthermore, the staining intensity in
epithelial cells was significantly increased in high Gleason score carcinomas
(scores 7-9, n = 12; labeling intensity 2 + to 3 +) compared with the one
observed in low and intermediate Gleason score tumors (scores 3-6, n = 15;
labeling intensity 0 and 1 +) (ANOVA test, P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data showing that HOXC8 overexpression is associated with the
loss of tumor differentiation in human prostate cancer suggests that HOXC8 may
play a role in the acquisition of the invasive and metastatic phenotype of this
malignancy.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11813208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 8;277(6):4176-82. Epub 2001 Nov 15.

A nuclear antagonistic mechanism of inhibitory Smads in transforming growth
factor-beta signaling.

Bai S(1), Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Inhibitory Smads (I-Smads), including Smad6 and Smad7, were initially
characterized as cytoplasmic antagonists in the transforming growth factor-beta
signaling pathway. However, I-Smads are also localized in the nucleus.
Previously, we have shown that Smad6 can function as a transcriptional
co-repressor. In this study, we found both Smad6 and Smad7 interact with histone 
deacetylases (HDACs). Acetylation state of core histones plays a critical role in
gene transcription regulation. An HDAC inhibitor, trichostatin A, released
Smad6-mediated transcription repression. Moreover, class I HDACs (HDAC-1 and -3),
not class II HDACs (HDAC-4, -5, and -6), were co-immunoprecipitated with Smad6.
Endogenous HDAC-1 was also shown to interact with both Smad6 and Hoxc-8. Mapping 
of the interaction domain indicates Smad6 MH2 domain is mainly involved in
recruiting HDAC-1. Most interestingly, Smad6 also binds to DNA through its MH1
domain, and the MH2 domain of Smad6 masks this binding activity, indicating that 
Smad6 MH1 and MH2 domains associate reciprocally and inhibit each other's
function. Hoxc-8 induces Smad6 binding to DNA as a transcriptional complex. Our
findings revealed that I-Smads act as antagonists in the nucleus by recruiting
HDACs.

PMID: 11711531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 1;232(1):149-56.

Agenesis of the scapula in Emx2 homozygous mutants.

Pellegrini M(1), Pantano S, Fumi MP, Lucchini F, Forabosco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Morfologiche e Medico Legali, Università di Modena e
Reggio Emilia, Modena, 41100, Italy. pellegrini.massimo@unimo.it

The shoulder and pelvic girdles represent the proximal bones of the appendicular 
skeleton that connect the anterior and posterior limbs to the body trunk.
Although the limb is a well-known model in developmental biology, the genetic
mechanisms controlling the development of the more proximal elements of the
appendicular skeleton are still unknown. The knock-out of Pax1 has shown that
this gene is involved in patterning the acromion, while the expression pattern
candidates Hoxc6 as a gene involved in scapula development. Surprisingly, we have
found that scapula and ilium do not develop in Emx2 knock-out mice. In the
homozygous mutants, developmental abnormalities of the brain cortex, the most
anterior structure of the primary axis of the body, are associated with important
defects of the girdles, the more proximal elements of the secondary axis. These
abnormalities suggest that the molecular mechanisms patterning the more proximal 
elements of the limb axis are different from those patterning the rest of
appendicular skeleton. While Hox genes specify the different segments of the more
distal part of the appendicular skeleton forming the limb, Emx2 is concerned with
the more proximal elements constituting the girdles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11254354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Anticancer Res. 2000 Sep-Oct;20(5A):3281-6.

Immunocytochemical detection of the homeobox B3, B4, and C6 gene products in
breast carcinomas.

Bodey B(1), Bodey B Jr, Siegel SE, Kaiser HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles 91335,
USA. Bodey18@aol.com

Breast cancer (BC) represents the most frequent neoplasm in women with a risk of 
incidence between 10% and 12%. The detection of tumor associated and oncofetal
antigen re-expression in a variety of neoplastically transformed cell types has
aided in the more precise diagnosis and prognostication of human cancers. The
homeobox (HOX) genes encode proteins which contain a 61 amino acid DNA-binding
homeodomain and are involved in the transcriptional regulation of other genes
during normal onto- and histogenesis. The class I HOX genes are organized in four
clusters on different chromosomes in humans, with a high conservation in the
order of the genes within each of these clusters. Re-expression of HOX gene
products has been reported in a wide variety of neoplastically transformed cells 
and it seems quite likely that the HOX genes represent yet another class of
oncofetal antigens involved in both normal development and carcinogenesis, as
well as tumor progression. The expression pattern of three HOX gene products
(HOX-B3, -B4, and -C6) was examined immunocytochemically in 11 human breast
carcinoma (BC) tissues. In all observed BC cases, HOX-C6 was present in over 90% 
of the neoplastically transformed cells (+4) demonstrating a high grade (A and B)
staining intensity. The same expression pattern was defined for the other two
observed proteins (HOX-B3 and -B4; over 90% or +4 and a high grade staining
intensity or A and B). Current treatment of BC encompasses the three "classic"
modalities of therapy: surgical resection, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy.
Although advances have been made, we still face great difficulties in the
treatment of this deadly human neoplasm. Therefore, we are always seeking novel
tumor associated antigens (TAAs), including oncofetal antigens, to use as
molecular targets in cancer cell directed fourth modality immunotherapy.

PMID: 11062754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Dyn. 2000 Oct;219(2):261-76.

Differential mammary morphogenesis along the anteroposterior axis in Hoxc6 gene
targeted mice.

Garcia-Gasca A(1), Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29403, USA.

Mammary epithelial cell proliferation, branching, and differentiation span from
the appearance of the mammary bud in midgestation through to the cycling mammary 
gland in adulthood. Here, we show that females homozygous for a targeted
disruption of the Hoxc6 homeobox gene produce thoracic mammary glands that are
slightly under-developed at birth and completely cleared of epithelium by
adulthood, and inguinal mammary ducts that are dilated and fail to regress in
response to ovariectomy. Mammary buds are detected in E12.5 Hoxc6 homozygous
embryos. However, in newborn Hoxc6 homozygous females, branching ductal
structures and fat pad development are reduced. Whole-mount and histologic
analyses of mammary glands from adult Hoxc6 homozygous females show the absence
of mammary epithelium in thoracic glands and dilated ducts in inguinal glands at 
100% penetrance. Histologic analysis of inguinal mammary glands from
ovariectomized Hoxc6 homozygous females demonstrates no signs of the expected
regression of epithelium, suggesting that these glands are not responsive to the 
loss of ovarian hormone signals. We further observe repression of Hoxc6
expression specifically within mammary stroma by estrogen and progesterone. Hoxc6
homozygous mice also exhibit a homeotic transformation of the second thoracic
vertebra into the first (T2 to T1 conversion with 60% penetrance), corresponding 
to both the gene's anterior boundary of expression and the most extreme
appearance of mammary defects. The position-specific phenotypes observed and the 
potential role for Hoxc6 in mediating hormone-regulated ductal expansion and
regression in the adult female are discussed.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11002345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Anticancer Res. 2000 Jul-Aug;20(4):2717-21.

Homeobox B3, B4, and C6 gene product expression in osteosarcomas as detected by
immunocytochemistry.

Bodey B(1), Bodey B Jr, Siegel SE, Luck JV, Kaiser HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles 91335,
USA. Bodey18@aol.com

Osteosarcoma (OS) is a malignant neoplastic disease of the bone, of mesenchymal
origin and with considerable morphologic heterogeneity, consisting of malignant
stoma with evidence of malignant osteoid, bone and/or cartilage production. The
mammalian homeobox (HOX) represents a highly conserved DNA motif of 183 base
pairs, encoding the 61 amino acid DNA-binding homeodomain, through which the HOX 
gene products regulate the transcription of other genes involved in onto- and
histogenesis. Re-expression of HOX proteins has been identified in a wide variety
of neoplastically transformed cell types and it seems that the HOX genes
represent yet another family of oncofetal antigens involved in both normal
development and oncogenesis, as well as tumor tissue progression. During this
study, the expression pattern of three HOX gene products (HOX-C6, -B3, and -B4)
was examined immunocytochemically in human osteosarcoma (OS) tissues. In all
observed (16/16) OS cases, HOX-C6 was present in over 90% of the neoplastically
transformed cells (+4), demonstrating a high to medium grade (A to B) staining
intensity. Similar results were obtained in OS cells for the other two observed
proteins (HOX-B3 and -B4; over 90% or +4 and a high to medium grade staining
intensity or A and B). The significance of the expression of class I HOX proteins
in the pathobiology, diagnosis and prognostication of human OS should be
established by further investigations.

PMID: 10953349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Anticancer Res. 2000 Jul-Aug;20(4):2711-6.

Immunocytochemical detection of homeobox B3, B4, and C6 gene product expression
in lung carcinomas.

Bodey B(1), Bodey B Jr, Gröger AM, Siegel SE, Kaiser HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles 91335,
USA. Bodey18@aol.com

The so-called homebox (HOX) was described as a highly conserved DNA motif of 183 
base pairs, encoding the 61 amino acid DNA-binding homeodomain. Numerous HOX
genes have subsequently been shown to bind to DNA and regulate the transcription 
of other genes. In humans the class I HOX genes are placed in four clusters on
different chromosomes. The order of the genes within each of these clusters is
evolutionarily conserved to a high degree and suggests that such an organization 
may be essential in the function of these genes during normal embryo- and
histogenesis. Re-expression of HOX gene products has been reported in a wide
variety of neoplastically transformed cells and it seems very likely that the HOX
genes represent yet another class of oncofetal antigens involved in both normal
development and cellular carcinogenesis, as well as tumor progression. The
expression pattern of three homeobox gene products (HOX-B3, HOX-B4, and HOX-C6), 
all shown to be involved in lung tissue development, was examined
immunocytochemically, in human lung carcinoma (LC) tissues. In all observed LC
cases, HOX-C6 was present in over 60% of neoplastic cells (+3) demonstrating a
medium grade (B and C) staining intensity. A smaller number of neoplastically
transformed epithelial cells also expressed the proteins HOX-B3 and -B4 (10% to
60% or +2 to +3 and a medium grade staining intensity or B and C). The
significance of these novel oncofetal antigens in tumor cell biology and as
target molecules in the immunotherapy of lung carcinomas should be established by
future studies.

PMID: 10953348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Anticancer Res. 2000 May-Jun;20(3A):1769-80.

Immunocytochemical detection of the homeobox B3, B4, and C6 gene products in
childhood medulloblastomas/primitive neuroectodermal tumors.

Bodey B(1), Bodey B Jr, Siegel SE, Kaiser HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles 91335,
USA. Bodey18@aol.com

The homeobox was originally described as a conserved DNA motif of about 180 base 
pairs. The protein domain encoded by the homeobox, the homeodomain, is thus about
60 amino acids long. The homeodomain is a DNA-binding domain, and many homeobox
genes have now been shown to bind to DNA and regulate the transcription of other 
genes. Thus homeodomain proteins are basically transcription factors, most of
which play a role in development. The homeobox genes seem to represent another
class of oncofetal antigens involved in both normal development and
carcinogenesis, as well as tumor progression. It has been shown that HOX-B3 and
HOX-B4 are preferentially expressed in primitive CD34+, lineage-committed
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in human bone marrow. HOX-B3 overexpression in
HSCs causes defective lymphoid development and progressive myeloproliferation,
while HOX-B4 leads to selective expansion of HSCs without altering their
differentiation. The HOX-C6 gene product leads to cell differentiation in
neuroblastomas, while also being associated with the neoplastically transformed
mammary cell phenotype and progression in primary cutaneous lymphomas. The
expression pattern of these three homeobox gene products (HOX-B3, HOX-B4, and
HOX-C6) was examined immunocytochemically in childhood MEDs/PNETs employing an
indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated technique on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Strong staining intensity (A, B) of HOX-B3 and
HOX-B4 was registered in all MEDs/PNETs, with immunoreactivity in between 50% and
90% (+3), but usually over 90% (+4) of the tumor cells. HOX-C6 was detected at
medium intensity (mostly B) in 50% to 90% (+3) of the MED/PNET cells. This report
is the first to describe the expression of these three homeobox gene products in 
MEDs/PNETs, and provides further evidence for the role of these proteins in the
progression of human malignancies. The value of these genes and proteins in the
early diagnosis and possible treatment of various human neoplasms, including
childhood brain tumors, should be assessed in further immunocytochemical and
molecular biological experiments.

PMID: 10928106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. In Vivo. 2000 May-Jun;14(3):419-24.

Immunocytochemical detection of the homeobox B3, B4, and C6 gene products within 
the human thymic cellular microenvironment.

Bodey B(1), Bodey B Jr, Siegel SE, Kaiser HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. 
Bodey18@aol.com

The homeobox (HOX) was originally described as a conserved DNA motif of about 180
base pairs. The protein domain encoded by the homeobox, the homeodomain, is thus 
about 60 amino acids long. The homeodomain is a DNA-binding domain, and many
homeobox genes have now been shown to bind to DNA and regulate the transcription 
of other genes. Thus homeodomain proteins are basically transcription factors,
most of which play a role in development. The homeobox genes seem to represent
another class of oncofetal antigens involved in both normal development and
carcinogenesis, as well as tumor progression. The expression pattern of three
homeobox gene products (HOX-B3, HOX-B4, and HOX-C6) was examined
immunocytochemically in human thymuses of different ages and developmental stages
(prenatal: 16 weeks and postnatal: 3 years, 5 years, and 21 years) employing an
indirect alkaline phosphatase conjugated antigen detection technique on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections. The immunoreactivity was
located in the thymic RE cellular network (cortical and medullar), showing
different intensity (+3 to +4 or 50% to 90% and over 90% in the prenatal thymic
tissue and +2 to +3 or 50% to 90% during the three different postnatal stages).
Intense expression was identified in the thymic medulla, including very strong
immunoreactivity in the immigrating, committed hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
present within the interlobular connective tissue (ICT). Strong presence of the
HOX-B3 and HOX-B4 proteins was detected in the thymic Hassall's bodies (HBs),
suggesting an intensive functional activity of the RE cells present within these 
unique formations within the thymic medulla. The precise role of these and other 
HOX gene products in the various steps of intrathymic T lymphopoieis should be
elucidated through further basic molecular biological research.

PMID: 10904875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. In Vivo. 2000 May-Jun;14(3):407-18.

Novel insights into the function of the thymic Hassall's bodies.

Bodey B(1), Bodey B Jr, Siegel SE, Kaiser HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. 
Bodey18@aol.com

During thymic ontogenesis, the HBs appear when lymphopoiesis is already
established and the cortex, medulla and the cortico-medullary junction are
capable of conducting the positive and negative selection of T lymphocytes
undergoing progressive maturation. The HBs are structurally organized from RE
cells, which usually undergo hypertrophy prior to their inclusion in the outer
cell layer of the corpuscles. The cellular microenvironment of the thymic medulla
is composed of networks of cell types, of a variety of origins, and all of them
may participate in the construction of growing, progressive HBs. Histochemically,
we detected a rich content of basic non-histone proteins, PAS positive substance 
(glycogen) and acid mucopolysaccharides within the bodies. Employing the
histological stain of Pasini and immunocytochemical methods with monoclonal
antidodies (MoABs) AE2 and AE3, high molecular weight (56.5 to 67 kD) basic
keratins were defined in human HBs. Employing a panel of MoABs developed against 
thymic RE cell surface antigens, we observed immunoreactivity localized to the
outer cell layer of the HBs with MoABs TE8, TE16 and TE19, while the centrally
located cells reacted positively with TE15 and TE19. Immunoreactivity in human
skin, employing the TE8, TE16 and TE19 MoABs was also observed in the epidermal
granulosa cell layer, while TE15 reacted with cells of the stratum corneum. The
presence of endocrine, peptide secreting RE cells within the HBs was defined with
the use of MoAB A2B5, which binds to the GQ ganglioside. The hypertrophied,
physiologically active RE cells of the peripheral cell layer of the HBs reacted
positively with medium to strong intensity when stained with MoABs UJ127.11,
J1153, A2B5, 215.D11, and 275.G7. We also observed the expression of transforming
growth factor-beta type II receptors in HBs. The recently detected expression of 
the homobox gene products B3, B4, and C6, transcription factors involved in
developmental processes related to hematopoiesis within HBs provides further
evidence that HBs are important functional components of the RE network of the
thymus which provide developing thymocytes with paracrine and juxtacrine signals 
to ensure their proper functional maturation during intrathymic lymphopoiesis.
Our transmission electronmicroscopical (TEM) studies on HBs determined the
existence of groups of RE cells connected to one another by desmosomes. We also
observed long cytoplasmic processes originating from medullary RE cells and
directly contacting thymic T lymphocytes and accessory antigen presenting cells
(macrophages, dendritic cells, interdigitating cells, Langerhans cells, etc.) by 
the use of scanning electronmicroscopy (SEM). Thus, our results indicate that the
HBs are unique, antigenically distinct, functionally active, multicellular
components of the nonlymphocytic, cellular micro-environment of the thymic
medulla, and participate in the physiological activities of the prenatal and
adult thymus.

PMID: 10904874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8267-70.

Smad6 as a transcriptional corepressor.

Bai S(1), Shi X, Yang X, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama School of Medicine, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Smad6 and Smad7, a subgroup of Smad proteins, antagonize the signals elicited by 
transforming growth factor-beta. These two Smads, induced by transforming growth 
factor-beta or bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) stimulation, form stable
associations with their activated type I receptors, blocking phosphorylation of
receptor-regulated Smads in the cytoplasm. Here we show that Smad6 interacts with
homeobox (Hox) c-8 as a transcriptional corepressor, inhibiting BMP signaling in 
the nucleus. The interaction between Smad6 and Hoxc-8 was identified by a yeast
two-hybrid approach and further demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation assays in 
cells. Gel shift assays show that Smad6, but not Smad7, interacts with both
Hoxc-8 and Hoxa-9 as a heterodimer when binding to DNA. More importantly, the
Smad6-Hoxc-8 complex inhibits interaction of Smad1 with Hoxc-8- and Smad1-induced
transcription activity. These data indicate that Smad6 interacts with Hox
transcription factors as part of the negative feedback circuit in the BMP
signaling pathway.

PMID: 10722652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 1999 May;1(2):117-24.

Homeobox proteins as signal transduction intermediates in regulation of NCAM
expression by recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 in osteoblast-like
cells.

Boersma CJ(1), Bloemen M, Hendriks JM, van Berkel EA, Olijve W, van Zoelen EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Applied Biology, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The role of homeobox genes in signaling of recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (rhBMP-2) was studied in osteoblast-like cells. Expression of several
homeobox genes was decreased by rhBMP-2. The finding that this regulation of
homeobox gene expression by rhBMP-2 was not dependent on protein synthesis
suggests that homeobox proteins can act as direct intermediates in signal
transduction of BMPs. Therefore, we studied the regulation of neural cell
adhesion molecule (NCAM), which has previously been described as a target gene of
both rhBMP-2 and homeobox proteins. We now show that in osteoblast-like cells,
rhBMP-2 inhibits NCAM expression, while HOXC6 increases its expression, both
acting via the same region of the promoter. As overexpression of HOXC6 could
abolish effects of rhBMP-2 on NCAM promoter activity, these data show for the
first time that members of the homeobox gene family may form direct functional
intermediates in the signaling mechanism of the TGF-beta superfamily.

PMID: 10356360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Curr Biol. 1999 Oct 7;9(19):R715.

Biology in pictures. How the snake lost its legs.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 10531018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biotechniques. 1999 Jun;26(6):1114-6, 1118-20, 1122 passim.

Absolute quantitation of MDR1 transcripts using heterologous DNA
standards--validation of the competitive RT-PCR (CRT-PCR) approach.

el-Osta A(1), Kantharidis P, Zalcberg J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Melbourne, Austin & Repatriation Medical Centre, Heidelberg
West, VIC, Australia.

The multidrug resistance (MDR1) gene product, P-glycoprotein (Pgp), is a 170-kDa 
ATP-dependent pump that expels a variety of anticancer drugs out of malignant
cells, reducing drug accumulation and thus antitumor activity. In recent years,
considerable data has been presented that indicates the need to standardize
detection methods for Pgp and MDR1. Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR is one of the 
most sensitive and specific techniques used to detect MDR1. Nevertheless, there
is the need to address working criteria for quantitation by RT-PCR. In this
study, we describe a flexible assay used to quantify MDR1 gene expression using
heterologous (nonhomologous) standards for use in competitive RT-PCR (CRT-PCR).
Our guidelines were to use a RT-PCR quantitation method that was independent of
exponential phase kinetics, sensitive (detect low levels of gene measurement in
clinical samples) and did not require radiolabel. Furthermore, the method would
need to be flexible enough for the user to express quantitation as either the
number of cells or amount of cDNA used in CRT-PCR. Using low-stringency
amplification, heterologous DNA competitors were constructed for MDR1 and as an
internal reference, the ubiquitously expressed human histone variant 3.3 (H3.3). 
The benefits of this approach are threefold: (i) amplification kinetics of target
and competitor molecules are identical, (ii) low-stringency PCR is a simple way
of constructing heterologous DNA competitors that do not require special storage 
conditions and (iii) heterologous competitors avoid the formation of heteroduplex
molecules. We conclude that CRT-PCR is an extremely flexible and sensitive assay 
that can quantify MDR1 based on competitive amplification of a heterologous
competitor. This might complement future efforts to standardize MDR1 detection
methods using RT-PCR.

PMID: 10376151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 21;257(3):738-45.

HOXC5 and HOXC8 expression are selectively turned on in human cervical cancer
cells compared to normal keratinocytes.

Alami Y(1), Castronovo V, Belotti D, Flagiello D, Clausse N.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.

A growing number of data have sustained the involvement of homeobox genes
expression deregulation in cancer. In this study, we have performed an exhaustive
survey of the expression of the 39 class I HOX genes expressed in normal and
malignant human cervix keratinocytes. Using RT-PCR, we observed that the vast
majority (34/39) of HOX genes are expressed in normal keratinocytes. Only HOXA2, 
HOXA7, HOXC5, HOXC8 and HOXD12 were found to be silent. Interestingly, this
pattern is conserved in the transformed keratinocytes (SiHa cells) except for the
appearance of HOXC5 and HOXC8 mRNA. The HOXC5 and HOXC8 expression was also
observed in two other transformed keratinocytes cell lines of independent
origins, Eil-8 and 18-11S3, and confirmed by in situ hybridization. Our data add 
weight to the body of evidence attributing to a specific adult tissue a
particular combination of expressed HOX genes and suggest that HOXC5 and/or HOXC8
could be involved in the process leading to the transformation of cervical
keratinocytes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Leukemia. 1998 Nov;12(11):1724-32.

Differentiation and cell-type-restricted expression of HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 in 
myeloid leukemias and normal myeloid cells.

Bijl JJ(1), van Oostveen JW, Walboomers JM, Brink AT, Vos W, Ossenkoppele GJ,
Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Hospital of the Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

HOX genes have shown a lineage-specific expression in hematopoiesis and are
suggested as being involved in the expression of certain adhesion molecules.
Recently, we have demonstrated that HOXC4 and HOXC6, but not HOXC5, are expressed
during lymphoid differentiation. Reports on the expression of these genes in
myeloid leukemias and normal myeloid cells are still scarce. Therefore, we have
investigated the expression of HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 in purified subpopulations 
of bone marrow in addition to 36 specimens of acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs),
eight chronic myeloid leukemias (CMLs), several myeloid cell lines and cutaneous 
localizations of three myelomonocytic leukemias and one granulocytic sarcoma by
RT-PCR and partly by RNA in situ hybridization (RISH). HOXC4 and HOXC6
transcripts were both detected by RT-PCR in 22/36 and 24/36 AMLs, respectively.
The distribution of HOXC4 and HOXC6 gene expression over the different types of
AML was largely similar and covered all types of AML. In contrast, HOXC5 gene
expression was found in only 6/32 AMLs. Expression of HOXC5 was restricted to
AMLs of the granulocytic (FAB M1-M3), early monocytic (FAB M4) and early
erythroid (FAB M6) lineage. In general, except in one FAB M5b case, no expression
of HOXC5 was found in AMLs derived from late stages of monocytic (FAB M5) and
megakaryocytic (FAB M7) lineages. As for HOXC4 and HOXC6, expression of HOXC5 was
absent in CMLs. Using RISH significant HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 expression was
found in a number of additionally studied AML samples of different FAB
classification (M2, M4, M5b and M5b), (M2 and M5b) (M2, M4, M5b), respectively.
In tissue localizations of leukemias a different expression pattern of HOXC4,
HOXC5 and HOXC6 was found. In contrast to mature leukemic stages of myeloid
differentiation, these skin localizations of leukemias expressed HOXC5 and HOXC6.
HOXC4 expression was found both in leukemic cells derived from peripheral blood
and from cutaneous localizations. Besides HOXC4 expression in monocytes no
expression of HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 was found in granulocytes and monocytes,
colonies of growth factor-induced CD34+ bone marrow cells. In earliest
CD34+/CD38low and high cell fractions of bone marrow only HOXC4 and in
megakaryocytic cells both HOXC4 and HOXC6 were found. Thus, the expression
patterns of these HOXC genes found in the limited number of cell fractions of
normal bone marrow suggest that the expression patterns found in AMLs and CMLs
might reflect the normal situation. Furthermore, the presence of HOXC5 and HOXC6 
expression specifically in skin infiltrates of late differentiation stages of
myeloid leukemias, suggests an additional role for these genes in the positioning
of these myeloid cells in skin tissue.

PMID: 9823947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Nov;208(9):517-22.

Hox gene expression reveals regionalization along the anteroposterior axis of the
zebrafish notochord.

Prince VE(1), Price AL, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy and The Committee on
Developmental Biology, University of Chicago, 1027 E. 57th St., Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

The vertebrate Hox genes have been shown to confer regional identity along the
anteroposterior axis of the developing embryo, especially within the central
nervous system (CNS) and the paraxial mesoderm. The notochord has been shown to
play vital roles in patterning adjacent tissues along both the dorsoventral and
mediolateral axes. However, the notochord's role in imparting anteroposterior
information to adjacent structures is less well understood, especially as the
notochord shows no morphological distinctions along the anteroposterior axis and 
is not generally described as a segmental or compartmentalized structure. Here we
report that four zebrafish hox genes: hoxb1, hoxb5, hoxc6 and hoxc8 are
regionally expressed along the anteroposterior extent of the developing
notochord. Notochord expression for each gene is transient, but maintains a
definite, gene-specific anterior limit throughout its duration. The hox gene
expression in the zebrafish notochord is spatially colinear with those genes
lying most 3' in the hox clusters having the most anterior limits. The expression
patterns of these hox cluster genes in the zebrafish are the most direct
molecular evidence for a system of anteroposterior regionalization of the
notochord in any vertebrate studied to date.

PMID: 9799433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;30(6):651-5.

The HOXC6 homeodomain-containing proteins.

Chariot A(1), Gielen J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Chemistry and Medical Oncology, C.H.U., Sart-Tilman,
University of Liege, Belgium. vbours@ulg.ac.be

The HOXC6 homeodomain-containing proteins act as transcription factors in the
genetic control of multiple genes involved in development and cell
differentiation. Two HOXC6 polypeptides are encoded by a single homeobox ('HOX') 
gene described as 'master gene' for the crucial role it plays in the patterning
and axial morphogenesis of multiple species. Transcription of the HOXC6 gene is
initiated from two promoters and generates two proteins that share the same
DNA-binding domain but harbor a distinct N-terminal region. Recent studies have
demonstrated that both HOXC6 products can activate or repress transcription,
depending on the cellular context. Functional in vivo specificity of HOXC6
proteins may be achieved through combinatorial interactions with other members of
the HOX family as well as with co-factors whose identities are largely unknown.
Disruption of this 'HOX code' may lead to pathology such as developmental
defects.

PMID: 9695021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):969-82.

The control of rostrocaudal pattern in the developing spinal cord: specification 
of motor neuron subtype identity is initiated by signals from paraxial mesoderm.

Ensini M(1), Tsuchida TN, Belting HG, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10025, USA.

The generation of distinct classes of motor neurons is an early step in the
control of vertebrate motor behavior. To study the interactions that control the 
generation of motor neuron subclasses in the developing avian spinal cord we
performed in vivo grafting studies in which either the neural tube or flanking
mesoderm were displaced between thoracic and brachial levels. The positional
identity of neural tube cells and motor neuron subtype identity was assessed by
Hox and LIM homeodomain protein expression. Our results show that the
rostrocaudal identity of neural cells is plastic at the time of neural tube
closure and is sensitive to positionally restricted signals from the paraxial
mesoderm. Such paraxial mesodermal signals appear to control the rostrocaudal
identity of neural tube cells and the columnar subtype identity of motor neurons.
These results suggest that the generation of motor neuron subtypes in the
developing spinal cord involves the integration of distinct rostrocaudal and
dorsoventral patterning signals that derive, respectively, from paraxial and
axial mesodermal cell groups.

PMID: 9463344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Dyn. 1997 Nov;210(3):274-87.

CHOXC-8 and CHOXD-13 expression in embryonic chick skin and cutaneous appendage
specification.

Kanzler B(1), Prin F, Thelu J, Dhouailly D.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie de la Différenciation Epithéliale-UMR CNRS 5538, Institut Albert
Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

We studied the expression of two distantly clustered Hox genes which could,
respectively, be involved in specification of dorsal feather- and foot
scale-forming skin in the chick embryo: cHoxc-8, a median paralog, and cHoxd-13, 
located at the 5' extremity of the HoxD cluster. The cHoxc-8 transcripts are
present at embryonic day 3.5 (E3.5) in the somitic cells, which give rise to the 
dorsal dermis by E5, and at E6.5-8.5 in the dorsal dermal and epidermal cells
during the first stages of feather morphogenesis. The cHoxd-13 transcripts are
present at E4.5-9.5 in the autopodial mesenchyme and at E10.5-12.5 in the plantar
dermis during the initiation of reticulate scale morphogenesis. Both the cHoxc-8 
and cHoxd-13 transcripts are no longer detectable after the anlagen stage of
cutaneous appendage morphogenesis. Furthermore, heterotopic dermal-epidermal
recombinations of dorsal, plantar, and apteric tissues revealed that the
epidermal ability or inability to form feathers is already established by the
time of skin formation. Retinoic acid (RA) treatment at E11 induces after 12 hr
an inhibition of cHoxd-13 expression in the plantar dermis, followed by the
formation of feather filaments on the reticulate scales. When E7.5 dorsal
explants are treated with RA for 6 days, they form scale-like structures where
the Hox transcripts are no more detectable. Protein analysis revealed that the
plantar filaments, made up of feather beta-keratins, corresponded to a homeotic
transformation, whereas the scale-like structures, composed also of feather
beta-keratins, were teratoid. These results strengthen the hypothesis that
different homeobox genes play a significant role in specifying the regional
identity of the different epidermal territories.

PMID: 9389453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Blood. 1997 Nov 15;90(10):4116-25.

HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 expression in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: preferential
expression of the HOXC5 gene in primary cutaneous anaplastic T-cell and
oro-gastrointestinal tract mucosa-associated B-cell lymphomas.

Bijl JJ(1), van Oostveen JW, Walboomers JM, Horstman A, van den Brule AJ,
Willemze R, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Most of the 39 members of the homeobox (HOX) gene family are believed to control 
blood cell development. HOXC4 and HOXC6 gene expression levels increase with
differentiation of lymphoid cells. In contrast, HOXC5 is not expressed in the
lymphoid lineage, but was found in lymphoid cell lines, representing the
neoplastic equivalents of various differentiation stages of T and B lymphocytes. 
In the present study, we investigated the HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 gene expression
pattern in 89 non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs) of different histologic subtypes and
originating from different sites. Using RNA in situ hybridization and
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, we found
expression of HOXC4 in 83 of 88 and HOXC6 in 77 of 88 NHLs and leukemias
investigated. In contrast, HOXC5 expression was found in only 26 of 87 NHLs and
appeared to be preferentially expressed by two specific subsets of lymphomas, ie,
primary cutaneous anaplastic T-cell lymphomas (9 of 9) and extranodal marginal
zone B-cell lymphomas (maltomas; 7 of 9). These results indicate that, in
contrast to HOXC4 and HOXC6, HOXC5 shows a type- and site-restricted expression
pattern in both T- and B-cell NHLs.

PMID: 9354682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Pathol. 1997 Oct;151(4):1067-74.

HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 expression in primary cutaneous lymphoid lesions. High
expression of HOXC5 in anaplastic large-cell lymphomas.

Bijl JJ(1), Rieger E, van Oostveen JW, Walboomers JM, Kreike M, Willemze R,
Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Homeobox (HOX) genes are involved in the lineage-specific differentiation of bone
marrow stem cells. Recently, we reported a largely similar expression pattern of 
HOXC4 and HOXC6 in normal and neoplastic cells of the lymphoid lineage. In
contrast, HOXC5 was specifically expressed in a subset of B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas (B-NHL) but not in normal lymphocytes or lymphoid leukemias. This might
suggest a role for HOXC5 in the pathogenesis of these lymphomas. In the present
study the expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 in primary cutaneous lymphomas
was investigated. Using RNA in situ hybridization (RISH) and semiquantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we found strong
expression of HOXC4 and HOXC6 in all, except one, primary cutaneous lymphomas and
all reactive cutaneous lymphoid infiltrates. Interestingly, a strong expression
of HOXC5 in primary anaplastic CD30+ large T-cell lymphomas was found. RISH was
consistently negative for HOXC5 in all other types of primary cutaneous B- and
T-cell lymphomas. However, by semiquantitative RT-PCR these lymphomas showed a
weak expression of HOXC5 mRNA. Therefore, we concluded that these lymphomas
express low constitutive levels of HOXC5 mRNA. Furthermore, HOXC5 expression was 
consistently absent in reactive cutaneous lymphoid infiltrates, hyperplastic
tonsils and lymph nodes, and peripheral blood lymphocytes either unstimulated or 
stimulated by a cocktail of CD3 and CD28 antibodies. As a strong expression of
HOXC5 in primary cutaneous lymphomas was observed only in anaplastic large T-cell
lymphomas and reactive control tissues lacked HOXC5 expression, these data
strongly support a role for HOXC5 in the genesis of anaplastic large-T-cell
lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC1858029
PMID: 9327740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 17;233(2):365-9.

Cell-type-specific modulation of Hox gene expression by members of the TGF-beta
superfamily: a comparison between human osteosarcoma and neuroblastoma cell
lines.

Kloen P(1), Visker MH, Olijve W, van Zoelen EJ, Boersma CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, USA.

Homeobox gene expression in osteoblast-like cells was investigated using the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A total of 13 homeobox genes was detected in U-2
OS (human osteosarcoma) and MC3T3-E1 (mouse osteoblast) cells by sequencing
cloned PCR products. Using specific primers, a different pattern of Hox gene
expression was shown for the neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-SH relative to U-2 OS
and MC3T3-E1. Additionally, we showed that expression of HOXC6 in U-2 OS and
SK-N-SH was differentially regulated by rhBMP-2, TGF-beta and activin-A. This
suggests that specific Hox genes may be target genes for TGF-beta superfamily
members, and allows us to further understand the complex functions of these
growth factors and how they relate to growth and development.

PMID: 9144540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. FEBS Lett. 1997 Feb 3;402(2-3):131-5.

Mapping of a potent transcriptional repression region of the human homeodomain
protein EVX1.

Briata P(1), Ilengo C, Van DeWerken R, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunobiology I.S.T., Advanced Biotechnology Center, Genova,
Italy. briata@sirio.cba.unige.it

The human homeodomain protein EVX1 is a transcriptional repressor in transfected 
mammalian cells and this function depends on a region carboxyl-terminal to the
homeodomain. In this study, we transiently expressed several deletions of the
EVX1 C-terminal region in mammalian cells and investigated their effect on the
transcription of a reporter gene directed by different promoters. We show that
the repressor activity maps to a region of 51 amino acids with a high abundance
of alanine and proline residues. This region is able to transfer the repressor
function to either the entire HOXC6 or CREB transcription factors, or to the GAL4
DNA binding domain.

PMID: 9037181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3881-92.

eFGF, Xcad3 and Hox genes form a molecular pathway that establishes the
anteroposterior axis in Xenopus.

Pownall ME(1), Tucker AS, Slack JM, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, School of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, UK.

Classical embryological experiments suggest that a posterior signal is required
for patterning the developing anteroposterior axis. In this paper, we investigate
a potential role for FGF signalling in this process. During normal development,
embryonic fibroblast growth factor (eFGF) is expressed in the posterior of the
Xenopus embryo. We have previously shown that overexpression of eFGF from the
start of gastrulation results in a posteriorised phenotype of reduced head and
enlarged proctodaeum. We have now determined the molecular basis of this
phenotype and we propose a role for eFGF in normal anteroposterior patterning. In
this study, we show that the overexpression of eFGF causes the up-regulation of a
number of posteriorly expressed genes, and prominent among these are Xcad3, a
caudal homologue, and the Hox genes, in particular HoxA7. There is both an
increase of expression within the normal domains and an extension of expression
towards the anterior. Application of eFGF-loaded beads to specific regions of
gastrulae reveals that anterior truncations arise from an effect on the
developing dorsal axis. Similar anterior truncations are caused by the dorsal
overexpression of Xcad3 or HoxA7. This suggests that this aspect of the eFGF
overexpression phenotype is caused by the ectopic activation of posterior genes
in anterior regions. Further results using the dominant negative FGF receptor
show that the normal expression of posterior Hox genes is dependent on FGF
signalling and that this regulation is likely mediated by the activation of
Xcad3. The biological activity of eFGF, together with its expression in the
posterior of the embryo, make it a good candidate to fulfil the role of the
'transforming' activity proposed by Nieuwkoop in his 'activation and
transformation' model for neural patterning.

PMID: 9012508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 1;319 ( Pt 1):91-7.

Cloning and expression of a new HOXC6 transcript encoding a repressing protein.

Chariot A(1), Castronovo V, Le P, Gillet C, Sobel ME, Gielen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, C.H.U., Sart-Tilman, University of Liege,
Belgium.

Homeodomain-containing proteins are transcription factors that regulate the
co-ordinated expression of multiple genes involved in development,
differentiation and malignant transformation. In an attempt to characterize
expressed homeobox (HOX) genes in breast cancer cells, we cloned two distinct
HOXC6 transcripts from an MCF7 cDNA library, Interestingly, one of them
represents a new HOXC6 mRNA encoding a homeodomain-containing protein harbouring 
a unique N-terminal sequence. Moreover we demonstrate that this HOXC6 transcript 
is less abundant in human breast cancer cells than in non-tumorigenic cell lines,
is detected in breast carcinomas and adjacent tissues and is expressed in a
variety of human tumours. In addition, transient co-transfection experiments
illustrated that both HOXC6 transcripts encode gene products that repress
transcription from a HOX binding sequence in MDA-MB231 cells and co-operate with 
other HOX gene products such as HOXB7 on their target genes. Taken together, our 
results suggest that HOXC6 proteins might contribute to the breast cell phenotype
through co-operative interactions with other HOX-derived proteins and repression 
of their target genes.

PMCID: PMC1217739
PMID: 8870653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Biol. 1996 Aug 25;178(1):192-7.

Virally mediated misexpression of Hoxc-6 in the cervical mesoderm results in
spinal nerve truncations.

Burke AC(1), Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

Members of the Hox gene family appear to regulate anterior-posterior (A-P)
regionalization in embryos. Genetic manipulation of numerous Hox genes in the
developing trunk region of vertebrates results in changes in the morphology of
individual vertebrae. We have used virally mediated, targeted misexpression to
ectopically express the Hoxc-6 protein in chick embryos. Hoxc-6 has an anterior
border of expression at the cervical-thoracic transition in tetrapods.
Misexpression of this gene in the cervical mesoderm of chick embryos results in
dramatic truncations of the ventral rami of cervical spinal nerves in the
infected region. These data point to a role for Hoxc-6 in axon guidance, and
suggest that in addition to regulating proliferative rates, Hox gene expression
provides positional information utilized in producing domain-specific
extracellular signals.

PMID: 8812121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Blood. 1996 Mar 1;87(5):1737-45.

Expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 in human lymphoid cell lines, leukemias,
and benign and malignant lymphoid tissue.

Bijl J(1), van Oostveen JW, Kreike M, Rieger E, van der Raaij-Helmer LM,
Walboomers JM, Corte G, Boncinelli E, van den Brule AJ, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Free University Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Besides their regulatory role in embryogenesis, homeobox (HOX) genes are
expressed in a specific manner in hematopoietic cell lineages, implying a role in
the molecular regulation of hematopoiesis. Some HOX C cluster genes are found to 
be expressed in lymphoid cells of mice and humans. Their function and expression 
in normal hematopoiesis are still largely unknown. We have studied the mRNA
expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 in several stages of lymphocyte maturation 
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and RNA in situ
hybridization (RISH). We examined CD34+/CD38low and CD34+/CD38high cells obtained
from normal donor bone marrow (BM), a panel of 19 lymphoid cell lines, several
types of leukemias and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL), and lymphocytes isolated
from tonsillar tissue and peripheral blood (PB). HOXC4 and HOXC6 were found to be
expressed during maturation in B- and T-lymphoid cells. The expression of each
gene was found to be initiated at different cell maturation stages. HOXC4
transcripts were present in CD34+/CD38low cells, which are thought to comprise
stem cells and noncommitted progenitor cells, and in subsequent stages to
terminally maturated lymphoid cells. HOXC6 expression is initiated in equivalents
of prothymocyte and pre-pre-B cell stage and remains present in mature cells.
However, HOXC5 is only expressed in neoplastic cell lines and in neoplastic cells
of NHL, but not in CD34+ BM cells, nor in resting or activated lymphoid cells
isolated from tonsil, PB, or in leukemia cells. In cell lines, weak expression of
HOXC5 is initiated in equivalents of pre-B cell and common thymocyte stage and is
continuously expressed in mature cell lines. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that
expression levels of HOXC5 were much lower than those of HOXC4 and HOXC6;
furthermore an increase of expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 during lymphoid 
cell differentiation was demonstrated. Thus, mainly mature lymphoid cell lines
and neoplastic cells of NHL do express HOXC5, in contrast to the lack of
expression in normal lymphoid cells and leukemias. These findings suggest
involvement of HOXC5 in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 8634419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Assist Reprod Genet. 1996 Feb;13(2):177-81.

Expression of homebox-containing genes in human preimplantation development and
in embryos with chromosomal aneuploidies.

Kuliev A(1), Kukharenko V, Morozov G, Freidine M, Rechitsky S, Verlinsky O,
Ivakhnenko V, Gindilis V, Strom C, Verlinsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Genetics Institute, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to investigate homeobox gene expression in 
human oocytes and preembryos and in postimplantation embryos with impaired
embryonic development determined by chromosomal abnormalities.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with intron
spanning primer sets for Homeobox gene sequences was used.
RESULTS: The homeobox genes HoxA4, HoxA7, HoxB4, and HoxB5 were present in human 
oocytes and cleaving normal and triploid embryos. The expression pattern was
different between chromosomally abnormal and normal first-trimester embryos. Of
four homeobox transcripts (HoxA7, HoxB4+ ++, HoxB5, and HoxC6) that are expressed
in diploid embryos, only HoxA7, HoxB4 and HoxC6 were present in a trisomy 7
embryo, and only HoxB4 and HoxB 5 in triploid embryos and an embryo with trisomy 
9. Cloning experiments revealed differences in the number of homeobox clones
obtained from trisomy 7 and control embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcripts of homeobox genes, HoxA4, HoxA7, HoxB4, and HoxB5,
were present in oocytes and cleaving embryos. The pattern of expression of
homeobox genes in cultured fibroblasts derived from spontaneously aborted embryos
with aneuploidies was different from that in control diploid cells.

PMID: 8688592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Tumour Biol. 1996;17(1):34-47.

Up-regulation of HOXC6, HOXD1, and HOXD8 homeobox gene expression in human
neuroblastoma cells following chemical induction of differentiation.

Manohar CF(1), Salwen HR, Furtado MR, Cohn SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, Chicago, Ill 60611, USA.

An early event in the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma (NB), a tumor derived from
embryonal neural crest tissue, appears to be the arrested differentiation of
neuroblasts. However, NB cells can be induced to differentiate in vitro with
numerous chemicals including retinoic acid (RA) and dibutyryl cyclic AMP
(db-cAMP). One family of transcription factors, encoded by the homeobox (HOX)
genes, plays a crucial role in Drosophila, Xenopus, and mammalian embryonic
differentiation and development. We have previously identified six HOX genes
(HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXD1, HOXD4, HOXD8, and HOXD9), by a sensitive PCR-based
approach, in a cDNA library prepared from the human LA-N-5 NB cell line induced
to differentiate with RA. In this report, we studied the regulation of these six 
HOX genes in a series of NB cell lines chemically induced to differentiate.
Untreated NB cells express low or undetectable levels of HOX mRNA, and HOXC8
remains undetectable in the induced cells. However, a significant induction of
HOXC6, HOXD1, and HOXD8 expression is seen in the RA-treated NB cell lines,
albeit with different patterns and degree of up-regulation. db-cAMP treatment
also induced HOXC6 and HOXD8 expression in two of the three NB cell lines
analyzed. Low levels of HOXD4 and HOXD9 induction were observed in two and one
RA-treated NB cell line, respectively. Up-regulation of HOXC6, HOXD1, and HOXD8
expression in human NB cells, chemically induced to differentiate, appears to be 
associated with maturation toward a differentiated neuronal phenotype.

PMID: 7501971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 1995 Apr 15;85(8):2084-90.

Expression of HOXC4 homeoprotein in the nucleus of activated human lymphocytes.

Meazza R(1), Faiella A, Corsetti MT, Airoldi I, Ferrini S, Boncinelli E, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy.

We have analyzed the expression of homeoproteins of the HOX family in resting and
activated lymphoid cells and in neoplastic lymphoid cell lines by the use of
monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) already shown to react with the homeoproteins
HOXA10, HOXC6, and HOXD4, respectively. Anti-HOXA10 and C6 MoAbs DIDi not show
any reactivity with the lymphoid cells tested, whereas anti-HOXD4 MoAb stained
few resting peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and most phytohemagglutinin
(PHA)-stimulated PBLs as early as 6 hours after stimulation. The pattern of
staining of PHA-activated PBLs is reminiscent of the stages of nucleolar
fragmentation in different phases of the cell cycle. The MoAb reacted also with
activated or Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cells, with clonal or polyclonal T 
and natural killer (NK) cells, with leukemic T-cell lines, and with a Burkitt's
lymphoma cell line. RNAse protection experiments, per formed with probes specific
for HOXD4 or for the highly homologous HOXA4, HOXB4, and HOXC4, belonging to the 
same paralogy group, indicated that only HOXC4 mRNA is present in resting or
activated PBLs. Northern blot analysis on polyA+ RNA from activated PBLs or Raji 
cells showed the presence of two different HOXC4 transcripts of 2.8 and 1.9 kb.
Gel retardation and Southwestern blot assays showed the presence of a 32-kD
homeoprotein with DNA-binding properties typical of a HOX4 homeoprotein in
nucleolar extracts of PHA-activated, but not of resting, lymphocytes. Taken
together, these data indicate that the HOXC4 homeoprotein is expressed in
activated and/or proliferating lymphocytes of the T-, B-, or NK-cell lineage,
whereas it is weakly expressed in a minority of resting cells. The early
expression and the nucleolar localization suggest an involvement of HOXC4 in the 
regulation of genes controlling lymphocyte activation and/or proliferation.

PMID: 7718879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Dev Biol. 1995 Apr;39(2):309-15.

115 kDa protein from Xenopus laevis embryos recognized by antibodies directed
against the Xenopus homeoprotein XIHbox 1.

Flavin M(1), Saint-Jeannet JP, Duprat AM, Strauss F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

Using antibodies against homeoprotein XIHbox 1 from Xenopus laevis, we have
detected a new embryonic protein with a much larger molecular weight, 115 kDa.
Antibodies fractionated according to their affinity for 3 different domains of
the XIHbox 1 protein were used to show that this new protein is related to the
C-terminal region of XIHbox 1 protein, downstream from the homeodomain. By
immunohistochemistry, the protein was shown to be localized in nuclei of
embryonic cells. On SDS-polyacrylamide gels, the 115 kDa protein appears as a set
of closely spaced bands whose pattern varies with the stage of development and
with the parental origin of the embryos. The protein could be extracted from
embryos in a multiprotein complex of approximately 600 kDa. In contrast, the 18
and 27 kDa proteins predicted from the sequence of cloned cDNA to be transcribed 
and translated from the XIHbox 1 gene could not be detected, suggesting that they
are rare or unstable in embryos. These data suggest that the new protein is
involved in the development of Xenopus embryos, with a function possibly related 
to that of the homeoprotein XIHbox 1.

PMID: 7669543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Cell Sci. 1995 Jan;108 ( Pt 1):187-93.

Nucleolar localisation of three Hox homeoproteins.

Corsetti MT(1), Levi G, Lancia F, Sanseverino L, Ferrini S, Boncinelli E, Corte
G.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Biotechnology Center, C.B.A., IST, Genova, Italy.

Homeoproteins encoded by genes of the Hox family are nuclear proteins believed to
act as transcription factors and to participate in the determination of the body 
plan. Here we show that in several vertebrate cells, they exhibit a subnuclear
localisation associated with the nucleolus. We used monoclonal antibodies to
study the distribution of three homeoproteins, namely HOXB7, HOXC6 and HOXD4. The
immunoreactivity to antibodies against HOXC6 protein in Xenopus laevis embryonic 
tissues is restricted to one or two spots within the nucleus; this distribution
partially overlaps that of fibrillarin, a protein of the fibrillar zone of the
nucleoli. Indirect immunofluorescence analysis of the distribution of HOXB7
protein in 3T3 cells, and of HOXD4 protein in human neuroblastoma and Raji
lymphoma cell lines and activated lymphocytes, results invariably in a nucleolar 
localisation. Purified nucleoli from stimulated T lymphocytes, and Raji cells
contain an activity capable of binding, in a gel retardation assay, to an
oligonucleotide specifically recognised by the HOXD4 homeoprotein. This activity 
is specifically removed by anti-HOXD4 antibodies and is found associated in
southwestern blots with a single band with an apparent M(r) of 30,000,
corresponding to that of recombinant HOXD4. The functional significance of the
nucleolar localisation of Hox proteins remains to be determined.

PMID: 7738096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. EMBO J. 1994 Jul 15;13(14):3339-47.

The thyroid transcription factor-1 gene is a candidate target for regulation by
Hox proteins.

Guazzi S(1), Lonigro R, Pintonello L, Boncinelli E, Di Lauro R, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele,
Milano, Italy.

Vertebrate Hox homeobox genes are transcription factors which regulate
antero-posterior axial identity in embryogenesis, presumably through activation
and/or repression of downstream target genes. Some of these targets were reported
to code for molecules involved in cell-cell interactions, whereas no relationship
has yet been demonstrated between Hox genes and other transcription factors
involved in determining and/or maintaining tissue specificity. The thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a homeodomain-containing protein required for
expression of thyroid-specific genes. A 862 bp 5' genomic fragment of the rat
TTF-1 gene, conferring thyroid-specific expression to a reporter gene, was
sufficient to mediate transactivation by the human HOXB3 gene in co-transfection 
assay in both NIH3T3 or HeLa cells. HOXB3 is expressed in early mammalian
embryogenesis in the anterior neuroectoderm, branchial arches and their
derivatives, including the area of the thyroid primordia and thyroid gland.
Transcription of the TTF-1 promoter is induced only by HOXB3, while its
paralogous gene HOXD3 or other Hox genes expressed more posteriorly (HOXA4,
HOXD4, HOXC5, HOXC6, HOXC8 and Hoxd-8) have no effect. Transactivation by HOXB3
is mediated by two binding sites containing an ATTA core located at -100 and +30 
from the transcription start site. DNase I footprinting experiments show that the
two sites bind HOXB3 protein synthesized in both Escherichia coli and eukaryotic 
cells, as well as nuclear factor(s) present in protein extracts obtained from
mouse embryonic tissues which express group 3 Hox genes and TTF-1. Some of the
DNA-protein complexes formed by the embryonic extracts are indistinguishable from
those generated by HOXB3.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC395231
PMID: 7913891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Biochem Pharmacol. 1994 Jan 13;47(1):137-43.

Homeobox genes: potential candidates for the transcriptional control of the
transformed and invasive phenotype.

Castronovo V(1), Kusaka M, Chariot A, Gielen J, Sobel M.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

The transformation of a cell and the acquisition of the invasive and metastatic
phenotype result from the activation of a group of complex cellular processes
rather than from the effect of a single gene product. It is likely that the
coordination of the multiple genes involved in malignancy is under the control of
a few genes that act as master genes or orchestrator genes. The latter probably
code for transcription factors that control the genetic program for tumor
invasion and metastasis. Homeobox genes are a family of transcription factors
that contain a 183 bp highly conserved nucleotide sequence coding for a 61 amino 
acid domain that binds specifically to DNA. First discovered in Drosophila as
genes controlling segmentation and segment identity, homeobox genes have since
been identified in many other species including nematodes, frog, mouse and human.
There is strong support for the suggestion that homeobox genes play a key role in
development and differentiation. In humans, there are 38 homeobox genes organized
in four clusters that are localized on chromosomes 2, 7, 12 and 17. The specific 
functions of each of these genes are generally unknown. Alterations in expression
of several homeobox genes have been reported in a variety of malignant lesions,
suggesting that they could play a role in the development of cancer. Using
reverse transcriptase reaction coupled with polymerase chain reaction and
degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the 5' and 3' ends of the highly
conserved homeodomain, we amplified 130 bp cDNA fragments from the human breast
cancer cell line MCF7 that were subsequently cloned into pBluescript vector.
Sequencing of the clones, resulted in the identification of the homeodomains of
four different human homeobox genes: HOXB6, HOXA1, HOXA10 and HOXC6. Further
studies should determine the specific role of these four homeobox genes in the
development and progression of human breast cancer and potentially determine if
they might be good targets for gene therapy.

PMID: 7906121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Anat. 1993 Dec;183 ( Pt 3):515-23.

Spatial localisation of transcripts of the Hox-C6 gene.

Shimeld SM(1), Gaunt SJ, Coletta PL, Geada AM, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Structural Biology, University of Manchester, UK.

The Hox-C6 gene, in common with its Xenopus and human homologues, is organised as
3 exons with 2 distinct promoters (PRI and PRII) producing 2 different
transcripts. The PRII promoter produces a 'typical' Hox transcript by splicing 2 
exons separated by a 700 bp intron. The PRI promoter initiates transcription from
a 3rd exon, 9 kbp 5' of PRII. This exon is spliced into the 1st exon of the PRII 
transcript at a point 3' of the translation start codon. This means that the
predicted protein product of the PRI protein contains the Hox-C6 homeodomain but 
is truncated by 82 amino acids compared with the PRII product. In situ
hybridisation using probes specific for PRI or PRII showed them to have
essentially the same distribution in the developing nervous system and
prevertebrae of 12.5 d embryos. However, the distribution of transcripts in the
CNS was distinctly different from that reported previously for a probe containing
the Hox-C6 homeobox.

PMCID: PMC1259877
PMID: 7905473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 15;90(14):6557-61.

Binding and transcriptional activation of the promoter for the neural cell
adhesion molecule by HoxC6 (Hox-3.3).

Jones FS(1), Holst BD, Minowa O, De Robertis EM, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Scores of homeobox gene-encoded transcription factors are expressed in a definite
spatiotemporal pattern during embryogenesis and regulate a series of as yet
unidentified target genes to help coordinate the morphogenetic process. We have
suggested that homeobox gene products modulate the expression of adhesion
molecule genes and have shown in cotransfection experiments that the promoters
for the neural cell adhesion molecule (N-CAM) and cytotactin/tenascin genes
respond to cues from different homeobox-containing genes. In this study, we show 
that the HoxC6 (Hox-3.3)-encoded homeoprotein binds to a DNA sequence in the
N-CAM promoter CCTAATTATTAA, designated homeodomain binding site I (HBS-I). To
test whether HoxC6 regulated N-CAM promoter activity, we cotransfected the Long
and Short reading frame variants of Xenopus HoxC6 (CMV-HoxC6-L and CMV-HoxC6-S)
driven by the human cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter together with a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene driven by the mouse N-CAM
promoter (N-CAM-Pro-CAT). Cotransfection of NIH 3T3 cells with either of the
CMV-HoxC6 expression vectors stimulated N-CAM promoter-driven CAT expression. A
47-bp region from the N-CAM promoter that included HBS-I and an adjacent
potential HBS, HBS-II, conferred HoxC6 regulation on a simian virus 40 minimal
promoter. HBS-I was sufficient for transactivation of the minimal promoter by
CMV-HoxC6-S. However, transcriptional activation by CMV-HoxC6-L required both
HBS-I and HBS-II, inasmuch as mutation of either HBS-I, HBS-II, or both motifs
abolished the response. These studies suggest that HBS-I is a target site for
binding and transcriptional control of the N-CAM promoter by homeoproteins,
although accessory DNA sequences (such as HBS-II) may also be required. Together 
with previous studies, these results support the notion that N-CAM gene
expression may be controlled by different combinations of homeoproteins that
appear in a place-dependent manner during embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC46971
PMID: 8393570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1993 Jul;30(4):733-41.

Hox gene expression in differentiating human neuroblastoma cells.

Manohar CF(1), Furtado MR, Salwen HR, Cohn SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, Chicago IL 60611.

Neuroblastoma, a malignancy of early childhood arises in the embryonal neural
crest. Neuroblastoma cells are in a state of arrested differentiation; however,
they can be induced to differentiate in vitro by retinoic acid. As a first step
toward understanding the molecular mechanisms of neuroblastoma differentiation we
analyzed the expression pattern of the developmentally important Homeobox genes
in cells treated with retinoic acid. The strategy employed involved rapid
screening of a cDNA library prepared from retinoic acid treated human LA-N-5
neuroblastoma cells for Homeobox genes by the polymerase chain reaction. Multiple
Homeobox genes were amplified from recombinant phage DNA using degenerate primers
directed against the conserved homeobox. To date 6 Homeobox genes (HoxC6, HoxC8, 
HoxD1, HoxD4, HoxD8, and HoxD9) have been identified in the cDNA library prepared
from LA-N-5 cells treated with retinoic acid. HoxD1 and HoxC8 are being reported 
for the first time to be expressed in neuroblastoma cells. Preliminary studies
indicate that there is an induction of Homeobox gene expression in
differentiating LA-N-5 neuroblastoma cells.

PMID: 8104620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mech Dev. 1992 Dec;39(3):171-80.

A Hox 3.3-lacZ transgene expressed in developing limbs.

Jegalian BG(1), Miller RW, Wright CV, Blum M, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles
90024.

We describe transgenic mouse lines that express lacZ under the control of the Hox
3.3 Promoter II. The correct anterior boundary can be fixed by 3.6 kb of promoter
DNA (plus 1.6 kb of 5' transcribed sequences), both in tissues of ectodermal and 
mesodermal origin. The posterior border, however, is not respected, and lacZ
expression continues into the tail region. One line has particularly strong
graded expression in the anterior proximal limb bud. Other lines, containing a
shorter promoter fragment (0.6 kb), have ectopic expression in the head region,
including one line that has expression in the anterior half of the retina. Such
mouse lines make it possible to molecularly distinguish cells in regions of the
embryo that look otherwise identical and may be useful in studying the
establishment of molecular differences in the mouse embryo.

PMID: 1292571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mech Dev. 1991 Sep;35(2):129-42.

Characterisation of the murine Hox-3.3 gene and its promoter.

Coletta PL(1), Shimeld SM, Chaudhuri C, Müller U, Clarke JP, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Structural Biology, University of Manchester, U.K.

The murine Hox-3.3 homeobox containing gene and its Xenopus homologue (XlHbox 1) 
produce two embryonic transcripts from two distinct promoters located
approximately 9 kb apart. In order to begin to characterise one of these promoter
regions (PRII), we have sequenced 3 kb of DNA immediately upstream of the
transcription start site of the PRII transcript and analyzed the sequence for
sequences known to bind transcription factors. Within this region are located a
number of sequences that match known cis-elements. We have analysed the ability
of two of these sequences that match to the Drosophila hunchback and
Antennapedia/fushi-tarazu consensus binding sequences to specifically bind
proteins extracted from embryos and from adult tissues. Using gel retention
assays with oligonucleotides derived from these sequences, we show that both
sequences specifically bind proteins present in extracts of mouse embryos and
some, but not all extracts of various adult tissues. Protein binding cannot,
however, be correlated with the known spatial domains of Hox-3.3 expression,
suggesting that binding to these sequences is not simply related to activation of
Hox-3.3 expression. A two base pair change in the most conserved region of the
hunchback-like binding sequence completely abolishes protein binding. The
presence of these highly conserved cis-acting elements that are known to be
involved in regulation of the hunchback, even-skipped and engrailed genes in
Drosophila suggests that these sequences may also be involved in the regulation
of expression of Hox-3.3 and furthermore that regulation may in part at least
involve binding of hunchback-like proteins (i.e. zinc-finger proteins) and
Antennapedia-like homeobox-containing proteins.

PMID: 1684715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Genomics. 1989 Jul;5(1):76-83.

Isolation and regional localization of the murine homeobox-containing gene
Hox-3.3 to mouse chromosome region 15E.

Schughart K(1), Pravtcheva D, Newman MS, Hunihan LW, Jiang ZL, Ruddle FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511.

A murine homeobox-containing cDNA clone has been isolated from an adult spinal
cord library. Using in situ hybridization and somatic cell genetics techniques,
the newly isolated homeobox gene has been mapped to mouse chromosome region 15E. 
Because of its chromosomal location, we called this gene locus Hox-3.3.
Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed that the Hox-3.3 gene represents the murine
cognate of the human homeobox gene c8. The presumptive organization of the murine
Hox-3 homeobox gene cluster is discussed.

PMID: 2570032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. EMBO J. 1988 Jul;7(7):2131-8.

Expression of multiple homeobox genes within diverse mammalian haemopoietic
lineages.

Kongsuwan K(1), Webb E, Housiaux P, Adams JM.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Post Office Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

Several mouse and human genes encoding the DNA-binding homeobox domain are
implicated here in haematopoiesis, a differentiation process maintained
throughout life. Four homeobox cDNA clones were isolated from bone marrow and
spleen of adult mice and two from the human leukaemia cell line K562. They derive
from the Hox 1.1, Hox 2.3, Hox 6.1 genes and two previously undescribed genes,
one of a type (paired) not found before in vertebrates. A survey of 36 cell lines
of the lymphoid, myeloid and erythroid lineages revealed that certain homeobox
transcripts were almost ubiquitous, while others were restricted to certain
lineages or even particular cell lines. The expression pattern altered in a
myeloid and an erythroid line induced to terminal differentiation, and in novel
lines that had switched from a lymphoid to a myeloid phenotype. Altogether, the
haemopoietic compartment may contain up to 20 homeobox transcripts. In one
myeloid leukaemia, DNA rearrangement has perturbed expression. These findings
suggest that homeobox genes may influence developmental decisions within the
haemopoietic system.

PMCID: PMC454515
PMID: 2901346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Development. 1988 Feb;102(2):397-407.

Isolation and expression of a new mouse homeobox gene.

Sharpe PT(1), Miller JR, Evans EP, Burtenshaw MD, Gaunt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, AFRC Institute of Animal Physiology and
Genetics Research, Babraham, Cambridge, UK.

A homeobox-containing clone has been isolated from an adult mouse kidney cDNA
library and shown by DNA sequence analysis to be a new isolate, Hox-6.1. A
genomic clone containing Hox-6.1 has been isolated and found to contain another
putative homeobox sequence (Hox-6.2), within 7 kb of Hox-6.1. In situ
hybridization of mouse metaphase chromosomes shows this Hox-6 locus to be located
on chromosome 14 (14E2). Hox-6.1 has been studied in detail and the predicted
protein sequence of the homeobox is 100% homologous to the Xenopus Xeb1 (formally
AC1) homeobox and the human c8 homeobox (Carrasco et al. 1984; Boncinelli et al. 
1985; Simeone et al. 1987). Southern blotting shows that the DNA sequence
encoding Hox-6.1 is single copy. Expression of Hox-6.1 has been studied in adult 
tissues and embryos by RNase protection assays, Northern blotting analysis and in
situ hybridization. RNase protection assays show that Hox-6.1 transcripts are
present in embryos between days 9 1/2 and 13 1/2 of gestation and in
extraembryonic tissues at day 9 1/2. Adult expression is detectable in kidney and
testis but not in liver, spleen and brain. One major transcript is detectable on 
Northern blots of kidney and day-13 1/2 embryo RNA. In kidney, this transcript is
2.7 kb whereas in embryos the major transcript is smaller at 1.9 kb, a much
fainter band being visible at 2.7 kb. Localized expression of Hox-6.1 is observed
in the spinal cord and prevertebral column of day-12 1/2 embryos, and in the
posterior mesoderm and ectoderm of day-8 1/4 embryos. An anterior boundary of
expression is located just behind the hindbrain whereas the boundary in the
mesoderm is located at the level of the 7th prevertebra.

PMID: 2458223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


