
1. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 25;17(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2396-9.

RNA-seq analysis of the gonadal transcriptome during Alligator mississippiensis
temperature-dependent sex determination and differentiation.

Yatsu R(1), Miyagawa S(2,)(3), Kohno S(4), Parrott BB(5), Yamaguchi K(6), Ogino
Y(7,)(8), Miyakawa H(9), Lowers RH(10), Shigenobu S(11,)(12), Guillette LJ
Jr(13), Iguchi T(14,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi,
444-8787, Japan. ryoheiy@nibb.ac.jp. (2)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of
Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 5-1
Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. miyagawa@nibb.ac.jp.
(3)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. miyagawa@nibb.ac.jp. (4)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Medical University of South Carolina, and Marine Biomedicine and 
Environmental Science Center, Hollings Marine Laboratory, Charleston, SC, 29412, 
USA. kohnos@gmail.com. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical
University of South Carolina, and Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Science
Center, Hollings Marine Laboratory, Charleston, SC, 29412, USA.
benbparrott@gmail.com. (6)National Institute for Basic Biology, National
Institutes of Natural Sciences, 38 Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi,
444-8585, Japan. kyamaguc@nibb.ac.jp. (7)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of 
Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 5-1
Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. ogino@nibb.ac.jp.
(8)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. ogino@nibb.ac.jp. (9)Center for Bioscience
Research and Education, Utsunomiya University, 350 Mine-machi, Utsunomiya,
Tochigi, 321-8505, Japan. h-miya@cc.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp. (10)Innovative Health
Applications, Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, FL, 32899, USA.
Russell.h.lowers@nasa.gov. (11)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of Life
Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 5-1 Higashiyama,
Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. shige@nibb.ac.jp. (12)National
Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 38
Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8585, Japan. shige@nibb.ac.jp.
(13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of South
Carolina, and Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Science Center, Hollings
Marine Laboratory, Charleston, SC, 29412, USA. kohno@musc.edu. (14)Department of 
Basic Biology, Faculty of Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for
Advanced Studies), 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan.
taisen@nibb.ac.jp. (15)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National
Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1
Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. taisen@nibb.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) displays
temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD), in which incubation temperature
during embryonic development determines the sexual fate of the individual.
However, the molecular mechanisms governing this process remain a mystery,
including the influence of initial environmental temperature on the comprehensive
gonadal gene expression patterns occurring during TSD.
RESULTS: Our characterization of transcriptomes during alligator TSD allowed us
to identify novel candidate genes involved in TSD initiation. High-throughput RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on gonads collected from A. mississippiensis
embryos incubated at both a male and a female producing temperature (33.5 °C and 
30 °C, respectively) in a time series during sexual development. RNA-seq yielded 
375.2 million paired-end reads, which were mapped and assembled, and used to
characterize differential gene expression. Changes in the transcriptome occurring
as a function of both development and sexual differentiation were extensively
profiled. Forty-one differentially expressed genes were detected in response to
incubation at male producing temperature, and included genes such as Wnt
signaling factor WNT11, histone demethylase KDM6B, and transcription factor
C/EBPA. Furthermore, comparative analysis of development- and sex-dependent
differential gene expression revealed 230 candidate genes involved in alligator
sex determination and differentiation, and early details of the suspected
male-fate commitment were profiled. We also discovered sexually dimorphic
expression of uncharacterized ncRNAs and other novel elements, such as unique
expression patterns of HEMGN and ARX. Twenty-five of the differentially expressed
genes identified in our analysis were putative transcriptional regulators, among 
which were MYBL2, MYCL, and HOXC10, in addition to conventional sex
differentiation genes such as SOX9, and FOXL2. Inferred gene regulatory network
was constructed, and the gene-gene and temperature-gene interactions were
predicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Gonadal global gene expression kinetics during sex determination has
been extensively profiled for the first time in a TSD species. These findings
provide insights into the genetic framework underlying TSD, and expand our
current understanding of the developmental fate pathways during vertebrate sex
determination.

PMCID: PMC4727388
PMID: 26810479  [PubMed - in process]


2. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016 Jan;24(1):51-9. doi: 10.1002/oby.21317. Epub 2015
Dec 9.

Fat depot-specific expression of HOXC9 and HOXC10 may contribute to adverse fat
distribution and related metabolic traits.

Brune JE(1), Kern M(2), Kunath A(2,)(3), Flehmig G(2,)(3), Schön MR(4), Lohmann
T(5), Dressler M(5), Dietrich A(1,)(6), Fasshauer M(2), Kovacs P(2), Stumvoll
M(2), Blüher M(2), Klöting N(1).

Author information: 
(1)IFB AdiposityDiseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (2)Department 
of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (3)German Center for
Diabetes Research (DZD), Leipzig, Germany. (4)Städtisches Klinikum Karlsruhe,
Clinic of Visceral Surgery, Karlsruhe, Germany. (5)Municipal Clinic
Dresden-Neustadt, Dresden, Germany. (6)Department of Surgery, University of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Independent previous studies in both rodents and humans suggest a role
of developmental genes in the origin of obesity and body fat distribution. Here, 
the hypothesis that human adipose tissue (AT) expression of the developmental
genes homeobox transcription factors C9 (HOXC9) and C10 (HOXC10) is fat
depot-specific and related to obesity-related traits was tested.
METHODS: In 636 individuals, HOXC9 and HOXC10 mRNA expression was investigated in
paired abdominal subcutaneous (SC) and omental AT samples in relation to a wide
range of age, BMI, fat distribution, and metabolic parameters and in subfractions
of isolated adipocytes and cells of the stromal vascular fraction (SVF).
RESULTS: HOXC9 and HOXC10 mRNA expression is significantly higher in SC compared 
to omental AT. HOXC9 and HOXC10 mRNA expression significantly correlates with
body fat mass, even after adjustment for age and gender. In smaller subgroups
(depending on the availability of data), fat depot-related significant gender-
and BMI-independent associations between HOXC9 and HOXC10 gene expression and
parameters of glucose metabolism and AT biology were found (e.g., adipocyte
size).
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data suggest that HOXC9 and HOXC10 may play an
important role in the development of obesity, adverse fat distribution, and
subsequent alterations in whole-body metabolism and AT function.

© 2015 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 26647900  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Nov;11(11):2946-54. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00253b.

HOXC10 up-regulation contributes to human thyroid cancer and indicates poor
survival outcome.

Feng X(1), Li T, Liu Z, Shi Y, Peng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Metabolism, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200080, China.
pengyongdewz@126.com.

HOX genes have been well described as important players in development and
morphogenesis, and more recently, in carcinogenesis. The role and clinical
implication of homeodomain-containing gene 10 (HOXC10) in human thyroid cancer is
poorly understood. Real-time PCR and bioinformatics analysis were used to detect 
the expression of HOXC10 in normal and human thyroid cancer samples from Shanghai
General Hospital (also known as Shanghai First People's Hospital) and the TCGA
dataset. The survival time of patients with human thyroid cancer was also
detected. Cell Count Kit-8 (CCK8) analysis was used to detect cell proliferation,
and the cell cycle was assessed by flow cytometry. Migration and invasion were
detected by transwell analysis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to
explore the correlation of HOXC10 with signaling pathways. Real-time PCR and
Western blot analysis were used to detect the expression of signaling pathway
related genes in human thyroid cancer cells. HOXC10 expression in Shanghai
General Hospital and the TCGA dataset revealed a significant increase in human
thyroid cancer tissues and its expression was positively correlated with the
advanced age, poor pathologic stage, and poor prognosis. HOXC10 knockdown by
shRNA conferred cell cycle blocking and inhibition of migration and invasion.
GSEA in the TCGA datasets revealed that HOXC10 expression was positively
correlated with cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and chemokine signaling
pathways. Our data suggest that inhibition of HOXC10 may be a therapeutic
strategy for human thyroid cancer treatment. This study investigates the role and
clinical implication of HOXC10 in human thyroid cancer.

PMID: 26279264  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Med. 2015 Jul 21. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00071. [Epub ahead of print]

An EG-VEGF-dependent decrease in homeobox gene NKX3.1 contributes to
cytotrophoblast dysfunction: a possible mechanism in human fetal growth
restriction.

Murthi P(1,)(2), Brouillet S(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Pratt A(1), Borg A(1), Kalionis
B(7), Goffin F(7), Tsatsaris V(8), Munaut C(7), Feige J(3,)(4,)(5), Benharouga
M(9), Fournier T(10), Alfaidy N(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's 
Hospital and The University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. 
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 1036,
Grenoble. France. (4)Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, 38000, Grenoble, France.
(5)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), iRTSV-Biology of Cancer and
infection, Grenoble, France. (6)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble,
Hôpital Couple-Enfant, Centre Clinique et Biologique d'Assistance Médicale à la
Procréation, 38700, La Tronche, France. (7)Laboratory of Tumor and Developmental 
Biology University of Liège, Belgium. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Hôpital Cochin, Maternité Port-Royal, Université Rene Descartes, F-75014 Paris,
France. (9)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5249, Laboratoire de Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Grenoble, France. (10)INSERM,
U1139, Paris, F-75006, France, Universite Paris Descartes, UMR-S1139, Sorbonne
Paris Cite, Paris, F-75006, France, PremUp Foundation, Paris, F-75006, France.

Idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is frequently associated with placental
insufficiency. Previous reports have provided evidence that EG-VEGF (endocrine
gland derived-vascular endothelial growth factor), a placental secreted protein, 
is expressed during the first trimester of pregnancy, controls both trophoblast
proliferation and invasion, and its increased expression is associated with human
FGR. In this study, we hypothesise that EG-VEGF-dependent change in placental
homeobox gene expressions contribute to trophoblast dysfunction in idiopathic
FGR. The changes in EG-VEGF-dependent homeobox gene expressions were determined
using a Homeobox gene cDNA array on placental explants of 8-12 weeks' gestation
after stimulation with EG-VEGF in vitro for 24 hours. The Homeobox gene array
identified a >5-fold increase in HOXA9, HOXC8, HOXC10, HOXD1, HOXD8, HOXD9 and
HOXD11, while NKX 3.1 showed a >2 fold-decrease in mRNA expression compared to
untreated controls. Homeobox gene NKX3.1 was selected as a candidate because it
is a downstream target of EG-VEGF and its expression and functional role are
largely unknown in control and idiopathic FGR-affected placentae. Real-time PCR
and immunoblotting showed a significant decrease in NKX3.1 mRNA and protein
levels, respectively, in placentae from FGR compared to control pregnancies. Gene
inactivation in vitro using short-interference RNA specific for NKX3.1
demonstrated an increase in BeWo cell differentiation and a decrease in
HTR8-SVneo proliferation. We conclude that the decreased expression of homeobox
gene NKX3.1 down-stream of EG-VEGF may contribute to the trophoblast dysfunction 
associated with idiopathic FGR pregnancies.

PMCID: PMC4749495
PMID: 26208047  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Mar 26;6(229):229ra41. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008326.

Epigenetic reprogramming of HOXC10 in endocrine-resistant breast cancer.

Pathiraja TN(1), Nayak SR, Xi Y, Jiang S, Garee JP, Edwards DP, Lee AV, Chen J,
Shea MJ, Santen RJ, Gannon F, Kangaspeska S, Jelinek J, Issa JP, Richer JK, Elias
A, McIlroy M, Young LS, Davidson NE, Schiff R, Li W, Oesterreich S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Resistance to aromatase inhibitors (AIs) is a major clinical problem in the
treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. In two breast cancer 
cell line models of AI resistance, we identified widespread DNA hyper- and
hypomethylation, with enrichment for promoter hypermethylation of developmental
genes. For the homeobox gene HOXC10, methylation occurred in a CpG shore, which
overlapped with a functional ER binding site, causing repression of HOXC10
expression. Although short-term blockade of ER signaling caused relief of HOXC10 
repression in both cell lines and breast tumors, it also resulted in concurrent
recruitment of EZH2 and increased H3K27me3, ultimately transitioning to increased
DNA methylation and silencing of HOXC10. Reduced HOXC10 in vitro and in
xenografts resulted in decreased apoptosis and caused antiestrogen resistance.
Supporting this, we used paired primary and metastatic breast cancer specimens to
show that HOXC10 was reduced in tumors that recurred during AI treatment. We
propose a model in which estrogen represses apoptotic and growth-inhibitory genes
such as HOXC10, contributing to tumor survival, whereas AIs induce these genes to
cause apoptosis and therapeutic benefit, but long-term AI treatment results in
permanent repression of these genes via methylation and confers resistance.
Therapies aimed at inhibiting AI-induced histone and DNA methylation may be
beneficial in blocking or delaying AI resistance.

PMCID: PMC4277862
PMID: 24670685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Oct;229(10):1405-16. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24577.

Altered histone mark deposition and DNA methylation at homeobox genes in human
oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Marcinkiewicz KM(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College and Weill Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences of Cornell University, New York, New York.

We recently reported a role of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and PRC2
trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in the regulation of homeobox
(HOX) (Marcinkiewicz and Gudas, 2013, Exp Cell Res) gene transcript levels in
human oral keratinocytes (OKF6-TERT1R) and tongue squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
cells. Here, we assessed both the levels of various histone modifications at a
subset of homeobox genes and genome wide DNA methylation patterns in OKF6-TERT1R 
and SCC-9 cells by using ERRBS (enhanced reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing). We detected the H3K9me3 mark at HOXB7, HOXC10, HOXC13, and HOXD8 at 
levels higher in OKF6-TERT1R than in SCC-9 cells; at IRX1 and SIX2 the H3K9me3
levels were conversely higher in SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R. The H3K79me3 mark was
detectable only at IRX1 in OKF6-TERT1R and at IRX4 in SCC-9 cells. The levels of 
H3K4me3 and H3K36me3 marks correlate with the transcript levels of the assessed
homeobox genes in both OKF6-TERT1R and SCC-9. We detected generally lower CpG
methylation levels on DNA in SCC-9 cells at annotated genomic regions which were 
differentially methylated between OKF6-TERT1R and SCC-9 cells; however, some
genomic regions, including the HOX gene clusters, showed DNA methylation at
higher levels in SCC-9 than OKF6-TERT1R. Thus, both altered histone modification 
patterns and changes in DNA methylation are associated with dysregulation of
homeobox gene expression in human oral cavity SCC cells, and this dysregulation
potentially plays a role in the neoplastic phenotype of oral keratinocytes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4206563
PMID: 24519855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 May 1;23(9):2498-510. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt626. Epub 2013 Dec 
17.

Gene-centric meta-analyses for central adiposity traits in up to 57 412
individuals of European descent confirm known loci and reveal several novel
associations.

Yoneyama S(1), Guo Y, Lanktree MB, Barnes MR, Elbers CC, Karczewski KJ,
Padmanabhan S, Bauer F, Baumert J, Beitelshees A, Berenson GS, Boer JM, Burke G, 
Cade B, Chen W, Cooper-Dehoff RM, Gaunt TR, Gieger C, Gong Y, Gorski M,
Heard-Costa N, Johnson T, Lamonte MJ, McDonough C, Monda KL, Onland-Moret NC,
Nelson CP, O'Connell JR, Ordovas J, Peter I, Peters A, Shaffer J, Shen H, Smith
E, Speilotes L, Thomas F, Thorand B, Monique Verschuren WM, Anand SS, Dominiczak 
A, Davidson KW, Hegele RA, Heid I, Hofker MH, Huggins GS, Illig T, Johnson JA,
Kirkland S; Look AHEAD Research Group, König W, Langaee TY, McCaffery J, Melander
O, Mitchell BD, Munroe P, Murray SS, Papanicolaou G, Redline S, Reilly M, Samani 
NJ, Schork NJ, Van Der Schouw YT, Shimbo D, Shuldiner AR, Tobin MD, Wijmenga C,
Yusuf S; GIANT Consortium; CARe IBC Consortium, Hakonarson H, Lange LA, Demerath 
EW, Fox CS, North KE, Reiner AP, Keating B, Taylor KC.

Author information: 
(1)Gillings School of Global Public Health.

Waist circumference (WC) and waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) are surrogate measures of
central adiposity that are associated with adverse cardiovascular events, type 2 
diabetes and cancer independent of body mass index (BMI). WC and WHR are highly
heritable with multiple susceptibility loci identified to date. We assessed the
association between SNPs and BMI-adjusted WC and WHR and unadjusted WC in up to
57 412 individuals of European descent from 22 cohorts collaborating with the
NHLBI's Candidate Gene Association Resource (CARe) project. The study population 
consisted of women and men aged 20-80 years. Study participants were genotyped
using the ITMAT/Broad/CARE array, which includes ~50 000 cosmopolitan tagged SNPs
across ~2100 cardiovascular-related genes. Each trait was modeled as a function
of age, study site and principal components to control for population
stratification, and we conducted a fixed-effects meta-analysis. No new loci for
WC were observed. For WHR analyses, three novel loci were significantly
associated (P < 2.4 × 10(-6)). Previously unreported rs2811337-G near TMCC1 was
associated with increased WHR (ß ± SE, 0.048 ± 0.008, P = 7.7 × 10(-9)) as was
rs7302703-G in HOXC10 (ß = 0.044 ± 0.008, P = 2.9 × 10(-7)) and rs936108-C in
PEMT (ß = 0.035 ± 0.007, P = 1.9 × 10(-6)). Sex-stratified analyses revealed two 
additional novel signals among females only, rs12076073-A in SHC1 (ß = 0.10 ±
0.02, P = 1.9 × 10(-6)) and rs1037575-A in ATBDB4 (ß = 0.046 ± 0.01, P = 2.2 ×
10(-6)), supporting an already established sexual dimorphism of central
adiposity-related genetic variants. Functional analysis using ENCODE and eQTL
databases revealed that several of these loci are in regulatory regions or
regions with differential expression in adipose tissue.

PMCID: PMC3988452
PMID: 24345515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Jan 1;320(1):128-43. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.09.011. Epub
2013 Sep 25.

Altered epigenetic regulation of homeobox genes in human oral squamous cell
carcinoma cells.

Marcinkiewicz KM(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of
Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

To gain insight into oral squamous cell carcinogenesis, we performed deep
sequencing (RNAseq) of non-tumorigenic human OKF6-TERT1R and tumorigenic SCC-9
cells. Numerous homeobox genes are differentially expressed between OKF6-TERT1R
and SCC-9 cells. Data from Oncomine, a cancer microarray database, also show that
homeobox (HOX) genes are dysregulated in oral SCC patients. The activity of
Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC), which causes epigenetic modifications, and
retinoic acid (RA) signaling can control HOX gene transcription. HOXB7, HOXC10,
HOXC13, and HOXD8 transcripts are higher in SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R cells;
using ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) we detected PRC2 protein SUZ12 and the
epigenetic H3K27me3 mark on histone H3 at these genes in OKF6-TERT1R, but not in 
SCC-9 cells. In contrast, IRX1, IRX4, SIX2 and TSHZ3 transcripts are lower in
SCC-9 than in OKF6-TERT1R cells. We detected SUZ12 and the H3K27me3 mark at these
genes in SCC-9, but not in OKF6-TERT1R cells. SUZ12 depletion increased HOXB7,
HOXC10, HOXC13, and HOXD8 transcript levels and decreased the proliferation of
OKF6-TERT1R cells. Transcriptional responses to RA are attenuated in SCC-9 versus
OKF6-TERT1R cells. SUZ12 and H3K27me3 levels were not altered by RA at these HOX 
genes in SCC-9 and OKF6-TERT1R cells. We conclude that altered activity of PRC2
is associated with dysregulation of homeobox gene expression in human SCC cells, 
and that this dysregulation potentially plays a role in the neoplastic
transformation of oral keratinocytes.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3880227
PMID: 24076275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):234-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.017. Epub 2012
Nov 27.

Pitx1 broadly associates with limb enhancers and is enriched on hindlimb
cis-regulatory elements.

Infante CR(1), Park S, Mihala AG, Kingsley DM, Menke DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Coverdell Building, Room 250A, 
500 DW Brooks Drive, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Extensive functional analyses have demonstrated that the pituitary homeodomain
transcription factor Pitx1 plays a critical role in specifying hindlimb
morphology in vertebrates. However, much less is known regarding the target genes
and cis-regulatory elements through which Pitx1 acts. Earlier studies suggested
that the hindlimb transcription factors Tbx4, HoxC10, and HoxC11 might be
transcriptional targets of Pitx1, but definitive evidence for direct regulatory
interactions has been lacking. Using ChIP-Seq on embryonic mouse hindlimbs, we
have pinpointed the genome-wide location of Pitx1 binding sites during mouse
hindlimb development and identified potential gene targets for Pitx1. We
determined that Pitx1 binding is significantly enriched near genes involved in
limb morphogenesis, including Tbx4, HoxC10, and HoxC11. Notably, Pitx1 is bound
to the previously identified HLEA and HLEB hindlimb enhancers of the Tbx4 gene
and to a newly identified Tbx2 hindlimb enhancer. Moreover, Pitx1 binding is
significantly enriched on hindlimb relative to forelimb-specific cis-regulatory
features that are differentially marked by H3K27ac. However, our analysis
revealed that Pitx1 also strongly associates with many functionally verified limb
enhancers that exhibit similar levels of activity in the embryonic mesenchyme of 
forelimbs and hindlimbs. We speculate that Pitx1 influences hindlimb morphology
both through the activation of hindlimb-specific enhancers as well as through the
hindlimb-specific modulation of enhancers that are active in both sets of limbs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3640454
PMID: 23201014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1816-26. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23861. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Molecular profiling of synovial joints: use of microarray analysis to identify
factors that direct the development of the knee and elbow.

Pazin DE(1), Gamer LW, Cox KA, Rosen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 188
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. dorothy_pazin@hsdm.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Synovial joints develop from the interzone, a dense layer of
mesenchymal progenitor cells that marks the site of the future joint. During the 
morphogenic events that follow, joints attain their distinct shape and
organization. The molecular mechanisms controlling the initial specification of
synovial joints has been studied, but the question of how individual joints
attain the specific structure required for their unique functions remains largely
unresolved. Here, we use microarray analysis to compare knee and elbow formation 
to identify factors involved in the development of specific joints.
RESULTS: The knee is enriched for the hindlimb patterning genes Hoxc9, Hoxc10,
and Tbx4 and for Tgfbi, Rspo2, and Sfrp2, factors involved in transforming growth
factor-beta/bone morphogenetic protein (TGFß/BMP) and Wnt signaling. Consistent
with these findings, we show that TGFß signaling directs knee morphogenesis, and 
is necessary for meniscus development. The tissue surrounding the elbow is highly
enriched for genes involved in muscle specification and differentiation, and in
splotch-delayed muscleless mutants, elbow, but not knee morphogenesis is
disrupted.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest there are fundamental differences in how
individual joints develop after interzone formation. Our microarray analyses
provides a new resource for further investigation of the pathways involved in the
morphogenesis of specific synovial joints.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22972626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028577. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Reduction in inflammatory gene expression in skeletal muscle from Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass patients randomized to omentectomy.

Tamboli RA(1), Hajri T, Jiang A, Marks-Shulman PA, Williams DB, Clements RH,
Melvin W, Bowen BP, Shyr Y, Abumrad NN, Flynn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the effects of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery
with and without laparoscopic removal of omental fat (omentectomy) on the
temporal gene expression profiles of skeletal muscle.
DESIGN: Previously reported were the whole-body metabolic effects of a
randomized, single-blinded study in patients receiving RYGB surgery stratified to
receive or not receive omentectomy. In this follow up study we report on changes 
in skeletal muscle gene expression in a subset of 21 patients, for whom biopsies 
were collected preoperatively and at either 6 months or 12 months
postoperatively.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: RNA isolated from skeletal muscle biopsies of 21 
subjects (8 without omentectomy and 13 with omentectomy) taken before RYGB or at 
6 and 12 months postoperatively were subjected to gene expression profiling via
Exon 1.0 S/T Array and Taqman Low Density Array. Robust Multichip Analysis and
gene enrichment data analysis revealed 84 genes with at least a 4-fold expression
difference after surgery. At 6 and 12 months the RYGB with omentectomy group
displayed a greater reduction in the expression of genes associated with skeletal
muscle inflammation (ANKRD1, CDR1, CH25H, CXCL2, CX3CR1, IL8, LBP, NFIL3, SELE,
SOCS3, TNFAIP3, and ZFP36) relative to the RYGB non-omentectomy group.
Expressions of IL6 and CCL2 were decreased at all postoperative time points.
There was differential expression of genes driving protein turnover (IGFN1,
FBXW10) in both groups over time and increased expression of PAAF1 in the
non-omentectomy group at 12 months. Evidence for the activation of skeletal
muscle satellite cells was inferred from the up-regulation of HOXC10. The
elevated post-operative expression of 22 small nucleolar RNAs and the decreased
expression of the transcription factors JUNB, FOS, FOSB, ATF3 MYC, EGR1 as well
as the orphan nuclear receptors NR4A1, NR4A2, NR4A3 suggest dramatic
reorganizations at both the cellular and genetic levels.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate that RYGB reduces skeletal muscle
inflammation, and removal of omental fat further amplifies this response.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00212160.

PMCID: PMC3241684
PMID: 22194858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan 25;48(1):61-75. doi: 10.1530/JME-11-0078. Print 2012
Feb.

HOXC10 is overexpressed in breast cancer and transcriptionally regulated by
estrogen via involvement of histone methylases MLL3 and MLL4.

Ansari KI(1), Hussain I, Kasiri S, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.

HOXC10 is a critical player in the development of spinal cord, formation of
neurons, and associated with human leukemia. We found that HOXC10 is
overexpressed in breast cancer and transcriptionally regulated by estrogen
(17ß-estradiol, E(2)). The HOXC10 promoter contains several estrogen response
elements (ERE1-7, half-sites). A luciferase-based reporter assay showed that ERE1
and ERE6 of HOXC10 promoter are E(2) responsive. ERa and ERß play critical roles 
in E(2)-mediated activation of HOXC10. Knockdown of ERa and ERß downregulated
E(2)-induced HOXC10 expression. ERa and ERß bind to ERE1 and ERE6 regions in an
E(2)-dependent manner. Additionally, knockdown of histone methylases MLL3 and
MLL4 (but not MLL1 and MLL2) diminished E(2)-induced expression of HOXC10. MLL3
and MLL4 were bound to the ERE1 and ERE6 regions of HOXC10 promoter in an
E(2)-dependent manner. Overall, we demonstrated that HOXC10 is overexpressed in
breast cancer, and it is an E(2)-responsive gene. Histone methylases MLL3 and
MLL4, along with ERs, regulate HOXC10 gene expression in the presence of E(2).

PMID: 22143955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Oct;27(10):1110-3.

[The preparation of rabbit antiserum against gekko japonicus Hoxc10 and it's
property identification].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou XF(1), Lu RF, Chen Q, Chu YD, Wang XQ, Qian TM, Gu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, China.

AIM: Prepare the rabbit antiserum against gecko japonicus Hoxc10 and to identify 
its properties.
METHODS: Prokaryotic expression vector of g-Hoxc10 were constructed and then
transform into E.coli (BL21). To make GST-g-Hoxc10 fusion protein in E.coli
(BL21) under the optimized induction of Isopropyl
ß-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside(IPTG). The recombination proteins were purified using
affinity chromatography. The purified fusion protein was inoculated into adult
rabbits to develop antiserum. Western blot and immunohistochemistry staining were
then performed to evaluate the feature of the prepared antiserum.
RESULTS: Prokaryotic expression vectors of g-Hoxc10 were successfully
constructed. The soluble recombinant protein was highly expressed in E.coli BL21 
and inoculated into adult rabbits to obtain high titer antiserum. Western blot
and immunohistochemistry staining were then performed to evaluate the specificity
of the prepared antiserum.
CONCLUSION: We successfully amplified and expressed the g-Hoxc10 in E.coli BL21. 
The purified fusion protein was inoculated into adult rabbits to develop
antiserum. The obtained antiserum of g-Hoxc10 showed a high titer against Hoxc10 
proteins. The protein and antiserum prepared in this study can be used for
further research of the function investigation of Hoxc10.

PMID: 21968313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Dec;38(22):8105-19. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq688. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

Homeotic proteins participate in the function of human-DNA replication origins.

Marchetti L(1), Comelli L, D'Innocenzo B, Puzzi L, Luin S, Arosio D, Calvello M, 
Mendoza-Maldonado R, Peverali F, Trovato F, Riva S, Biamonti G, Abdurashidova G, 
Beltram F, Falaschi A.

Author information: 
(1)NEST, Scuola Normale Superiore and Istituto Nanoscienze-CNR, Laboratorio di
Biologia Molecolare, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy. l.marchetti@sns.it

Recent evidence points to homeotic proteins as actors in the crosstalk between
development and DNA replication. The present work demonstrates that HOXC13,
previously identified as a new member of human DNA replicative complexes, is a
stable component of early replicating chromatin in living cells: it displays a
slow nuclear dynamics due to its anchoring to the DNA minor groove via the
arginine-5 residue of the homeodomain. HOXC13 binds in vivo to the lamin B2
origin in a cell-cycle-dependent manner consistent with origin function; the
interaction maps with nucleotide precision within the replicative complex. HOXC13
displays in vitro affinity for other replicative complex proteins; it interacts
also in vivo with the same proteins in a cell-cycle-dependent fashion.
Chromatin-structure modifying treatments, disturbing origin function, reduce also
HOXC13-origin interaction. The described interactions are not restricted to a
single origin nor to a single homeotic protein (also HOXC10 binds the lamin B2
origin in vivo). Thus, HOX complexes probably contribute in a general,
structure-dependent manner, to origin identification and assembly of replicative 
complexes thereon, in presence of specific chromatin configurations.

PMCID: PMC3001063
PMID: 20693533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Jul;5(1):40-50. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.03.004. Epub 2010 Mar
27.

The HOX Code as a "biological fingerprint" to distinguish functionally distinct
stem cell populations derived from cord blood.

Liedtke S(1), Buchheiser A, Bosch J, Bosse F, Kruse F, Zhao X, Santourlidis S,
Kögler G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics,
Heinrich-Heine-University Medical Center, Düsseldorf, Germany.
liedtke@itz.uni-duesseldorf.de

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been isolated from almost every adult tissue.
In cord blood (CB), different non-hematopoietic CD45-, CD34- adherent cell
populations can be generated: the cord blood derived MSC (CB-MSC), that behave
almost like MSC from bone marrow (BM-MSC), and unrestricted somatic stem cells
(USSC) which show a distinct differentiation potential into all three germ
layers. However, distinguishing these populations easily by molecular markers is 
still a concern. In this study we were able to present the HOX expression pattern
of USSC, CB-MSC and BM-MSC, which in fact allows a discrimination of these
populations. Briefly, RT-PCR analysis of the HOX code revealed a high similarity 
between BM-MSC and CB-MSC, which are both HOX-positive, whereas USSC resembled H9
embryonic stem cells HOX-negative.Especially HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXC10 and HOXD8 are
good candidate markers to discriminate MSC from USSC. Thus, our data suggest that
the "biological fingerprint" based on the HOX code can be used to distinguish
functionally distinct MSC populations derived from bone marrow and cord blood.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20434420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 15;11:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-176.

The embryonic genes Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 identify muscle types in a
diet-independent and fiber-type unrelated way.

de Wilde J(1), Hulshof MF, Boekschoten MV, de Groot P, Smit E, Mariman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Nutrigenomics Consortium, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. j.dewilde@hb.unimaas.nl

BACKGROUND: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types
that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every
muscle type has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. 
To find novel genes involved in specifying muscle types, we used microarray
analysis to compare the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps from mice fed a low fat
diet (LFD) or high fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. Additional qPCR analysis were
performed in the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus muscle from mice fed an LFD
or HFD for 20 weeks.
RESULTS: In mice fed the 8-week LFD 162 genes were differentially expressed in
the gastrocnemius vs. the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest differences in
expression were markers for oxidative fiber types (e.g. Tnni1) and genes which
are known to be involved in embryogenesis (Dkk3, Hoxd8,Hoxd9 and Tbx1). Also
Dkk2, Hoxa5, Hoxa10, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Hoxc6 and Tbx15 were detectably, but not
differentially expressed in adult muscle tissue. Expression of differentially
expressed genes was not influenced by an 8-week or 20-week HFD. Comparing
gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus, expression of Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was not
related with expression of markers for the four different fiber types. We found
that the expression of both Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was much higher in the gastrocnemius 
than in the quadriceps or soleus, whereas the expression of Dkk3 was high in
quadriceps, but low in both gastrocnemius and soleus. Finally, expression of Tbx1
was high in quadriceps, intermediate in soleus and low in gastrocnemius.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that genes from the Dkk family, Hox family and Tbx family
are detectably expressed in adult mouse muscle. Interestingly, expression of
Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 was highly different between gastrocnemius,
quadriceps and soleus. In fact, every muscle type showed a unique combination of 
expression of these four genes which was not influenced by diet. Altogether, we
conclude that genes important for embryogenesis identify mouse muscle types in a 
diet-independent and fiber type-unrelated manner.

PMCID: PMC2847971
PMID: 20230627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Feb;45(1):14-22. doi: 10.3109/10409230903365608.

DNA replication, development and cancer: a homeotic connection?

Falaschi A(1), Abdurashidova G, Biamonti G.

Author information: 
(1)Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy. falaschi@icgeb.org

The homeotic proteins are transcription factors, highly conserved in metazoan
organisms, exerting a pivotal role in development and differentiation. They
individually display a loose specificity for the DNA sequence they can bind, but 
operate mainly in multi-molecular associations that assure their target and
function specificity. Homeotic proteins are known to play a role in the positive 
or negative regulation of cell proliferation. Furthermore, many homeotic proteins
are actually proto-oncogenes, since different translocations involving their
genes cause tumors, particularly in the hematopoietic system. A one-hybrid screen
to detect proteins with affinity for the lamin B2 replication origin identified
three homeotic proteins, namely HoxA13, HoxC10 and HoxC13. Recent data
demonstrate that the HoxC13 oncoprotein specifically associates with replication 
foci and binds in vitro and in vivo to several human DNA replication origins.
Moreover, Hox proteins interact with geminin, a regulator of cell cycle
progression, and control the interaction of this protein with the DNA replication
licensing factor Ctd1. Thus, the homeotic proteins, by participating directly in 
the function of DNA replication origins, may provide a direct link between the
accurate regulation of DNA replication required by the morphogenetic program and 
the deregulation of this process typical of cancer.

PMID: 19919294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Biol Sci. 2009 Jun 3;5(5):397-410.

Axial and appendicular skeletal transformations, ligament alterations, and motor 
neuron loss in Hoxc10 mutants.

Hostikka SL(1), Gong J, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Science, UCLA School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Vertebrate Hox genes regulate many aspects of embryonic body plan development and
patterning. In particular, Hox genes have been shown to regulate regional
patterning of the axial and appendicular skeleton and of the central nervous
system. We have identified patterning defects resulting from the targeted
mutation of Hoxc10, a member of the Hox10 paralogous family. Hoxc10 mutant mice
have skeletal transformations in thoracic, lumbar, and sacral vertebrae and in
the pelvis, along with alterations in the bones and ligaments of the hindlimbs.
These results suggest that Hoxc10, along with other members of the Hox10
paralogous gene family, regulates vertebral identity at the transition from
thoracic to lumbar and lumbar to sacral regions. Our results also suggest a
general role for Hoxc10 in regulating chondrogenesis and osteogenesis in the
hindlimb, along with a specific role in shaping femoral architecture. In
addition, mutant mice have a reduction in lumbar motor neurons and a change in
locomotor behavior. These results suggest a role for Hoxc10 in generating or
maintaining the normal complement of lumbar motor neurons.

PMCID: PMC2713654
PMID: 19623272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Jun;11(2):269-79. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0068.

HOXC10 as a potential marker for discriminating between amnion- and
decidua-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Hwang JH(1), Seok OS, Song HR, Jo JY, Lee JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea
University College of Medicine , Seoul, Korea.

The HOX family of genes plays a fundamental role in the morphogenesis of
vertebrate embryonic cells. HOX genes are thought to be important for the
regulation of stem cells. We investigated HOX gene expression in mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) from human placentas. We isolated MSCs from human placentas and
confirmed stemness by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis and
differentiation studies. Using reverse transcription PCR, mRNA expression of 39
Class I HOX genes was measured in the MSCs. The expression of HOXB6, C4, C8, C10,
D3, D4, and D10 were measured by Western blot analysis. HOXC10 was expressed in
10 of 10 amnion-derived MSCs but in only 2 of 10 decidua-derived MSCs. HOXC4 and 
D10 were expressed in 100% of both amnion-derived MSCs and deciduas-derived MSCs.
HOXD4 was silent in all amnion-derived MSCs and deciduas-derived MSCs (n = 10).
HOX gene activation patterns might be a useful indicator for the detection of
MSCs of different tissue origins. We demonstrated that HOXC10 is a gene that may 
discriminate between amnion-derived MSCs and decidua-derived MSCs.

PMID: 19522674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Development. 2008 Jan;135(1):171-82.

Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 regulate mouse columnar, divisional and motor pool identity of 
lumbar motoneurons.

Wu Y(1), Wang G, Scott SA, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112,
USA.

A central question in neural development is how the broad diversity of neurons is
generated in the vertebrate CNS. We have investigated the function of Hoxc10 and 
Hoxd10 in mouse lumbar motoneuron development. We show that Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 are
initially expressed in most newly generated lumbar motoneurons, but subsequently 
become restricted to the lateral division of the lateral motor column (lLMC).
Disruption of Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 caused severe hindlimb locomotor defects.
Motoneurons in rostral lumbar segments were found to adopt the phenotype of
thoracic motoneurons. More caudally the lLMC and dorsal-projecting axons were
missing, yet most hindlimb muscles were innervated. The loss of the lLMC was not 
due to decreased production of motoneuron precursors or increased apoptosis.
Instead, presumptive lLMC neurons failed to migrate to their normal position, and
did not differentiate into other motoneurons or interneurons. Together, these
results show that Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 play key roles in establishing lumbar
motoneuron columnar, divisional and motor pool identity.

PMID: 18065432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 1;67(21):10163-72.

Gene expression analysis of preinvasive and invasive cervical squamous cell
carcinomas identifies HOXC10 as a key mediator of invasion.

Zhai Y(1), Kuick R, Nan B, Ota I, Weiss SJ, Trimble CL, Fearon ER, Cho KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109-2200, USA.

If left untreated, a subset of high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL)
of the cervix will progress to invasive squamous cell carcinomas (SCC). To
identify genes whose differential expression is linked to cervical cancer
progression, we compared gene expression in microdissected squamous epithelial
samples from 10 normal cervices, 7 HSILs, and 21 SCCs using high-density
oligonucleotide microarrays. We identified 171 distinct genes at least 1.5-fold
up-regulated (and P < 0.001) in the SCCs relative to HSILs and normal cervix
samples. Differential expression of a subset of these genes was confirmed by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR and immunohistochemical staining of
cervical tissue samples. One of the genes up-regulated during progression,
HOXC10, was selected for functional studies aimed at assessing its role in
mediating invasive behavior of neoplastic squamous epithelial cells. Elevated
HOXC10 expression was associated with increased invasiveness of human
papillomavirus-immortalized keratinocytes and cervical cancer-derived cell lines 
in both in vitro and in vivo assays. Cervical cancer cells with high endogenous
levels of HOXC10 were less invasive after short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of
HOXC10 expression. Our findings support a key role for the HOXC10 homeobox
protein in cervical cancer progression. Other genes with differential expression 
in invasive SCC versus HSIL may contribute to tumor progression or may be useful 
as markers for cancer diagnosis or progression risk.

PMID: 17974957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cancer Res. 2007 Sep;5(9):881-90.

Breast cancer molecular signatures as determined by SAGE: correlation with lymph 
node status.

Abba MC(1), Sun H, Hawkins KA, Drake JA, Hu Y, Nunez MI, Gaddis S, Shi T, Horvath
S, Sahin A, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, P.O. Box 389, Smithville, TX 78957, USA.

Global gene expression measured by DNA microarray platforms have been extensively
used to classify breast carcinomas correlating with clinical characteristics,
including outcome. We generated a breast cancer Serial Analysis of Gene
Expression (SAGE) high-resolution database of approximately 2.7 million tags to
perform unsupervised statistical analyses to obtain the molecular classification 
of breast-invasive ductal carcinomas in correlation with clinicopathologic
features. Unsupervised statistical analysis by means of a random forest approach 
identified two main clusters of breast carcinomas, which differed in their lymph 
node status (P=0.01); this suggested that lymph node status leads to globally
distinct expression profiles. A total of 245 (55 up-modulated and 190
down-modulated) transcripts were differentially expressed between lymph node (+) 
and lymph node (-) primary breast tumors (fold change, >or=2; P<0.05). Various
lymph node (+) up-modulated transcripts were validated in independent sets of
human breast tumors by means of real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). We 
validated significant overexpression of transcripts for HOXC10 (P=0.001), TPD52L1
(P=0.007), ZFP36L1 (P=0.011), PLINP1 (P=0.013), DCTN3 (P=0.025), DEK (P=0.031),
and CSNK1D (P=0.04) in lymph node (+) breast carcinomas. Moreover, the DCTN3
(P=0.022) and RHBDD2 (P=0.002) transcripts were confirmed to be overexpressed in 
tumors that recurred within 6 years of follow-up by real-time RT-PCR. In
addition, meta-analysis was used to compare SAGE data associated with lymph node 
(+) status with publicly available breast cancer DNA microarray data sets. We
have generated evidence indicating that the pattern of gene expression in primary
breast cancers at the time of surgical removal could discriminate those tumors
with lymph node metastatic involvement using SAGE to identify specific
transcripts that behave as predictors of recurrence as well.

PMCID: PMC4186709
PMID: 17855657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 1;299(1):22-34. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Pitx1 determines the morphology of muscle, tendon, and bones of the hindlimb.

DeLaurier A(1), Schweitzer R, Logan M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The vertebrate forelimb and hindlimb are serially homologous structures; however,
their distinctive morphologies suggest that different mechanisms are associated
with each limb type to give rise to limb-type identity. Three genes have been
implicated in this process; T-box transcription factors Tbx5 and Tbx4, which are 
expressed in the forelimb and hindlimb, respectively, and a paired-type
homeodomain transcription factor Pitx1, expressed in the hindlimb. To explore the
roles of Pitx1 and Tbx4 in patterning the hindlimb, we have ectopically
misexpressed these genes in the mouse forelimb using transgenic methods. We have 
developed a novel technique for visualising the structure and organisation of
tissues in limbs in 3D using optical projection tomography (OPT). This approach
provides unparalleled access to understanding the relationships between
connective tissues during development of the limb. Misexpression of Pitx1 in the 
forelimb results in the transformation and translocation of specific muscles,
tendons, and bones of the forelimb so that they acquire a hindlimb-like
morphology. Pitx1 also upregulates hindlimb-specific factors in the forelimb,
including Hoxc10 and Tbx4. In contrast, misexpression of Tbx4 in the forelimb
does not result in a transformation of limb-type morphology. These results
demonstrate that Pitx1, but not Tbx4, determines the morphological identity of
hindlimb tissues.

PMID: 16989801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Leukemia. 2006 Oct;20(10):1855-62. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Differential DNA methylation patterns of small B-cell lymphoma subclasses with
different clinical behavior.

Rahmatpanah FB(1), Carstens S, Guo J, Sjahputera O, Taylor KH, Duff D, Shi H,
Davis JW, Hooshmand SI, Chitma-Matsiga R, Caldwell CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, Ellis Fischel Cancer Center, 
University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65203, USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2006 Oct;20(10):1658-60.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) is a group of malignancies of the immune system with
variable clinical behaviors and diverse molecular features. Despite the progress 
made in classification of NHLs based on classical methods, molecular
classifications are a work in progress. Toward this goal, we used an array-based 
technique called differential methylation hybridization (DMH) to study small
B-cell lymphoma (SBCL) subtypes. A total of 43 genomic DMH experiments were
performed. From these results, several statistical methods were used to generate 
a set of differentially methylated genes for further validation. Methylation of
LHX2, POU3F3, HOXC10, NRP2, PRKCE, RAMP, MLLT2, NKX6.1, LRP1B and ARF4 was
validated in cell lines and patient samples and demonstrated subtype-related
preferential methylation patterns. For LHX2 and LRP1B, bisulfite sequencing,
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and induction of gene
expression following treatment with the demethylating agent,
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, were confirmed. This new epigenetic information is
helping to define molecular portraits of distinct subtypes of SBCL that are not
recognized by current classification systems and provides valuable potential
insights into the biology of these tumors.

PMID: 16900213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. EMBO Rep. 2006 Aug;7(8):831-7. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Growth differentiation factor 11 signals through the transforming growth
factor-beta receptor ALK5 to regionalize the anterior-posterior axis.

Andersson O(1), Reissmann E, Ibáñez CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Karolinska
Institutet, Berzelius väg 35, Box 285, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Growth differentiation factor 11 (GDF11) contributes to regionalize the mouse
embryo along its anterior-posterior axis by regulating the expression of Hox
genes. The identity of the receptors that mediate GDF11 signalling during
embryogenesis remains unclear. Here, we show that GDF11 can interact with type I 
receptors ALK4, ALK5 and ALK7, but predominantly uses ALK4 and ALK5 to activate a
Smad3-dependent reporter gene. Alk5 mutant embryos showed malformations in
anterior-posterior patterning, including the lack of expression of the posterior 
determinant Hoxc10, that resemble defects found in Gdf11-null mutants. A
heterozygous mutation in Alk5, but not in Alk4 or Alk7, potentiated
Gdf11(-/-)-like phenotypes in vertebral, kidney and palate development in an
Acvr2b(-/-) background, indicating a genetic interaction between the two receptor
genes. Thus, the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor ALK5, which 
until now has only been associated with the biological functions of TGF-beta1 to 
TGF-beta3 proteins, mediates GDF11 signalling during embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1525155
PMID: 16845371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006 May-Jun;16(3):1289-96.

A subgroup of HOX Abd-B gene is differentially expressed in cervical cancer.

López R(1), Garrido E, Vázquez G, Piña P, Pérez C, Alvarado I, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, CINVESTAV-IPN,Unidad de
Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de Oncología, Centro
Médico Nacional Siglo XXI-IMSS, Av. Cuauhtemoc 330, Col. Doctores, México DF
07780, Mexico.

The HOX genes are a family of transcription factors that bind to specific
sequences of DNA in target genes regulating their expression. The role of HOX
genes in adult cell differentiation is still obscure, but growing evidence
suggests that they may play an important role in the development of cancer. In
order to study the role of the HOX Abd-B genes in cervical cancer, we analyzed
their expression in cervical tissues. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and RNA in situ hybridization were used to detect HOX Abd-B messenger
RNA expression in nine normal cervical tissues and ten cervical carcinomas. The
normal tissues were human papillomavirus (HPV) negative, whereas all invasive
carcinomas included were HPV16 positive. In this study, we show that HOXA9, A10, 
A11, A13, B9, D11, and D13 genes are expressed in both the epithelium of normal
tissues and neoplastic cells from squamous cervical carcinomas. Interestingly,
the HOXC10 and D12 genes were not expressed in any cervical tissues; however,
HOXB13, C9, C11, C12, C13, D9, and D10 genes were expressed only in the tumoral
tissues but not in the normal cervix. Our findings suggest that the expression of
HOXB13, D9, D10, and HOXC cluster (HOXC9, C11-C13) genes might be an important
step involved in cervical cancer.

PMID: 16803519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(7):730-7. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Expression patterns of Hox10 paralogous genes during lumbar spinal cord
development.

Choe A(1), Phun HQ, Tieu DD, Hu YH, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Science, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We have examined the expression of three paralogous Hox genes from E11.5 through 
E15.5 in the mouse spinal cord. These ages coincide with major phases of spinal
cord neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, cell migration, gliogenesis, and
motor neuron cell death. The three genes, Hoxa10, Hoxc10, and Hoxd10, are all
expressed in the lumbar spinal cord and have distinct expression patterns.
Mutations in these three genes are known to affect motor neuron patterning. All
three genes show lower levels of expression at the rostral limits of their
domains, with selective regions of higher expression more caudally. Hoxa10 and
Hoxd10 expression appears confined to postmitotic cell populations in the
intermediate and ventral gray, while Hoxc10 is also expressed in proliferating
cells in the dorsal ventricular zone. Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 expression is clearly
excluded from the lateral motor columns at rostral lumbar levels but is present
in this region more caudally. Double labeling demonstrates that Hoxc10 expression
is correlated with ventrolateral LIM gene expression in the caudal part of the
lumbar spinal cord.

PMID: 16495162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Dec;22(6):653-6.

[Analysis of association between 5' HOXD gene and idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LL(1), Jin CL, Liu LY, Zhang X, Ji SJ, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in HOXD10, HOXD12 and
HOXD13 genes were chosen to investigate SNP and haplotypes distribution in
idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus nuclear pedigrees.
METHODS: Genotypes of 4 SNPs in 84 idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus
nuclear pedigrees were analyzed by restriction fragment length polymorphism and
DNA sequencing. Analysis of association between SNP locus and idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus was performed using ETDT software. Haplotypes and 
their frequencies in 84 nuclear pedigrees were established and analyzed by
TRANSMIT software.
RESULTS: rs847151 polymorphism was not detected; the rs847154 located in 5'
flanking sequence of HOXD12 gene and the rs13392701 located in exon 1 of HOXD13
gene were noted to have transmission disequilibrium in 84 nuclear pedigrees (P < 
0.05).
CONCLUSION: rs847154 located in 5' flanking sequence of HOXD12 gene and
rs13392701 located in exon 1 of HOXD13 gene are associated with idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus; HOXD12 andHOXD13 are important susceptible genes 
of idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus.

PMID: 16331564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dev Biol. 2004 Nov 15;275(2):287-300.

Muscle satellite cell-specific genes identified by genetic profiling of
MyoD-deficient myogenic cell.

Seale P(1), Ishibashi J, Holterman C, Rudnicki MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1.

Satellite cells are committed myogenic progenitors that give rise to
proliferating myoblasts during postnatal growth and repair of skeletal muscle. To
identify genes expressed at different developmental stages in the satellite cell 
myogenic program, representational difference analysis of cDNAs was employed to
identify more than 50 unique mRNAs expressed in wild-type myoblasts and MyoD-/-
myogenic cells. Novel expression patterns for several genes, such as Pax7, Asb5, 
IgSF4, and Hoxc10, were identified that were expressed in both quiescent and
activated satellite cells. Several previously uncharacterized genes that
represent putative MyoD target genes were also identified, including Pw1, Dapk2, 
Sytl2, and NLRR1. Importantly, many genes such as IgSF4, Neuritin, and Klra18
that were expressed exclusively in MyoD-/- myoblasts were also expressed by
satellite cells in undamaged muscle in vivo but were not expressed by primary
myoblasts. These data are consistent with a biological role for activated
satellite cells that induce Myf5 but not MyoD. Lastly, additional endothelial and
hematopoietic markers were identified supporting a nonsomitic developmental
origin of the satellite cell myogenic lineage.

PMID: 15501219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biol Cell. 2003 Dec;95(9):589-94.

The spatial restrictions of 5'HoxC genes expression are maintained in adult newt 
spinal cord.

Nicolas S(1), Papillon D, Perez Y, Caubit X, Le Parco Y.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenèse et Morphogenèse dans le Développement et chez l'Adulte, UMR CNRS
6156, Laboratoire de génétique et physiologie du développement, UMR 6545, IBDM,
Parc scientifique de Luminy, 13288 Marseille cedex 9, France.

Urodele amphibians are the only adult vertebrates possessing the capacity to
regenerate their limbs and tail after amputation. Epimorphic regeneration is
characterized by the accumulation of undifferentiated and dividing mesenchymal
cells originating from the tissues of the stump, which form a blastema. It has
been proposed that the ability to regenerate precisely the amputated structures
depends on a 'positional memory' of the cells at the level of amputation plane
and that a continuum of positional value would be present in adult urodeles along
the appendages able to regenerate. Hox genes are good candidates for playing a
role in providing the capacity for regeneration and for carrying positional
information. Here, we report the cloning of four AbdB-like genes (Hoxa9, Hoxc10, 
Hoxc12 and Hoxc13) in the newt Pleurodeles waltl (Pw). To analyse their
expression pattern along the antero-posterior (AP) axis of adult urodele central 
nervous system (CNS), we used the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and showed that the 5'HoxC genes expression pattern conforms to the
usual spatial colinearity rule. In addition, the expression level in tail
regenerates of PwHoxc13, PwHoxc12, and PwHoxc10 was respectively 20, 7 and 2 fold
higher than in adult tail. These last results suggest that 5'HoxC genes could
specify positional memory in adult spinal cord (SC) and could be involved in
axial patterning of the tail during regeneration.

PMID: 14720461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):299-309. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb
zeugopod.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the 5' or posterior murine Hox genes (paralogous groups 9-13)
markedly affect the formation of the stylopod, zeugopod and autopod of both
forelimbs and hindlimbs. Targeted disruption of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 or Hoxa10,
Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 result in gross mispatterning of the radius and ulna or the
femur, respectively. Similarly, in mice with disruptions of both Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13, development of the forelimb and hindlimb autopod is severely curtailed.
Although these examples clearly illustrate the major roles played by the
posterior Hox genes, little is known regarding the stage or stages at which Hox
transcription factors intersect with the limb development program to ensure
proper patterning of the principle elements of the limb. Moreover, the cellular
and/or molecular bases for the developmental defects observed in these mutant
mice have not been described. In this study, we show that malformation of the
forelimb zeugopod in Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants is a consequence of
interruption at multiple steps during the formation of the radius and ulna. In
particular, reductions in the levels of Fgf8 and Fgf10 expression may be related 
to the observed delay in forelimb bud outgrowth that, in turn, leads to the
formation of smaller mesenchymal condensations. However, the most significant
defect appears to be the failure to form normal growth plates at the proximal and
distal ends of the zeugopod bones. As a consequence, growth and maturation of
these bones is highly disorganized, resulting in the creation of amorphous bony
elements, rather than a normal radius and ulna.

PMID: 14668414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):39-45. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

HOXC and HOXD gene expression in human endometrium: lack of redundancy with HOXA 
paralogs.

Akbas GE(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOXA genes, essential regulators of differentiation in the embryo, are also
essential for adult cyclic endometrial development and for endometrial
receptivity. Mice deficient in Hoxa10 or Hoxa11 exhibit reduced fertility because
of defects in implantation. We hypothesized that HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11, paralogs of HOXA10 and HOXA11, might also be involved in endometrial
development. Here, we showed that the expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11 was evident throughout the menstrual cycle in the endometrium by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the
secretory phase, expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, and HOXD11 decreased to 4% and
HOXD10 decreased to 25% of the proliferative phase expression (P < 0.001, P <
0.001, P < 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively). In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of each of these HOX genes primarily in the stroma and confirmed the
decreased expression in the secretory phase. HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and HOXD11
expression was not regulated by sex steroids in primary endometrial stromal cells
or Ishikawa cells. The expression and regulation of HOXC and HOXD genes varies
from that of HOXA10 and HOXA11. Whereas HOXA10 and HOXA11 are regulators of
endometrial differentiation, HOXC and HOXD genes likely regulate endometrial
proliferation. Paralogous HOX genes typically have a redundant function in
development; a novel evolutionary divergence of paralogous Hox genes has resulted
in HOXC and HOXD genes having distinct expression patterns, regulation, and
likely also distinct functions from HOXA genes. A network of HOX genes may be
involved in regulating multiple aspects of endometrial development, including
both proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 12954737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO J. 2003 Jul 15;22(14):3715-24.

Early mitotic degradation of the homeoprotein HOXC10 is potentially linked to
cell cycle progression.

Gabellini D(1), Colaluca IN, Vodermaier HC, Biamonti G, Giacca M, Falaschi A,
Riva S, Peverali FA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare, CNR, via Abbiategrasso 207,I-27100 Pavia,
Italy.

Hox proteins are transcription factors involved in controlling axial patterning, 
leukaemias and hereditary malformations. Here, we show that HOXC10 oscillates in 
abundance during the cell cycle, being targeted for degradation early in mitosis 
by the ubiquitin-dependent proteasome pathway. Among abdominal-B subfamily
members, the mitotic proteolysis of HOXC10 appears unique, since the levels of
the paralogous HOXD10 and the related homeoprotein HOXC13 are constant throughout
the cell cycle. When two destruction box motifs (D-box) are mutated, HOXC10 is
stabilized and cells accumulate in metaphase. HOXC10 appears to be a new
prometaphase target of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), since its
degradation coincides with cyclin A destruction and is suppressed by expression
of a dominant-negative form of UbcH10, an APC-associated ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme. Moreover, HOXC10 co-immunoprecipitates the APC subunit CDC27, and its in 
vitro degradation is reduced in APC-depleted extracts or by competition with the 
APC substrate cyclin A. These data imply that HOXC10 is a homeoprotein with the
potential to influence mitotic progression, and might provide a link between
developmental regulation and cell cycle control.

PMCID: PMC165610
PMID: 12853486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Dev Dyn. 2003 Feb;226(2):349-55.

Regeneration-specific expression pattern of three posterior Hox genes.

Christen B(1), Beck CW, Lombardo A, Slack JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom. bssbc@bath.ac.uk

Homeobox genes encode positional information during primary and secondary axis
formation during development. For this reason, the Hox genes have attracted
attention in regeneration research as well. At early stages of regeneration, Hox 
genes have been implicated in wound healing and the dedifferentiation process and
at later stages in the patterning of the blastema. We studied the expression of
three Abdominal B-type Hox genes in Xenopus: XHoxc10, XHoxa13, and XHoxd13 during
normal limb development and during regeneration of limbs and tails. We compared
their expression with nonregenerating and with wounded limbs and tails,
respectively. We show that the temporal and spatial control of these three Hox
genes in blastemas differs from normal development. All three are specific to
regeneration, XHoxc10 is up-regulated at the right time and at the site where
cells dedifferentiate and undifferentiated cells are recruited, whereas XHoxa13
is reexpressed slightly later in regeneration, when the blastemal cells
proliferate and remains on during patterning of the blastema. XHoxd13 is not
expressed until relatively late and appears to be involved only in patterning of 
the blastema.

PMID: 12557213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):874-8.

Upregulation of Meis1 and HoxA9 in acute lymphocytic leukemias with the t(4 : 11)
abnormality.

Rozovskaia T(1), Feinstein E, Mor O, Foa R, Blechman J, Nakamura T, Croce CM,
Cimino G, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the human ALL-1 gene are frequently encountered in acute
lymphocytic leukemias (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). These
rearrangements are mostly due to chromosome translocations and result in
production of chimeric proteins composed of the N-terminal fragment of ALL-1 and 
the C-terminal segments of the partner proteins. The most common chromosome
translocation involving ALL-1 is the t(4 : 11) associated with ALL. ALL-1 is the 
human homologue of Drosophila trithorax and directly activates transcription of
multiple Hox genes. A preliminary DNA microarray screen indicated that the Meis1,
HoxA9 and AC133 genes were overexpressed in ALLs with t(4 : 11), compared to ALLs
with very similar phenotype but without the chromosomal abnormality. These genes,
as well as additional five Hox genes, were subjected to comprehensive
semi-quantitative or quantitative RT-PCR analysis in 57 primary ALL and AML
tumors. Meis1 and HoxA9 were found expressed in 13/14 of ALLs with the t(4 : 11) 
and in 8/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. The two genes were not consistently
transcribed in other types of ALL. AC133 was transcribed in 13/14 of ALLs with
t(4 : 11), but in only 4/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. HoxA10 was
expressed in most leukemias with ALL-1 alterations, but was also transcribed in
PrePreB CD10(-) ALLs lacking the t(4 : 11). Expression of HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxC8 and
HoxC10 did not correlate with ALL-1 rearrangements. Coexpression of Meis1 and
HoxA9, overexpression of HoxA10, and overexpression or fusion of HoxA9 were
previously implicated in certain acute myeloid leukemias in mice and humans. The 
present work suggests that upregulation of Meis1, HoxA9, and possibly HoxA10
might also play a role in pathogenesis of acute lymphocytic and acute myeloid
leukemias associated with ALL-1 fusions.

PMID: 11314021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 2001 Jan 15;229(2):396-406.

Expression of Hoxb13 and Hoxc10 in developing and regenerating Axolotl limbs and 
tails.

Carlson MR(1), Komine Y, Bryant SV, Gardiner DM.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Center, University of California, Irvine, California
92697, USA.

The expression of Hox complex genes in correct spatial and temporal order is
critical to patterning of the body axis and limbs during embryonic development.
In order to understand the role such genes play in appendage regeneration, we
have compared the expression of two 5' Hox complex genes: Hoxb13 and Hoxc10
during development and regeneration of the body axis and the limbs of axolotls.
In contrast to higher vertebrates, Hoxb13 is expressed not only in the tip of the
developing tail, but also in the distal mesenchyme of developing hind limbs, and 
at low levels in developing forelimbs. Hoxc10 is expressed as two transcripts
during both development and regeneration. The short transcript (Hoxc10S) is
expressed in the tip of the developing tail, in developing hind limbs, and at low
levels in developing forelimbs. The long transcript (Hoxc10L) is expressed in a
similar pattern, with the exception that no expression in developing forelimbs
could be detected. Hoxb13 and both transcripts of Hoxc10 are expressed at high
levels in the regenerating spinal cord during tail regeneration, and in both
regenerating hind limbs and forelimbs. The up-regulation of expression of these
genes during forelimb regeneration, relative to the very low levels of expression
during forelimb development, suggests that they play a critical and perhaps
unique role in regeneration. This is particularly true for Hoxc10L, which is not 
expressed during forelimb development, but is expressed during forelimb
regeneration; thus making it the first truly "regeneration-specific" gene
transcript identified to date.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11150241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Mol Biol. 2000 Jun 9;299(3):667-80.

Selection of homeotic proteins for binding to a human DNA replication origin.

de Stanchina E(1), Gabellini D, Norio P, Giacca M, Peverali FA, Riva S, Falaschi 
A, Biamonti G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Biochimica ed Evoluzionistica del CNR, Via Abbiategrasso 
207, Pavia, 27100, Italy.

We have previously shown that a cell cycle-dependent nucleoprotein complex
assembles in vivo on a 74 bp sequence within the human DNA replication origin
associated to the Lamin B2 gene. Here, we report the identification, using a
one-hybrid screen in yeast, of three proteins interacting with the 74 bp
sequence. All of them, namely HOXA13, HOXC10 and HOXC13, are orthologues of the
Abdominal-B gene of Drosophila melanogaster and are members of the homeogene
family of developmental regulators. We describe the complete open reading frame
sequence of HOXC10 and HOXC13 along with the structure of the HoxC13 gene. The
specificity of binding of these two proteins to the Lamin B2 origin is confirmed 
by both band-shift and in vitro footprinting assays. In addition, the ability of 
HOXC10 and HOXC13 to increase the activity of a promoter containing the 74 bp
sequence, as assayed by CAT-assay experiments, demonstrates a direct interaction 
of these homeoproteins with the origin sequence in mammalian cells. We also show 
that HOXC10 expression is cell-type-dependent and positively correlates with cell
proliferation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10835276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Science. 1999 Mar 12;283(5408):1736-9.

Role of Pitx1 upstream of Tbx4 in specification of hindlimb identity.

Logan M(1), Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1999 Mar 12;283(5408):1615-6.

In spite of recent breakthroughs in understanding limb patterning, the genetic
factors determining the differences between the forelimb and the hindlimb have
not been understood. The genes Pitx1 and Tbx4 encode transcription factors that
are expressed throughout the developing hindlimb but not forelimb buds.
Misexpression of Pitx1 in the chick wing bud induced distal expression of Tbx4,
as well as HoxC10 and HoxC11, which are normally restricted to hindlimb
expression domains. Wing buds in which Pitx1 was misexpressed developed into
limbs with some morphological characteristics of hindlimbs: the flexure was
altered to that normally observed in legs, the digits were more toe-like in their
relative size and shape, and the muscle pattern was transformed to that of a leg.

PMID: 10073939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


