
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2016 Mar;43(3):141-50. doi: 10.1007/s11033-016-3946-6. Epub 2016
Feb 8.

The transcriptional coregulator MAML1 affects DNA methylation and gene expression
patterns in human embryonic kidney cells.

Putnik M(1), Brodin D(2), Wojdacz TK(1), Fagerström-Billai F(2), Dahlman-Wright
K(2), Wallberg AE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels väg 13, 171
77, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Bioinformatics and Expression Core Facility (BEA),
Karolinska Institutet, Hälsovägen 7-9, 141 83, Huddinge, Sweden. (3)Institute of 
Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels väg 13, 171 77, Stockholm, 
Sweden. annika.wallberg@ki.se.

Mastermind-like 1 (MAML1) is a transcriptional coregulator that has been
associated with early development of many systems such as neuronal, muscular and 
urogenital. The present study aimed to explore the genome wide effects of MAML1
on DNA methylation and RNA expression in human embryonic kidney cells. Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip Illumina array, methylation-sensitive
high-resolution melt technique, Chip Analysis Methylation Pipeline and RNA
profiling approaches were used to study MAML1 effects on the epigenome. We found 
that 11802 CpG sites were differentially methylated in MAML1-expressing cells
while only 225 genes were differentially expressed. MAML1 overexpression induced 
more global differential hypermethylation than hypomethylation changes. In
addition, the differentially methylated regions were mapped predominantly to
3'untranslated regions, intragenic regions and gene bodies and to a lesser extent
to gene regulatory sequences. Gene ontology analysis revealed that the
differentially changed genes (including HOXC11, HTATIP2, SLFN12 and SOX11) are
involved in the regulation of urogenital system development, cell adhesion and
embryogenesis. This study is the first report that shows the global effect of a
single coregulator on DNA methylation and gene expression. Our results stress and
support the effects of transcriptional coregulators on the cell methylome.

PMID: 26857655  [PubMed - in process]


2. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 14;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2370-6.

Identification of genomic aberrations in hemangioblastoma by droplet digital PCR 
and SNP microarray highlights novel candidate genes and pathways for
pathogenesis.

Mehrian-Shai R(1), Yalon M(2), Moshe I(3), Barshack I(4,)(5), Nass D(6), Jacob
J(7), Dor C(8), Reichardt JK(9), Constantini S(10,)(11), Toren A(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and
Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
ruty.shai@sheba.health.gov.il. (2)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. michal@droren.co.il. (3)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. itaimoshe@gmail.com. (4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (5)Institute of 
Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (6)Institute of Pathology, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. Dvora.Nass@sheba.health.gov.il. (7)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Jasmine.Jacob@sheba.health.gov.il. (8)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. Chen.Gefen@sheba.health.gov.il. (9)Division of Tropical Health and 
Medicine, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
Juergen.reichardt@jcu.edu.au. (10)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (11)Department of
Pediatric Neurosurgery, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv-Sourasky Medical
Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (12)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. amost@post.tau.ac.il.
(13)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
amost@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: The genetic mechanisms underlying hemangioblastoma development are
still largely unknown. We used high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism
microarrays and droplet digital PCR analysis to detect copy number variations
(CNVs) in total of 45 hemangioblastoma tumors.
RESULTS: We identified 94 CNVs with a median of 18 CNVs per sample. The most
frequently gained regions were on chromosomes 1 (p36.32) and 7 (p11.2). These
regions contain the EGFR and PRDM16 genes. Recurrent losses were located at
chromosome 12 (q24.13), which includes the gene PTPN11.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first high-resolution genome-wide view of
chromosomal changes in hemangioblastoma and identify 23 candidate genes: EGFR,
PRDM16, PTPN11, HOXD11, HOXD13, FLT3, PTCH, FGFR1, FOXP1, GPC3, HOXC13, HOXC11,
MKL1, CHEK2, IRF4, GPHN, IKZF1, RB1, HOXA9, and micro RNA, such as hsa-mir-196a-2
for hemangioblastoma pathogenesis. Furthermore, our data implicate that cell
proliferation and angiogenesis promoting pathways may be involved in the
molecular pathogenesis of hemangioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4712606
PMID: 26768750  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Med Genet. 2016 Apr;53(4):250-5. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103505. Epub 2016 
Jan 4.

Deletions of 5' HOXC genes are associated with lower extremity malformations,
including clubfoot and vertical talus.

Alvarado DM(1), McCall K(1), Hecht JT(2), Dobbs MB(3), Gurnett CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston,
Texas, USA. (3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA Shriners Hospital for Children, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Department of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: Deletions of the HOXC gene cluster result in variable phenotypes in
mice, but have been rarely described in humans.
OBJECTIVE: To report chromosome 12q13.13 microdeletions ranging from 13 to 175 kb
and involving the 5' HOXC genes in four families, segregating congenital lower
limb malformations, including clubfoot, vertical talus and hip dysplasia.
METHODS: Probands (N=253) with clubfoot or vertical talus were screened for point
mutations and copy number variants using multiplexed direct genomic selection, a 
pooled BAC targeted capture approach. SNP genotyping included 1178 probands with 
clubfoot or vertical talus and 1775 controls.
RESULTS: The microdeletions share a minimal non-coding region overlap upstream of
HOXC13, with variable phenotypes depending upon HOXC13, HOXC12 or the HOTAIR
lncRNA inclusion. SNP analysis revealed HOXC11 p.Ser191Phe segregating with
clubfoot in a small family and enrichment of HOXC12 p.Asn176Lys in patients with 
clubfoot or vertical talus (rs189468720, p=0.0057, OR=3.8). Defects in limb
morphogenesis include shortened and overlapping toes, as well as peroneus muscle 
hypoplasia. Finally, HOXC and HOXD gene expression is reduced in fibroblasts from
a patient with a 5' HOXC deletion, consistent with previous studies demonstrating
that dosage of lncRNAs alters expression of HOXD genes in trans.
CONCLUSIONS: Because HOXD10 has been implicated in the aetiology of congenital
vertical talus, variation in its expression may contribute to the lower limb
phenotypes occurring with 5' HOXC microdeletions. Identification of 5' HOXC
microdeletions highlights the importance of transcriptional regulators in the
aetiology of severe lower limb malformations and will improve their diagnosis and
management.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26729820  [PubMed - in process]


4. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2015;53 Suppl 2:S188-93.

[The role of developmental HOX genes in cervical cancer].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

López-Romero R(1), Marrero-Rodríguez D, Romero-Morelos P, Villegas V, Valdivia A,
Arreola H, Huerta-Padilla V, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de
Oncología, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal, México. rlopez_99@yahoo.com.

Cervical cancer (CC) is a multifactorial disease associated to genetic,
environmental and epigenetic factors, being the infection by human papillomavirus
the main etiologic agent. Additionally, the alteration in the expression of
transcription factors has been considered of importance for the development of
this tumor. HOX genes encode a group of transcription factors involved in
cellular proliferation and differentiation processes during the development of
embryonic structures in vertebrates; their aberrant expression is associated with
tumorigenesis and metastasis. A range of evidence suggests a role for HOX genes
in the development of cervical neoplastic cell. Studies in CC cell lines, primary
tumors and premalignant lesions have suggested the involvement of HOXA1, HOXC5,
C6, C8 and C10, HOXD9 and HOXD13 in the process of cervical carcinogenesis. Also,
the de novo expression of genes HOXB2, B4, B13 and HOXC11-C13 appears to be
involved in the process of malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cell. 
These data would allow to open a field in search of new molecular markers in
cervical cancer and the development of new therapeutic strategies for this
malignancy.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26462515  [PubMed - in process]


5. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31255-62. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5158.

The association analysis of lncRNA HOTAIR genetic variants and gastric cancer
risk in a Chinese population.

Du M(1), Wang W(2), Jin H(3), Wang Q(1), Ge Y(1), Lu J(1), Ma G(1), Chu H(1,)(4),
Tong N(1,)(4), Zhu H(3), Wang M(1,)(4), Qiang F(3), Zhang Z(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Genomics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer
Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Cancer Center, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Core Laboratory, Nantong Tumor 
Hospital, Nantong, China. (4)Department of Genetic Toxicology, the Key Laboratory
of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.

The HOX transcript antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR), a well-known long noncoding
RNA, is involved in pathogenesis and progress of multiple tumors. Its ectopic
expression and biological functions have been observed in gastric cancer. In this
study, we conducted a two-stage case-control study to evaluate whether genetic
variations of HOTAIR were associated with gastric cancer risk. We identified that
a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs4759314 was significantly associated
with the increased gastric cancer risk with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.39 [95%
confidence interval (CI) = 1.13-1.71, P = 0.002] in the combined sets. Further
functional experiments revealed the allele-specific effects on HOTAIR and HOXC11 
expressions in gastric cancer tissues, of which HOTAIR and HOXC11 expressions of 
individuals carrying with AG genotype were much higher than those with AA
genotype; similarly, the effects occurred in intronic promoter activities, of
which the promoter activity of G allele was more pronounced than that of A
allele. Interestingly, we identified a novel potential oncogene HOXC11 in gastric
cancer pathogenesis with differential expression in gastric cancer tissues by
association analysis with candidate gene strategy. These results suggest that SNP
rs4759314 of HOTAIR acts as a potential biomarker for predicting gastric cancer, 
and the role of HOXC11 in gastric cancer etiology is warranted to further
investigation.

PMCID: PMC4741602
PMID: 26384301  [PubMed - in process]


6. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 4;17(1):123. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0636-6.

Prosaposin activates the androgen receptor and potentiates resistance to
endocrine treatment in breast cancer.

Ali A(1,)(2), Creevey L(3), Hao Y(4), McCartan D(5), O'Gaora P(6), Hill A(7,)(8),
Young L(9), McIlroy M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons 
in Ireland, St. Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. azlenaali@rcsi.ie.
(2)Department of Surgery, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9, Ireland.
azlenaali@rcsi.ie. (3)Endocrine Oncology Research, Department of Surgery, Royal
College of Surgeons in Ireland, St. Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.
lauracreevey@rcsi.ie. (4)School of Medicine and Medical Science, UCD Conway
Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. yhao@cshl.edu.
(5)Endocrine Oncology Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons 
in Ireland, St. Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. damiamccartan@rcsi.ie.
(6)School of Medicine and Medical Science, UCD Conway Institute, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. peadar.ogaora@ucd.ie. (7)Endocrine Oncology
Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, St.
Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. adkhill@rcsi.ie. (8)Department of Surgery,
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9, Ireland. adkhill@rcsi.ie. (9)Endocrine Oncology
Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, St.
Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. lyoung@rcsi.ie. (10)Endocrine Oncology
Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, St.
Stephens Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. mmcilroy@rcsi.ie.

INTRODUCTION: HOX genes play vital roles in growth and development, however,
atypical redeployment of these genes is often associated with steroidal
adaptability in endocrine cancers. We previously identified HOXC11 to be an
indicator of poor response to hormonal therapy in breast cancer. In this study we
aimed to elucidate genes regulated by HOXC11 in the endocrine resistant setting.
METHODS: RNA-sequencing paired with transcription factor motif-mapping was
utilised to identify putative HOXC11 target genes in endocrine resistant breast
cancer. Validation and functional evaluation of the target gene, prosaposin
(PSAP), was performed in a panel of endocrine sensitive and resistant breast
cancer cell lines. The clinical significance of this finding was explored in
clinical cohorts at both mRNA and protein level.
RESULTS: PSAP was shown to be regulated by HOXC11 in both tamoxifen and aromatase
inhibitor (AI) resistant cell lines. Transcript levels of HOXC11 and PSAP
correlated strongly in samples of primary breast tumours (r = 0.7692, n = 51).
PSAP has previously been reported to activate androgen receptor (AR) in prostate 
cancer cells. In a panel of breast cancer cell lines it was shown that endocrine 
resistant cells exhibit innately elevated levels of AR compared to their
endocrine sensitive counterparts. Here, we demonstrate that stimulation with PSAP
can drive AR recruitment to a hormone response element (HRE) in AI resistant
breast cancer cells. Functionally, PSAP promotes cell migration and invasion only
in AI resistant cells and not in their endocrine sensitive counterparts. In a
cohort of breast cancer patients (n = 34), elevated serum levels of PSAP were
found to associate significantly with poor response to endocrine treatment (p =
0.04). Meta-analysis of combined PSAP and AR mRNA are indicative of poor
disease-free survival in endocrine treated breast cancer patients (hazard ratio
(HR): 2.2, P = 0.0003, n = 661).
CONCLUSION: The HOXC11 target gene, PSAP, is an AR activator which facilitates
adaptation to a more invasive phenotype in vitro. These findings have particular 
relevance to the development of resistance to AI therapy which is an emerging
clinical issue. PSAP is a secreted biomarker which has potential in identifying
patients failing to exhibit sustained response to hormonal treatment.

PMCID: PMC4560928
PMID: 26341737  [PubMed - in process]


7. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;34(6):400-11. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2737. Epub 2015 Mar
11.

Transcriptional dynamics of homeobox C11 gene in water buffalo bubalus bubalis.

Rawal L(1), Pathak D(1), Sehgal N(2), Ali S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi,
India. (2)2Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi, India.

The Hox complex contains 39 genes clustered into four groups involved in cell
differentiation and development. We cloned full-length sequence of Hoxc11 gene
from water buffalo Bubalus bubalis, assessed its copy number, localized the same 
onto the chromosome 5, and studied its evolutionary conservation across the
species. Northern hybridization of Hoxc11 showed a 2.2 kb band in the tissues
analyzed. Real-Time PCR showed highest expression of Hoxc11 gene in lung followed
by spleen, spermatozoa, and testis. Six interacting partners of this gene showed 
higher expression in spleen, lung, testis, and spermatozoa. During the early
stages of development, Hoxc11 and its interacting partners both showed lower
expression, which then became prominent during the age of 1-3 years, regressed
drastically thereafter, and remained so until the animal's life time (~ 20
years). The high expression of Hoxc11 and its interacting partners in spermatozoa
and testis during the onset of puberty suggests its likely role in the
differentiation of gonads and subsequent reproductive activities. Additional work
on Hoxc11 especially, in the context of respiratory, immunological, and
in/fertility in other species, including humans would be useful for establishing 
its broader biological significance towards the enrichment of functional and
comparative genomics.

PMCID: PMC4484715 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25760398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Gene. 2015 Apr 15;560(2):165-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.01.063. Epub 2015 Jan
31.

MS-HRM assay identifies high levels of epigenetic heterogeneity in human
immortalized cell lines.

Putnik M(1), Wojdacz TK(1), Pournara A(1), Vahter M(1), Wallberg AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Unit of Metals and Health, Karolinska
Institutet, Nobels väg 13, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Institute of Environmental
Medicine, Unit of Metals and Health, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels väg 13, 17177 
Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: annika.wallberg@ki.se.

Immortalized cell lines are widely used in genetic and epigenetic studies, from
exploration of basic molecular pathways to evaluation of disease-specific
cellular properties. They are also used in biotechnology, e.g., in drug toxicity 
tests and vaccine production. Cellular and genetic uniformity is the main feature
of immortalized cell lines and it has been particularly advantageous in
functional genomic research, which has in recent years been expanded to include
epigenetic mechanisms of gene expression regulation. Using the MS-HRM technique, 
we demonstrated heterogeneity in locus-specific methylation patterns in different
cell cultures of four human cell lines: HEK293, HEK293T, LCL and DU145. Our
results show that some human immortalized cell lines consist of cells that differ
in the methylation status of specific loci, i.e., that they are epigenetically
heterogeneous. We show that even two cultures of the same cell line obtained from
different laboratories can differ in the methylation status of the specific loci.
The results indicated that epigenetic uniformity of the cell lines cannot be
assumed in experiments which utilize cell cultures and that the methylation
status of the specific loci in the immortalized cell lines should be
re-characterized and carefully profiled before epigenetic studies are performed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25644772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Tumour Biol. 2015 Apr;36(4):2821-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2909-6. Epub 2014 Dec
5.

Overexpression of HOXC11 homeobox gene in clear cell renal cell carcinoma induces
cellular proliferation and is associated with poor prognosis.

Liu YJ(1), Zhu Y, Yuan HX, Zhang JP, Guo JM, Lin ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, No. 180 Fenglin
Road, Shanghai, 200032, People's Republic of China.

Novel evidence has confirmed the involvement of dysregulated expression of HOX
genes in cancer. HOX genes are a family of 39 transcription factors, divided in
four clusters (HOXA to HOXD), that during normal development regulate cell
proliferation and specific cell fate. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether genes of the HOXC cluster might play a role in renal cancer. The
expression of HOXC11 was detected through polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemical staining, and we demonstrated that HOXC11 was significantly
higher in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) compared to normal kidney tissue. We further
demonstrated that HOXC11 overexpression in HK-2 human epithelial cell line
promoted proliferation, whereas downregulation of HOXC11 endogenous levels in
human RCC cells (Caki-2 cells) decreased proliferation. In RCC, expression of
HOXC11 and Ki67, a marker of proliferation, correlates strongly with each other
(r s <U+2009>=<U+2009>0.47, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003). High immunohistochemical expression of HOXC11 was
correlated with T stage (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.06), N stage (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.07), disease stage (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.08),
and Ki67 expression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.07), and patients with tumors showing high number of
HOXC11-positive cells had shorter overall survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.08) and shorter
progression-free survival after treatment (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.08) compared with patients with 
tumors exhibiting low amount of HOXC11-positive cells. Our data suggest that
HOXC11 may contribute to RCC carcinogenesis by increasing tumor cell
proliferation and imply that HOXC11 may be an important determinant of RCC
patient prognosis.

PMID: 25476856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;11(2):90-100. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.185. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Biology of upper-body and lower-body adipose tissue--link to whole-body
phenotypes.

Karpe F(1), Pinnick KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Radcliffe
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Headington OX3 
7LE, UK. [2] NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, OUH Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK. (2)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK.

The distribution of adipose tissue in the body has wide-ranging and reproducible 
associations with health and disease. Accumulation of adipose tissue in the upper
body (abdominal obesity) is associated with the development of cardiovascular
disease, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and even all-cause
mortality. Conversely, accumulation of fat in the lower body (gluteofemoral
obesity) shows opposite associations with cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes mellitus when adjusted for overall fat mass. The abdominal depots are
characterized by rapid uptake of predominantly diet-derived fat and a high lipid 
turnover that is easily stimulated by adrenergic receptor activation. The
lower-body fat stores have a reduced lipid turnover with a capacity to
accommodate fat undergoing redistribution. Lower-body adipose tissue also seems
to retain the capacity to recruit additional adipocytes as a result of weight
gain and demonstrates fewer signs of inflammatory insult. New data suggest that
the profound functional differences between the upper-body and lower-body tissues
are controlled by site-specific sets of developmental genes, such as HOXA6,
HOXA5, HOXA3, IRX2 and TBX5 in subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue and HOTAIR, 
SHOX2 and HOXC11 in gluteofemoral adipose tissue, which are under epigenetic
control. This Review discusses the developmental and functional differences
between upper-body and lower-body fat depots and provides mechanistic insight
into the disease-protective effects of lower-body fat.

PMID: 25365922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 30;15:638. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-638.

Differential expression of Homeobox C11 protein in water buffalo Bubalus bubalis 
and its putative 3D structure.

Sharma M, Rawal L, Panwar D, Sehgal N, Ali S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf
Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. alisher@nii.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: The Homeobox (Hox) family complex contains 39 genes, clustered into
four groups (A-D) all expressing in sequential manner. The HOX proteins are
transcriptional factors involved in regulation of pattern formation of the
anterio-posterior body axis across the species. Most of the Hox family genes have
been studied with respect to their organization and expression during the
embryonic stages. However, expression pattern of Homeobox C11 (Hoxc11) gene in
the 5' region, particularly in higher mammals remains largely unexplored.
RESULTS: We cloned and expressed Homeobox C11 (Hoxc11) gene from water buffalo
Bubalus bubalis. The recombinant HOXC11 protein expressed as inclusion bodies was
solubilized in Tris buffer (10 mM, pH-6.5) and purified using Ni-NTA affinity
column. The purity and molecular weight of HOXC11 protein (~33 kDa) were
confirmed by SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis. Employing immunohistochemistry
approach, we localized HOXC11 protein in the nuclei across the tissues of
buffalo. Western blot analysis showed highest expression of HOXC11 protein in
kidney and lung although its possible renal and respiratory roles are not yet
established. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) demonstrated the
specific binding of HOXC11 protein with the promoter element, CE-LPH1 of
lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) gene showing reduced mobility of the
protein-DNA complex, corroborating with earlier report on the possible role of
this protein in intestinal functions. In silico analysis of HOXC11 showed
predominance of a helices and presence of six conserved domains. We deduced the
putative 3D structure of HOXC11 protein and fifteen possible DNA interacting
residues within the homeodomain.
CONCLUSIONS: Present study augments our understanding on the specific expression 
of HOXC11 protein in kidney and lung in water buffalo. The fifteen DNA
interacting residues reported herein provide an opportunity to establish much
broader structural and functional perspectives of HOXC11 protein in the context
of genome analysis in general and animal biotechnology in particular.

PMCID: PMC4139611
PMID: 25080327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1839(9):793-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.06.011. 
Epub 2014 Jun 21.

Akt1 mediates the posterior Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modifications
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Kong KA(1), Lee JY(1), Oh JH(1), Lee Y(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox genes are organized in clusters and expressed
colinearly to specify body patterning during embryonic development. Previously,
Akt1 has been identified as a putative Hox gene regulator through in silico
analysis. Substantial upregulation of consecutive 5' Hoxc genes has been observed
when Akt1 is absent in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells. In this study, we 
provide evidence that Akt1 regulates the 5' Hoxc gene expression by epigenetic
modifications. Enrichment of histone H3K9 acetylation and a low level of the
H3K27me3 mark were detected at the posterior 5' Hoxc loci when Akt1 is absent. A 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor de-repressed 5' Hoxc gene expression when
Akt1 is present, and a DNA demethylating reagent synergistically upregulated
HDAC-induced 5' Hoxc gene expression. A knockdown study revealed that Hdac6 is
mediated in the Hoxc12 repression through direct binding to the transcription
start site (TSS) in the presence of Akt1. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that endogenous Akt1 directly interacted with Hdac6. Furthermore,
exogenous Akt1 was enriched at the promoter region of the posterior Hoxc genes
such as Hoxc11 and Hoxc12, not the Akt1-independent Hoxc5 and Hoxd10 loci. The
regulation of the H3K27me3 mark by Ezh2 and Kdm6b at the 5' Hoxc gene promoter
turned out to be Akt1 dependent. Taken together, these results suggest that Akt1 
mediates the posterior 5' Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modification
such as histone methylation and acetylation, and partly through a direct binding 
to the promoter region of the 5' Hoxc genes and/or Hdac6 in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24955524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):e82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku218. Epub 2014 Mar
20.

Multiplexed direct genomic selection (MDiGS): a pooled BAC capture approach for
highly accurate CNV and SNP/INDEL detection.

Alvarado DM(1), Yang P(1), Druley TE(2), Lovett M(3), Gurnett CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
660 S Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, 
USA Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S
Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Genome Technology and Systems Biology,
NHLI, Imperial College, London, UK. (4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, 
USA Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S
Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Neurology, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 S Euclid Ave., St Louis, MO 63110, USA
gurnettc@neuro.wustl.edu.

Despite declining sequencing costs, few methods are available for cost-effective 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), insertion/deletion (INDEL) and copy number 
variation (CNV) discovery in a single assay. Commercially available methods
require a high investment to a specific region and are only cost-effective for
large samples. Here, we introduce a novel, flexible approach for multiplexed
targeted sequencing and CNV analysis of large genomic regions called multiplexed 
direct genomic selection (MDiGS). MDiGS combines biotinylated bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) capture and multiplexed pooled capture for SNP/INDEL 
and CNV detection of 96 multiplexed samples on a single MiSeq run. MDiGS is
advantageous over other methods for CNV detection because pooled sample capture
and hybridization to large contiguous BAC baits reduces sample and probe
hybridization variability inherent in other methods. We performed MDiGS capture
for three chromosomal regions consisting of ~ 550 kb of coding and non-coding
sequence with DNA from 253 patients with congenital lower limb disorders. PITX1
nonsense and HOXC11 S191F missense mutations were identified that segregate in
clubfoot families. Using a novel pooled-capture reference strategy, we identified
recurrent chromosome chr17q23.1q23.2 duplications and small HOXC 5' cluster
deletions (51 kb and 12 kb). Given the current interest in coding and non-coding 
variants in human disease, MDiGS fulfills a niche for comprehensive and low-cost 
evaluation of CNVs, coding, and non-coding variants across candidate regions of
interest.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4041413
PMID: 24682816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;74(9):2533-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2133. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Global gene repression by the steroid receptor coactivator SRC-1 promotes
oncogenesis.

Walsh CA(1), Bolger JC, Byrne C, Cocchiglia S, Hao Y, Fagan A, Qin L, Cahalin A, 
McCartan D, McIlroy M, O'Gaora P, Xu J, Hill AD, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Endocrine Oncology Research, Royal College of Surgeons 
in Ireland; UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, 
University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; and Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology and Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.

Transcriptional control is the major determinant of cell fate. The steroid
receptor coactivator (SRC)-1 enhances the activity of the estrogen receptor in
breast cancer cells, where it confers cell survival benefits. Here, we report
that a global analysis of SRC-1 target genes suggested that SRC-1 also mediates
transcriptional repression in breast cancer cells. Combined SRC-1 and HOXC11
ChIPseq analysis identified the differentiation marker, CD24, and the apoptotic
protein, PAWR, as direct SRC-1/HOXC11 suppression targets. Reduced expression of 
both CD24 and PAWR was associated with disease progression in patients with
breast cancer, and their expression was suppressed in metastatic tissues.
Investigations in endocrine-resistant breast cancer cell lines and
SRC-1(-/-)/PyMT mice confirmed a role for SRC-1 and HOXC11 in downregulation of
CD24 and PAWR. Through bioinformatic analysis and liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry, we identified AP1 proteins and Jumonji domain containing 2C
(JMD2C/KDM4C), respectively, as members of the SRC-1 interactome responsible for 
transcriptional repression. Our findings deepen the understanding of how SRC-1
controls transcription in breast cancers.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24648347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2014 May;322(3):156-65. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22554. Epub
2013 Dec 23.

Conserved regulation of hoxc11 by pitx1 in Anolis lizards.

Park S(1), Infante CR, Rivera-Davila LC, Menke DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.

Anolis lizards are an emerging model system for the study of limb development and
evolution, but very little is known concerning the regulatory interactions that
control limb patterning differences among Anolis species or what regulatory
interactions are deeply conserved between Anolis and other tetrapod groups. Here 
we report the establishment of an embryonic limb micromass culture system that
enables functional studies of forelimb and hindlimb gene regulatory networks in
Anolis. Characterization of this culture system demonstrated that embryonic
forelimb and hindlimb micromasses from different Anolis species are easy to
sustain in culture for weeks, and the expression of forelimb and
hindlimb-specific gene expression patterns are maintained for at least 8 days in 
culture. We tested the ability of this system to explore regulatory linkages
between transcription factors and their putative target genes through the ectopic
expression of a hindlimb-specific transcription factor, pitx1, in forelimb
micromasses. We found that pitx1 expression in forelimb cells is sufficient to
strongly induce the expression of hoxc11, a gene that normally exhibits
hindlimb-restricted expression.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24376195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biol Open. 2012 May 15;1(5):430-5. doi: 10.1242/bio.2012039. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Changing topographic Hox expression in blood vessels results in regionally
distinct vessel wall remodeling.

Pruett ND(1), Hajdu Z, Zhang J, Visconti RP, Kern MJ, Wellik DM, Majesky MW,
Awgulewitsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine.

The distinct topographic Hox expression patterns observed in vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs) of the adult cardiovascular system suggest that these
transcriptional regulators are critical for maintaining region-specific
physiological properties of blood vessels. To test this proposition, we expanded 
the vascular Hoxc11 expression domain normally restricted to the lower limbs by
utilizing an innovative integrated tetracycline regulatory system and Transgelin 
promoter elements to induce Hoxc11 expression universally in VSMCs of transgenic 
mice. Ectopic Hoxc11 expression in carotid arteries, aortic arch and descending
aorta resulted in drastic vessel wall remodeling involving elastic laminae
fragmentation, medial smooth muscle cell loss, and intimal lesion formation. None
of these alterations were observed upon induction of Hoxc11 transgene expression 
in the femoral artery, i.e. the natural Hoxc11 activity domain, although this
vessel was greatly enlarged, comparable to the topographically restricted
vascular changes seen in Hoxc11(-/-) mice. To begin defining Hoxc11-controlled
pathways of vascular remodeling, we performed immunolabeling studies in
conjunction with co-transfection and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays 
using mouse vascular smooth muscle (MOVAS) cells. The results suggest direct
transcriptional control of two members of the matrix metalloproteinase (Mmp)
family, including Mmp2 and Mmp9 that are known as key players in the inception
and progression of vascular remodeling events. In summary, the severe vascular
abnormalities resulting from the induced dysregulated expression of a Hox gene
with regional vascular patterning functions suggest that proper Hox function and 
regulation is critical for maintaining vascular functional integrity.

PMCID: PMC3507213
PMID: 23213434  [PubMed]


17. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):234-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.017. Epub 2012
Nov 27.

Pitx1 broadly associates with limb enhancers and is enriched on hindlimb
cis-regulatory elements.

Infante CR(1), Park S, Mihala AG, Kingsley DM, Menke DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Coverdell Building, Room 250A, 
500 DW Brooks Drive, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Extensive functional analyses have demonstrated that the pituitary homeodomain
transcription factor Pitx1 plays a critical role in specifying hindlimb
morphology in vertebrates. However, much less is known regarding the target genes
and cis-regulatory elements through which Pitx1 acts. Earlier studies suggested
that the hindlimb transcription factors Tbx4, HoxC10, and HoxC11 might be
transcriptional targets of Pitx1, but definitive evidence for direct regulatory
interactions has been lacking. Using ChIP-Seq on embryonic mouse hindlimbs, we
have pinpointed the genome-wide location of Pitx1 binding sites during mouse
hindlimb development and identified potential gene targets for Pitx1. We
determined that Pitx1 binding is significantly enriched near genes involved in
limb morphogenesis, including Tbx4, HoxC10, and HoxC11. Notably, Pitx1 is bound
to the previously identified HLEA and HLEB hindlimb enhancers of the Tbx4 gene
and to a newly identified Tbx2 hindlimb enhancer. Moreover, Pitx1 binding is
significantly enriched on hindlimb relative to forelimb-specific cis-regulatory
features that are differentially marked by H3K27ac. However, our analysis
revealed that Pitx1 also strongly associates with many functionally verified limb
enhancers that exhibit similar levels of activity in the embryonic mesenchyme of 
forelimbs and hindlimbs. We speculate that Pitx1 influences hindlimb morphology
both through the activation of hindlimb-specific enhancers as well as through the
hindlimb-specific modulation of enhancers that are active in both sets of limbs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3640454
PMID: 23201014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3478-85. doi: 10.1002/art.34573.

Methylation alterations of WT1 and homeobox genes in inflamed muscle biopsy
samples from patients with untreated juvenile dermatomyositis suggest
self-renewal capacity.

Wang M(1), Xie H, Shrestha S, Sredni S, Morgan GA, Pachman LM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Chicago Research Center and Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of methylation alteration in inflamed muscles 
from children with juvenile dermatomyositis (DM) and other idiopathic
inflammatory myopathies (IIMs).
METHODS: Magnetic resonance imaging-directed diagnostic muscle biopsies yielded
samples from 20 children with juvenile DM, which were used for genome-wide DNA
methylation profiling, as were muscle biopsy samples from 4 healthy controls.
Bisulfite treatment followed by pyrosequencing confirmed methylation status in
juvenile DM and other IIMs. Immunohistochemistry defined localization and
expression levels of WT1.
RESULTS: Comparison of genome-wide DNA methylation profiling between juvenile DM 
muscle and normal control muscle revealed 27 genes with a significant methylation
difference between the groups. These genes were enriched with transcription
factors and/or cell cycle regulators and were unrelated to duration of untreated 
disease. Six homeobox genes were among them; ALX4, HOXC11, HOXD3, and HOXD4 were 
hypomethylated, while EMX2 and HOXB1 were hypermethylated. WT1 was significantly 
hypomethylated in juvenile DM (<U+0394>ß = -0.41, P < 0.001). Bisulfite pyrosequencing
verification in samples from 56 patients with juvenile DM confirmed the
methylation alterations of these genes. Similar methylation alterations were
observed in juvenile polymyositis (n = 5) and other IIMs (n = 9). Concordant with
the other findings, WT1 protein was increased in juvenile DM muscle, with average
positive staining of 11.6%, but was undetectable in normal muscle (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that affected muscles of children with juvenile
DM and IIMs have the capacity to be repaired, and that homeobox and WT1 genes are
epigenetically marked to facilitate this repair process, potentially suggesting
new avenues of therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3462248
PMID: 22674142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Br J Cancer. 2011 Jun 28;105(1):118-23. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.193. Epub 2011 Jun 
7.

HOXC11-SRC-1 regulation of S100beta in cutaneous melanoma: new targets for the
kinase inhibitor dasatinib.

deBlacam C(1), Byrne C, Hughes E, McIlroy M, Bane F, Hill AD, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons 
in Ireland, York House, York Street, Dublin 2, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous melanoma is an aggressive disease. S100beta is an
established biomarker of disease progression; however, the mechanism of its
regulation in melanoma is undefined.
METHODS: Expression of HOXC11 and SRC-1 was examined by immunohistochemistry and 
immunofluorescence. Molecular and cellular techniques were used to investigate
regulation of S100beta, including, western blot, qPCR, ChIP and migration assays.
RESULTS: Expression levels of the transcription factor HOXC11 and its coactivator
SRC-1 were significantly elevated in malignant melanoma in comparison with benign
nevi (P<0.001 and P=0.017, respectively, n=80), and expression of HOXC11 and
SRC-1 in the malignant tissue associated with each other (P<0.001). HOXC11
recruitment to the promoter of S100beta was observed in the primary melanoma cell
line SKMel28. S100beta expression was found to be dependant on both HOXC11 and
SRC-1. Treatment with the Src/Abl inhibitor, dasatinib, reduced HOXC11-SRC-1
interaction and prevented recruitment of HOXC11 to the S100beta promoter.
Dasatinib inhibited both mRNA and protein levels of S100beta and reduced
migration of the metastatic cell line MeWo.
CONCLUSION: We have defined a signalling mechanism regulating S100beta in
melanoma, which can be modulated by dasatinib. Profiling patients for expression 
of key markers of this network has the potential to increase the efficacy of
dasatinib treatment.

PMCID: PMC3137411
PMID: 21654685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. PLoS Genet. 2011 May;7(5):e1002071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002071. Epub 2011 
May 26.

Structural and functional differences in the long non-coding RNA hotair in mouse 
and human.

Schorderet P(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne,
Switzerland.

Long non-coding RNAs regulate various biological processes such as dosage
compensation, imprinting, and chromatin organization. HOTAIR, a paradigm of this 
new class of RNAs, is localized within the human HOXC gene cluster and was shown,
in human cells, to regulate HOXD genes in trans via the recruitment of Polycomb
Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), followed by the trimethylation of lysine 27 of
histone H3. We looked for the presence of Hotair in mice to assess whether this
in trans mechanism was conserved, in particular at the developmental stages, when
Hoxd genes must be tightly regulated. We show that the cognate mouse Hotair is
poorly conserved in sequence; and its absence, along with the deletion of the
HoxC cluster, has surprisingly little effect in vivo, neither on the expression
pattern or transcription efficiency, nor on the amount of K27me3 coverage of
different Hoxd target genes. We conclude that Hotair may have rapidly evolved
within mammals and acquired a functional importance in humans that is not easily 
revealed in mice. Alternatively, redundant or compensatory mechanisms may mask
its function when studied under physiological conditions.

PMCID: PMC3102750
PMID: 21637793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Evol Biol. 2011 Apr 16;11:102. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-11-102.

The sequence, structure and evolutionary features of HOTAIR in mammals.

He S(1), Liu S, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Section, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510515, China.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been
identified recently. Different from all the others that function in cis to
regulate local gene expression, the newly identified HOTAIR is located between
HoxC11 and HoxC12 in the human genome and regulates HoxD expression in multiple
tissues. Like the well-characterised lncRNA Xist, HOTAIR binds to polycomb
proteins to methylate histones at multiple HoxD loci, but unlike Xist, many
details of its structure and function, as well as the trans regulation, remain
unclear. Moreover, HOTAIR is involved in the aberrant regulation of gene
expression in cancer.
RESULTS: To identify conserved domains in HOTAIR and study the phylogenetic
distribution of this lncRNA, we searched the genomes of 10 mammalian and 3
non-mammalian vertebrates for matches to its 6 exons and the two conserved
domains within the 1800 bp exon6 using Infernal. There was just one high-scoring 
hit for each mammal, but many low-scoring hits were found in both mammals and
non-mammalian vertebrates. These hits and their flanking genes in four placental 
mammals and platypus were examined to determine whether HOTAIR contained elements
shared by other lncRNAs. Several of the hits were within unknown transcripts or
ncRNAs, many were within introns of, or antisense to, protein-coding genes, and
conservation of the flanking genes was observed only between human and
chimpanzee. Phylogenetic analysis revealed discrete evolutionary dynamics for
orthologous sequences of HOTAIR exons. Exon1 at the 5' end and a domain in exon6 
near the 3' end, which contain domains that bind to multiple proteins, have
evolved faster in primates than in other mammals. Structures were predicted for
exon1, two domains of exon6 and the full HOTAIR sequence. The sequence and
structure of two fragments, in exon1 and the domain B of exon6 respectively, were
identified to robustly occur in predicted structures of exon1, domain B of exon6 
and the full HOTAIR in mammals.
CONCLUSIONS: HOTAIR exists in mammals, has poorly conserved sequences and
considerably conserved structures, and has evolved faster than nearby HoxC genes.
Exons of HOTAIR show distinct evolutionary features, and a 239 bp domain in the
1804 bp exon6 is especially conserved. These features, together with the absence 
of some exons and sequences in mouse, rat and kangaroo, suggest ab initio
generation of HOTAIR in marsupials. Structure prediction identifies two fragments
in the 5' end exon1 and the 3' end domain B of exon6, with sequence and structure
invariably occurring in various predicted structures of exon1, the domain B of
exon6 and the full HOTAIR.

PMCID: PMC3103462
PMID: 21496275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Asian J Androl. 2011 Mar;13(2):342-6. doi: 10.1038/aja.2010.160. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Analysis of the methylation pattern of six gene promoters in sperm of men with
abnormal protamination.

Nanassy L(1), Carrell DT.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology and IVF Laboratories, Department of Surgery, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.

It has recently been shown that alteration of the methylation pattern of
imprinted genes is associated with different types of male infertility. The
objective of our study was to investigate the methylation pattern of selected
gene promoters in sperm of patients with abnormal protamine replacement. The
promoters of OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HOXC11, miR-17 and CREM were analyzed using
bisulfite sequencing and the percentage of DNA methylation was compared between
patients with an abnormal protamine 1/protamine 2 (P1/P2) ratio and
normozoospermic controls. No significant quantitative differences were found
between groups of patients with either an abnormally high or low P1/P2 ratio
compared to normal controls. However, two individual samples from infertile
subjects (2/20, 10%) showed an altered methylation pattern for the CREM gene
promoter that was not found in control samples. These two samples had a
significantly higher (P<0.05) promoter methylation (5.58 and 4.23%, respectively)
compared to the control group (0.46%). In conclusion, in our pilot study, extreme
methylations defects were not seen broadly in severely infertile men. However,
two patients exhibited altered methylation of the CREM gene, which may be either 
causative or a result of abnormal protmaine replacement.

PMCID: PMC3739198
PMID: 21196940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Development. 2010 Nov;137(22):3795-800. doi: 10.1242/dev.053447.

Hox11 genes establish synovial joint organization and phylogenetic
characteristics in developing mouse zeugopod skeletal elements.

Koyama E(1), Yasuda T, Minugh-Purvis N, Kinumatsu T, Yallowitz AR, Wellik DM,
Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, College of Medicine, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. eiki.koyama@jefferson.edu

Hox11 genes are essential for zeugopod skeletal element development but their
roles in synovial joint formation remain largely unknown. Here, we show that the 
elbow and knee joints of mouse embryos lacking all Hox11 paralogous genes are
specifically remodeled and reorganized. The proximal ends of developing mutant
ulna and radius elements became morphologically similar and formed an
anatomically distinct elbow joint. The mutant ulna lacked the olecranon that
normally attaches to the triceps brachii muscle tendon and connects the humerus
to the ulna. In its place, an ulnar patella-like element developed that expressed
lubricin on its ventral side facing the joint and was connected to the triceps
muscle tendon. In mutant knees, both tibia and fibula fully articulated with an
enlarged femoral epiphyseal end that accommodated both elements, and the
neo-tripartite knee joint was enclosed in a single synovial cavity and displayed 
an additional anterior ligament. The mutant joints also exhibited a different
organization of the superficial zone of articular cartilage that normally exerts 
an anti-friction function. In conclusion, Hox11 genes co-regulate and coordinate 
the development of zeugopod skeletal elements and adjacent elbow and knee joints,
and dictate joint identity, morphogenesis and anatomical and functional
organization. Notably, the ulnar patella and tripartite knee joints in the mouse 
mutants actually characterize several lower vertebrates, including certain
reptiles and amphibians. The re-emergence of such anatomical structures suggests 
that their genetic blueprint is still present in the mouse genome but is normally
modified to the needs of the mammalian joint-formation program by distinct Hox11 
function.

PMCID: PMC3049277
PMID: 20978074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Womens Health (Lond Engl). 2010 Jul;6(4):493. doi: 10.2217/whe.10.12.

New findings offer insight into resistance to breast cancer therapy.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 20597624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1585-94. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3713. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

Interaction of developmental transcription factor HOXC11 with steroid receptor
coactivator SRC-1 mediates resistance to endocrine therapy in breast cancer
[corrected].

McIlroy M(1), McCartan D, Early S, O Gaora P, Pennington S, Hill AD, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology Research, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons 
in Ireland, Dublin D2, Ireland.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 15;70(8):3413.

Mechanisms of acquired resistance to endocrine therapy in breast cancer, a major 
clinical challenge, are poorly understood. We have used a mass spectrometry-based
screen to identify proteins that are associated with the endocrine-resistant
phenotype. In this study, we report the identification of a novel pathway of
resistance to endocrine therapy involving interactions of the developmental
transcription HOXC11 with the steroid receptor coactivator protein SRC-1, which
is a strong predictor of reduced disease-free survival in breast cancer patients.
HOXC11 and SRC-1 cooperate to regulate expression of the calcium-binding protein 
S100beta in resistant breast cancer cells. Nuclear HOXC11 and S100beta were found
to strongly predict poor disease-free survival in breast cancer patients (n =
560; hazard ratios: 5.79 and 5.82, respectively; P < 0.0001). Elevated serum
levels of S100beta detected in patients also predicted reduced disease-free
survival (n = 80; hazard ratio: 5.3; P = 0.004). Our findings define a
biomolecular interaction network that drives an adaptive response to endocrine
therapy with negative consequences for survival in breast cancer.

PMID: 20145129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Sep;193(2):109-11. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.04.015.

A NUP98-positive acute myeloid leukemia with a t(11;12)(p15;q13) without HOXC
cluster gene involvement.

La Starza R(1), Brandimarte L, Pierini V, Nofrini V, Gorello P, Crescenzi B,
Berchicci L, Matteucci C, Romoli S, Beacci D, Rosati R, Martelli MF, Mecucci C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, University of Perugia,
Ematologia e Trapianto di Midollo Osseo, Ospedale S.M. della Misericordia,
(Padiglione B, piano -2), S. Andrea delle Fratte, 06156 Perugia, Italy.

We report a case of adult acute myeloid leukemia with a new t(11;12)(p15;q13)
underlying a NUP98 rearrangement without HOXC cluster gene involvement. We
designed a specific double-color double-fusion FISH assay to discriminate between
this t(11;12)(p15;q13) and those producing NUP98-HOXC11 or NUP98-HOXC13. Our
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed that putative candidate partners
mapping 600 kilobases centromeric to HOXC were RARG (retinoic acid receptor
gamma), MFSD5 (major facilitator superfamily domain containing 5), and ESPL1
(extra spindle pole bodies homolog 1). It is noteworthy that so far only ESPL1
has been implicated in human cancers. This FISH assay is useful for diagnostic
screening of NUP98-positive leukemias.

PMID: 19665072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 30;8:93. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-93.

Evidence for Hox-specified positional identities in adult vasculature.

Pruett ND(1), Visconti RP, Jacobs DF, Scholz D, McQuinn T, Sundberg JP,
Awgulewitsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathan
Lucas Street, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. pruettnd@musc.edu

BACKGROUND: The concept of specifying positional information in the adult
cardiovascular system is largely unexplored. While the Hox transcriptional
regulators have to be viewed as excellent candidates for assuming such a role,
little is known about their presumptive cardiovascular control functions and in
vivo expression patterns.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that conventional reporter gene analysis in transgenic
mice is a useful approach for defining highly complex Hox expression patterns in 
the adult vascular network as exemplified by our lacZ reporter gene models for
Hoxa3 and Hoxc11. These mice revealed expression in subsets of vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs) and endothelial cells (ECs) located in distinct regions of
the vasculature that roughly correspond to the embryonic expression domains of
the two genes. These reporter gene patterns were validated as authentic
indicators of endogenous gene expression by immunolabeling and PCR analysis.
Furthermore, we show that persistent reporter gene expression in cultured cells
derived from vessel explants facilitates in vitro characterization of phenotypic 
properties as exemplified by the differential response of Hoxc11-lacZ-positive
versus-negative cells in migration assays and to serum.
CONCLUSION: The data support a conceptual model of Hox-specified positional
identities in adult blood vessels, which is of likely relevance for understanding
the mechanisms underlying regional physiological diversities in the
cardiovascular system. The data also demonstrate that conventional Hox reporter
gene mice are useful tools for visualizing complex Hox expression patterns in the
vascular network that might be unattainable otherwise. Finally, these mice are a 
resource for the isolation and phenotypic characterization of specific
subpopulations of vascular cells marked by distinct Hox expression profiles.

PMCID: PMC2570687
PMID: 18826643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 15;319(2):396-405. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.044. Epub 2008
Apr 11.

Hoxd11 specifies a program of metanephric kidney development within the
intermediate mesoderm of the mouse embryo.

Mugford JW(1), Sipilä P, Kobayashi A, Behringer RR, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The mammalian kidney consists of an array of tubules connected to a ductal system
that collectively function to control water/salt balance and to remove waste from
the organisms' circulatory system. During mammalian embryogenesis, three kidney
structures form within the intermediate mesoderm. The two most anterior
structures, the pronephros and the mesonephros, are transitory and largely
non-functional, while the most posterior, the metanephros, persists as the adult 
kidney. We have explored the mechanisms underlying regional specific
differentiation of the kidney forming mesoderm. Previous studies have shown a
requirement for Hox11 paralogs (Hoxa11, Hoxc11 and Hoxd11) in metanephric
development. Mice lacking all Hox11 activity fail to form metanephric kidney
structures. We demonstrate that the Hox11 paralog expression is restricted in the
intermediate mesoderm to the posterior, metanephric level. When Hoxd11 is
ectopically activated in the anterior mesonephros, we observe a partial
transformation to a metanephric program of development. Anterior Hoxd11(+) cells 
activate Six2, a transcription factor required for the maintenance of metanephric
tubule progenitors. Additionally, Hoxd11(+) mesonephric tubules exhibit an
altered morphology and activate several metanephric specific markers normally
confined to distal portions of the functional nephron. Collectively, our data
support a model where Hox11 paralogs specify a metanephric developmental program 
in responsive intermediate mesoderm. This program maintains tubule forming
progenitors and instructs a metanephric specific pattern of nephron
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2580739
PMID: 18485340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Cell Mol Med. 2007 Mar-Apr;11(2):299-306.

HOXC6 and HOXC11 increase transcription of S100beta gene in BrdU-induced in vitro
differentiation of GOTO neuroblastoma cells into Schwannian cells.

Zhang X(1), Hamada J, Nishimoto A, Takahashi Y, Murai T, Tada M, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15 Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.
doggirl999@hotmail.com

HOX genes encode transcription factors that play a key role in morphogenesis and 
cell differentiation during embryogenesis of animals. Human neuroblastoma cells
are known to be chemically induced to differentiate into neuronal or Schwannian
cells. In the present study, we investigated the roles of HOX genes in
differentiation of GOTO neuroblastoma cells into Schwannian cells. When GOTO
cells were grown in the presence of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU), they
increased the expressions of two HOX genes (HOXC6 and HOXC11) and marker genes
for Schwannian cells (S100beta and myelin basic protein). Forced expression of
HOXC11 alone or both HOXC6 isoform 1 and HOXC11 induced the expression of
S100beta in GOTO cells. In transient transfection experiments, the overexpression
of HOXC6 and HOXC11 transactivated the S100beta promoter-reporter construct.
Taken together, our results suggest that HOXC6 and HOXC11 are associated with
differentiation of GOTO cells into Schwannian cells through the transcriptional
activation of S100beta gene.

PMCID: PMC3822828
PMID: 17488478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cancer Res. 2006 May 1;66(9):4584-90.

Trans-repressive effect of NUP98-PMX1 on PMX1-regulated c-FOS gene through
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 by FG repeats.

Bai XT(1), Gu BW, Yin T, Niu C, Xi XD, Zhang J, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
P.R. China.

The formation of fusion genes between NUP98 and members of the HOX family
represents a critical factor for the genesis of acute leukemia or acute
transformation of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). To gain insights into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the leukemogenesis of NUP98-HOX fusion products, 
we cloned NUP98-PMX1 from a CML-blast crisis patient with t(1;11) as a secondary 
chromosomal translocation, and functionally studied the fusion products in detail
through various molecular and protein biochemical assays. In addition to many
interesting features, we have found that the NUP98-PMX1 fusion protein exerts a
repressive effect on PMX1 or serum response factor-mediated c-FOS activation,
probably through the recruitment of a common corepressor histone deacetylase 1 by
FG domains of the NUP98-PMX1 fusion protein. Moreover, we have provided evidence 
that the FG domains of NUP98-PMX1 and two other NUP98-containing fusion proteins,
i.e., NUP98-HOXA9 and NUP98-HOXC11, all exhibit dual binding ability to both CREB
binding protein, a coactivator, and histone deacetylase 1, a corepressor.
Accordingly, we have hypothesized that this dual binding activity is shared by
most, if not all, NUP98-HOX-involved fusion proteins, enabling these fusion
proteins to act as both trans-activators and trans-repressors, and contributing
to the genesis of acute leukemia or acute transformation of CML.

PMID: 16651408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):673-9.

Aberrant expression of HOX genes in human invasive breast carcinoma.

Makiyama K(1), Hamada J, Takada M, Murakawa K, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Tamoto E,
Shindo G, Matsunaga A, Teramoto K, Komuro K, Kondo S, Katoh H, Koike T, Moriuchi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

HOX genes are known not only as master genes that control the morphogenesis, but 
also as regulator genes that maintain tissue or organ specificity in the adult
body. We hypothesized that dysregulated expression of HOX genes was associated
with tumor development and malignant progression such as invasion and metastasis.
In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of 39 HOX genes in human
invasive ductal breast cancer tissues and normal tissues by the real-time RT-PCR 
method. We found 11 HOX genes (HOXA1, A2, A3, A5, A9, C11, D3, D4, D8, D9 and
D10) expression levels of which were significantly different between cancerous
and normal tissues. All 10 genes except HOXC11 were expressed at lower levels in 
cancerous tissues than normal tissues. Comparing expression levels of each HOX
gene among the different types of cancer tissues, the expression level of HOXB7
was lower in lymph node metastasis-positive cancer tissues than negative cancer
tissues; those of HOXD12 and D13 were higher in progesterone receptor-positive
cancer tissues than negative cancer tissues; and the expression level of HOXC5
was lower in cancerous tissues with mutated-type p53 than in normal and cancerous
tissues with wild-type p53. These results suggest that the aberrant expression of
HOX genes is related to the development of breast cancer and malignant behavior
of cancer cells.

PMID: 15756441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2004 Nov;79(6):719-26.

[Expression of mRNA for HOX gene in human breast cancer and non-cancerous
tissues].

[Article in Japanese]

Makiyama K.

PMID: 15675302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Lett. 2004 Oct 8;214(1):19-33.

Identification of novel genes associated with the response to 5-FU treatment in
gastric cancer cell lines using a cDNA microarray.

Park JS(1), Young Yoon S, Kim JM, Yeom YI, Kim YS, Kim NS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genomics, Division of Genomics and Proteomics, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-333,
South Korea.

The 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is an anticancer drug that is widely used in the
treatment of cancer. To identify novel genes associated with 5-FU in gastric
cancer, the time-dependent expression profiling of genes in response to 5-FU was 
examined in 5-FU sensitive and/or resistant gastric cancer cell lines using a
'KUGI 14 K cDNA chip' containing 14,081 unigenes obtained from human gastric
cancer cell lines and tissues. By this analysis, we obtained 13 genes which are
directly associated with sensitivity or resistance to 5-FU. Of these genes, 11
were found to be commonly up-regulated only in the 5-FU sensitive cell lines, and
2 were oppositely regulated in both of 5-FU sensitive and resistant cell lines.
These genes were determined to be involved in cell surface, apoptosis, cell cycle
and signal transduction. Of these genes, the expression levels of ZFP100, 4F2hc, 
FLJ11021, CSTF3, PPP1R14A, DDB2, C6orf139, CDKN1A, HOXC11 and FLJ38860 were
confirmed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. In addition, seven genes containing RRMI, 
UP1 and K-EST0037597 were found to be commonly up-regulated in both cell lines.
In addition, the expression of genes such as TP, OPRT, TS and DPD, which have
been previously known to be involved in 5-FU metabolism, were examined in both of
5-FU sensitive and resistant cell lines. These results provide not only
predictive biomarkers for 5-FU sensitivity or resistance to human gastric cancer,
but also a new molecular basis for understanding the mechanism of cellular
cytoxicity to 5-FU.

PMID: 15331170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Leukemia. 2003 Sep;17(9):1858-64.

Major form of NUP98/HOXC11 fusion in adult AML with t(11;12)(p15;q13)
translocation exhibits aberrant trans-regulatory activity.

Gu BW(1), Wang Q, Wang JM, Xue YQ, Fang J, Wong KF, Chen B, Shi ZZ, Shi JY, Bai
XT, Wu DH, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin
Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China.

Three adult patients with de novo acute myeloid leukemia of distinct subtypes
harboring t(11;12)(p15;q13) have been investigated to characterize the genes
involved in that translocation. Through molecular cytogenetics, a chromosome
break was detected at the 3' part of nucleoporin 98 (NUP98) gene at 11p15. Using 
rapid amplification of cDNA end, we identified the partner gene at 12q13, HOXC11.
Molecular analysis showed that exon 12 of NUP98 was fused in-frame to exon 2 of
HOXC11 in all three cases with t(11;12)(p15;q13). Therefore, this type of fusion 
may represent the major form of the NUP98-HOXC11 chimera so far reported.
Moreover, two out of three cases had a confirmed deletion of the 3' part of NUP98
gene and more telomeric region of 11p harboring a group of tumor-suppressor
genes. Interestingly, the NUP98-HOXC11 protein when assayed in a GAL4 reporter
system, showed an aberrant trans-regulatory activity as compared to the wild-type
HOXC11 in both COS-7 and HL-60 cells. Therefore, NUP98-HOXC11 may contribute to
the leukemogenesis by interfering with the cellular mechanism of transcriptional 
regulation.

PMID: 12970787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):39-45. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

HOXC and HOXD gene expression in human endometrium: lack of redundancy with HOXA 
paralogs.

Akbas GE(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOXA genes, essential regulators of differentiation in the embryo, are also
essential for adult cyclic endometrial development and for endometrial
receptivity. Mice deficient in Hoxa10 or Hoxa11 exhibit reduced fertility because
of defects in implantation. We hypothesized that HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11, paralogs of HOXA10 and HOXA11, might also be involved in endometrial
development. Here, we showed that the expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11 was evident throughout the menstrual cycle in the endometrium by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the
secretory phase, expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, and HOXD11 decreased to 4% and
HOXD10 decreased to 25% of the proliferative phase expression (P < 0.001, P <
0.001, P < 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively). In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of each of these HOX genes primarily in the stroma and confirmed the
decreased expression in the secretory phase. HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and HOXD11
expression was not regulated by sex steroids in primary endometrial stromal cells
or Ishikawa cells. The expression and regulation of HOXC and HOXD genes varies
from that of HOXA10 and HOXA11. Whereas HOXA10 and HOXA11 are regulators of
endometrial differentiation, HOXC and HOXD genes likely regulate endometrial
proliferation. Paralogous HOX genes typically have a redundant function in
development; a novel evolutionary divergence of paralogous Hox genes has resulted
in HOXC and HOXD genes having distinct expression patterns, regulation, and
likely also distinct functions from HOXA genes. A network of HOX genes may be
involved in regulating multiple aspects of endometrial development, including
both proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 12954737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2002 Aug 15;62(16):4571-4.

Novel NUP98-HOXC11 fusion gene resulted from a chromosomal break within exon 1 of
HOXC11 in acute myeloid leukemia with t(11;12)(p15;q13).

Taketani T(1), Taki T, Shibuya N, Kikuchi A, Hanada R, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The NUP98 gene has been reported to be fused to 11 partner genes in hematological
malignancies with 11p15 translocations. Among NUP98 fusion partner genes, HOXA
and HOXD clusters have been reported thus far; however, no HOXC or HOXB clusters 
have been reported. We identified a novel NUP98-HOXC11 fusion gene in a pediatric
patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia having t(11;12)(p15;q13). The
breakpoint of NUP98 was located within a LINE repetitive sequence (HAL1) in
intron 12, and the breakpoint of HOXC11 was located within exon 1, resulting in a
NUP98-HOXC11 in-frame fusion transcript containing exon 12 of NUP98 fused to a
part of exon 1 of HOXC11 with an 8-bp insertion derived from the intron sequence 
just 5' of the breakpoint of NUP98. The NUP98-HOXC11 fusion protein consists of
the NH2-terminal phenylalanine-glycine repeat motif of NUP98 and the
COOH-terminal homeodomain of HOXC11. Although the frequency of HOXC11 expression 
was not high in leukemia cell lines, its expression was significantly more
frequent in myeloid than lymphoid leukemia cell lines. These data suggest that
the NUP98-HOXC11 fusion protein plays a role in the pathogenesis of myeloid
malignancies.

PMID: 12183408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genes Dev. 2002 Jun 1;16(11):1423-32.

Hox11 paralogous genes are essential for metanephric kidney induction.

Wellik DM(1), Hawkes PJ, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112-5331, USA.

The mammalian Hox complex is divided into four linkage groups containing 13 sets 
of paralogous genes. These paralogous genes have retained functional redundancy
during evolution. For this reason, loss of only one or two Hox genes within a
paralogous group often results in incompletely penetrant phenotypes which are
difficult to interpret by molecular analysis. For example, mice individually
mutant for Hoxa11 or Hoxd11 show no discernible kidney abnormalities.
Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants, however, demonstrate hypoplasia of the kidneys. As 
described in this study, removal of the last Hox11 paralogous member, Hoxc11,
results in the complete loss of metanephric kidney induction. In these triple
mutants, the metanephric blastema condenses, and expression of early patterning
genes, Pax2 and Wt1, is unperturbed. Eya1 expression is also intact. Six2
expression, however, is absent, as is expression of the inducing growth factor,
Gdnf. In the absence of Gdnf, ureteric bud formation is not initiated. Molecular 
analysis of this phenotype demonstrates that Hox11 control of early metanephric
induction is accomplished by the interaction of Hox11 genes with the pax-eya-six 
regulatory cascade, a pathway that may be used by Hox genes more generally for
the induction of multiple structures along the anteroposterior axis.

PMCID: PMC186320
PMID: 12050119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 2000 Jun;3(6):367-73.

Repression of transcription by HoxC11 upon phorbol ester stimulation.

Sur IP(1), Toftgård R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences at Novum, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, SE-14157,
Sweden. inderpreet.sur@cnt.ki.se

Hox genes encode transcription factors with a conserved DNA-binding domain and
exhibit similar DNA-binding preferences. The in vivo specificity required for
their biological function is brought about by combinatorial interactions with
other factors. Such interactions also modulate their activation state. Here we
show that HoxC11 can either activate or repress transcription in a
signal-specific manner. We report the isolation of HoxC11 in a yeast one-hybrid
screen for factors binding to a phorbol-ester,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) response element (VLTRE), which is
also a target for TPA-induced binding of Rel factors in gel-shift experiments.
Although we detect no binding of in vitro translated HoxC11 to the TPA response
element in EMSA, overexpression of HoxC11 in the HepG2 cell line leads to a
complete block of TPA-induced transcription from a VLTRE-luciferase reporter.
There is, however, no repression of the basal levels. The repression is
furthermore not dependent on homeo-domain DNA binding. Our data suggest an
interaction of HoxC11 with the basal-transcription machinery. We propose that
HoxC11 is capable of mediating transcriptional activation or repression in a
signal-specific manner and that its activation of the DNA target sequence in
yeast might reflect in vivo recruitment to the promoter complex.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11032759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mech Dev. 2000 Apr;92(2):113-23.

Loss of fibula in mice overexpressing Hoxc11.

Papenbrock T(1), Visconti RP, Awgulewitsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathan
Lucas Street--CSB, Charleston, USA.

This study demonstrates severe malformations of the appendicular skeleton in mice
overexpressing Hoxc11. Consistent with the endogenous expression pattern, the
most conspicuous defect in Hoxc11 overexpressing neonates is aplasia/hypoplasia
of the fibula. This is preceded at day 15.5 of embryonic development by marked
reduction of chondrocyte proliferation, lack of PTHR expressing prehypertrophic
cells, and the absence of hypertrophic and calcifying chondrocytes. Combined with
the lack of an overt phenotype in the majority of Hoxc11 overexpressing embryos
at day 13.5, the data suggest inhibition of chondrocyte differentiation during
the elongation phase of the fibula bone as a primary effect of elevated Hoxc11
expression. This interpretation is further corroborated by Hoxc11 reporter gene
expression in the joint areas at embryonic day 15.5, suggesting an involvement of
the periarticular perichondrium in generating the mutant phenotype.

PMID: 10727851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Science. 1999 Mar 12;283(5408):1736-9.

Role of Pitx1 upstream of Tbx4 in specification of hindlimb identity.

Logan M(1), Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1999 Mar 12;283(5408):1615-6.

In spite of recent breakthroughs in understanding limb patterning, the genetic
factors determining the differences between the forelimb and the hindlimb have
not been understood. The genes Pitx1 and Tbx4 encode transcription factors that
are expressed throughout the developing hindlimb but not forelimb buds.
Misexpression of Pitx1 in the chick wing bud induced distal expression of Tbx4,
as well as HoxC10 and HoxC11, which are normally restricted to hindlimb
expression domains. Wing buds in which Pitx1 was misexpressed developed into
limbs with some morphological characteristics of hindlimbs: the flexure was
altered to that normally observed in legs, the digits were more toe-like in their
relative size and shape, and the muscle pattern was transformed to that of a leg.

PMID: 10073939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13297-306.

The HOXC11 homeodomain protein interacts with the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
promoter and stimulates HNF1alpha-dependent transcription.

Mitchelmore C(1), Troelsen JT, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N,
Denmark. mitch@biobase.dk

The lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) gene is expressed specifically in the
enterocytes of the small intestine. LPH levels are high in newborn mammals, but
decrease after weaning. We have previously suggested that the promoter element
CE-LPH1, located at -40 to -54, plays an important role in this down-regulation, 
because the DNA binding activity of a nuclear factor that binds to this site is
present specifically in small intestinal extracts and is down-regulated after
weaning. In an effort to clone CE-LPH1-binding factors, a yeast one-hybrid
genetic selection was used, resulting in the isolation of a partial cDNA encoding
the human homeodomain protein HOXC11. The full-length HOXC11 sequence was
obtained by rapid amplification of cDNA ends. It was shown in a yeast assay and
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that HOXC11 binds to the CE-LPH1 element 
with similar specificity to the endogenous intestinal factor. Two HOXC11
transcript sizes were identified by Northern blot analysis. The larger transcript
(2.1 kilobase pairs) is likely to contain a translational start site in good
context and is present in HeLa cells. The shorter 1.7-kilobase pair transcript,
present in HeLa and Caco-2 cells, probably encodes a protein lacking 114 amino
acids at the N-terminal end. Both forms of HOXC11 potentiate transcriptional
activation of the LPH promoter by HNF1alpha. The expression of HOXC11 mRNA in
human fetal intestine suggests a role in early intestinal development.

PMID: 9582375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mech Dev. 1998 Jan;70(1-2):133-45.

The mouse Hoxc11 gene: genomic structure and expression pattern.

Hostikka SL(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City 84112-5331, USA.

The mouse and human Hox complex consists of 39 genes in four linkage groups
(A-D). Although the structure and expression patterns of most of these genes have
been reported, the 5' members of the Hox C linkage group have been only partially
characterized. Herein we report the primary and genomic structure of the mouse
Hoxc11 gene as well as its expression pattern. The Hoxc11 gene encodes a 304
amino acid protein which is translated from a 2.2 kb transcript, derived from two
exons. Hoxc11 mRNA is found in the most posterior region of the developing embryo
commencing at 9.5 days of gestation. Expression is detected in the posterior
neural tube, dorsal root ganglia, prevertebrae and hindlimbs. Expression is also 
found in metanephric mesenchyme which, later in development, becomes restricted
to the cortical region of the developing kidney. In the developing genitalia,
prominent expression is first observed in the posterior urogenital sinus that
gives rise to the urethra, vagina and prostate. Later, expression is seen in
paramesonephric and mesonephric ducts and in the genital tubercle. In the
hindlimbs, Hoxc11 expression is seen in the mesenchyme posterior to the region
forming the femur and fibula, but does not extend anteriorly to the region giving
rise to the tibia or distally to the tarsal bones.

PMID: 9510030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


