
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Feb;20(4):664-72.

Identification of key genes involved in HER2-positive breast cancer.

Zhong BL(1), Bian LJ, Wang GM, Zhou YF, Chen YY, Peng F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Second People's Hospital of Guangdong
Province/Guangdong Provincial Emergency Hospital, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
kejingwangkjw@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: As an invasive cancer, breast cancer is the most common tumour in
women and is with high mortality. To study the mechanisms of HER2-positive breast
cancer, we analyzed microarray of GSE52194.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GSE52194 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus
including 5 HER2-positive breast cancer samples and 3 normal breast samples.
Using cuffdiff software, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially
expressed long non-coding RNAs (DE-lncRNAs) were screened. Functions of the DEGs 
were analyzed by Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses. Then,
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the DEGs was constructed using
Cytoscape and modules of the PPI network were screened by CFinder. Moreover,
lncRNA-DEG pairs were screened.
RESULTS: Total 209 lncRNA transcriptions were predicted, and 996 differentially
expressed transcriptions were screened. Besides, FOS had interaction
relationships with EGR1 and SOD2 separately in module E and F of the PPI network 
for the DEGs. Moreover, there were many lncRNA-DEG pairs (e.g.
TCONS_00003876-EGR1, TCONS_00003876-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-BCL6B, 
lnc-TEAD4-1:1-FOS and lnc-TEAD4-1:1-BCL6B), meanwhile, co-expressed DEGs of
TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and lnc-TEAD4-1:1 were enriched in p53 signaling
pathway, MAPK signaling pathway and cancer-related pathways, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: ANXA1, EGR1, BCL6, SOD2, FOS, TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and
lnc-TEAD4-1:1 might play a role in HER2-positive breast cancer.

PMID: 26957268  [PubMed - in process]


2. Hematology. 2016 Feb 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Bioinformatics analysis of molecular mechanism of the expansion of hematopoietic 
stem cell transduced by HOXB4/HOXC4.

Xin C, Zhao C, Yin X, Wu S, Su Z.

Objectives We aimed to identify the potential HOXB4/HOXC4 downstream effectors
and elucidate their regulatory mechanism in the expansion of hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC). Methods The microarray data GSE24379 were downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus database, including 12 human CD34(+) hematopoietic cells with 
irradiated EGFP-, HOXB4-, or HOXC4-transduced MS-5 cells, respectively. Then
common differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in HOXB4- and HOXC4-treated
hematopoietic cells (HOXB4&HOXC4.DEGs) were screened out. Protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network was constructed and functional modules analysis was
performed. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the Database for
Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery. Besides, transcription
regulatory network (TRN) was constructed to screen transcription factors (TFs)
corresponding to HOXB4&HOXC4.DEGs. Results A total of 408 HOXB4&HOXC4.DEGs (373
up- and 35 down-regulated) in hematopoietic cells were identified. Tumor protein 
p53 (TP53) had the highest degrees in PPI network. Cyclin B1 (CCNB1) was a hub
node in Cluster 1. V-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (MYC) and 
MYC-associated factor X (MAX) were important TFs with higher degrees. Meanwhile, 
MYC, TP53, and CCNB1 were significantly enriched in cell cycle. Conclusion MYC,
MAX, TP53, and CCNB1 may be crucial HOXB4/HOXC4 downstream molecules potentially 
involved in HSCs expansion, and HOXB4 and HOXC4 homeoprotein could display
positive effects on expansion of human HSCs via regulating these genes.

PMID: 26923762  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Jan 26. pii: S1567-133X(16)30002-3. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.01.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Fat accumulation in differentiated brown adipocytes is linked with expression of 
Hox genes.

Singh S(1), Rajput YS(2), Barui AK(3), Sharma R(3), Datta TK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy Researikch Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, 132001, India. (2)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy
Researikch Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. Electronic address:
ys_rajput@rediffmail.com. (3)Dairy Chemistry Division, National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. (4)Animal Biotechnology Centre,
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are involved in body plan of embryo along the
anterior-posterior axis. Presence of several Hox genes in white adipose tissue
(WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT) is indicative of involvement of Hox genes in
adipogenesis. We propose that differentiation inducing agents viz.
isobutyl-methyl-xanthine (IBMX), indomethacin, dexamethasone (DEX),
triiodothyronine (T3) and insulin may regulate differentiation in brown adipose
tissue through Hox genes. In vitro culture of brown fat stromalvascular fraction 
(SVF) in presence or absence of differentiation inducing agents was used for
establishing relationship between fat accumulation in differentiated adipocytes
and expression of Hox genes. Relative expression of Pref1, UCP1 and Hox genes was
determined in different stages of adipogenesis. Presence or absence of IBMX,
indomethacin and DEX during differentiation of proliferated pre-adipocytes
resulted in marked differences in expression of Hox genes and lipid accumulation.
In presence of these inducing agents, lipid accumulation as well as expression of
HoxA1, HoxA5, HoxC4 &HoxC8 markedly enhanced. Irrespective of presence or absence
of T3, insulin down regulates HoxA10. T3 results in over expression of HoxA5,
HoxC4 and HoxC8 genes, whereas insulin up regulates expression of only HoxC8.
Findings suggest that accumulation of fat in differentiated adipocytes is linked 
with expression of Hox genes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26820751  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2015 Dec 31. doi: 10.1111/cga.12153. [Epub ahead of print]

Homeobox family Hoxc localization during murine palate formation.

Hirata A(1), Katayama K(2), Tsuji T(3), Imura H(4), Natsume N(4), Sugahara T(4), 
Kunieda T(3), Nakamura H(5), Otsuki Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Osaka Medical
College, 2-7, Daigaku-machi, Takatsuki, Osaka, 569-8686, Japan. (2)Division of
Functional Morphology, Department of Basic Veterinary Medicine, School of
Veterinary Medicine, Nippon Veterinary and Life Science University, 1-7-1,
Kyonancho, Musashino, Tokyo, 180-8602, Japan. (3)Department of Animal Science,
Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama University, 1-1-1,
Tsushima-naka, kita-ku, Okayama, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan. (4)Division of
Research and Treatment for Oral and Maxillofacial Congenital Anomalies, School of
Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University, 2-11, Suemori-dori, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya,
Aichi, 464-8651, Japan. (5)Department of Oral Histology, School of Dentistry,
Matsumoto Dental University, 1780, Hirooka-gobara, Shiojiri, Nagano, 399-0781,
Japan. (6)Osaka Medical College, 2-7, Daigaku-machi, Takatsuki, Osaka, 569-8686, 
Japan.

Homeobox genes play important roles in craniofacial morphogenesis. However, the
characteristics of the transcription factor Hoxc during palate formation remain
unclear. We examined the immunolocalization patterns of Hoxc5, Hoxc4, and Hoxc6
in palatogenesis of cleft palate (Eh/Eh) mice. On the other hand, mutations in
the FGF/FGFR pathway are exclusively associated with syndromic forms of cleft
palate. We also examined the immunolocalization of Fgfr1 and Erk1/2 to clarify
their relationships with Hoxc in palatogenesis. Some palatal epithelial cells
showed Hoxc5 labeling, while almost no labeling of mesenchymal cells was observed
in +/+ mice. As palate formation progressed in +/+ mice, Hoxc5, Hoxc4, and Hoxc6 
were observed in medial epithelial seam cells. Hoxc5 and Hoxc6 were detected in
the oral epithelium. The palatal mesenchyme also showed intense staining for
Fgfr1and Erk1/2 with progression of palate formation. In contrast, the palatal
shelves of Eh/Eh mice exhibited impaired horizontal growth and failed to fuse,
resulting in a cleft. Hoxc5 was observed in a few epithelial cells and diffusely 
in the mesenchyme of Eh/Eh palatal shelves. No or little labeling of Fgfr1 and
Erk1/2 was detected in the cleft palate of Eh/Eh mice. These findings suggest
that Hoxc genes are involved in palatogenesis. Furthermore, there may be the
differences in the localization pattern between Hoxc5, Hoxc4, and Hoxc6.
Additionally, Hoxc distribution in palatal cells during palate development may be
correlated with FGF signaling. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26718736  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Nov;68:42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.08.012.
Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Estrogen receptor signal in regulation of B cell activation during diverse immune
responses.

Asaba J(1), Bandyopadhyay M(2), Kindy M(3), Dasgupta S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, Saint James School of Medicine, Albert
Lake Drive, A-I-2640, The Quarter, British West Indies, Anguilla. (2)Department
of Biological Sciences, Trident Technical College, North Charleston, SC, USA.
(3)Strom Thurmond Building, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC,
USA. (4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, Saint James School of Medicine,
Albert Lake Drive, A-I-2640, The Quarter, P.O. Box 318, British West Indies,
Anguilla; Department of Biochemistry, Saint James School of Medicine, Albert Lake
Drive, A-I-2640, The Quarter, P.O. Box 318, British West Indies, Anguilla.
Electronic address: sdasgupta@mail.sjsm.org.

The role of signalling through oestrogen receptors (ERs) in the regulation of B
cell activation is an area of growing importance not only in terms protective
immunity but also in the determination of the mechanisms of the onset of
autoimmune disorders and cancers. The mode of signalling action of this single
chain nuclear receptor protein molecule depends on its ability to bind to the
promoters of Pax5, HOXC4 and apolipoprotein B RNA-editing enzyme
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) genes. ER-mediated transcriptional
regulation induces class switch recombination of the immunoglobulin heavy chain
variable (VH) to DH-JH genes and somatic hypermutation in developing B cells. The
mode of action of ER is associated with BCR-signal pathways that involve the
regulator proteins BAFF and APRIL. Additionally, the plasma membrane-bound G
protein-coupled oestrogen receptor-1 (GEPR1) directs diverse cell signalling
events in B cells that involve the MAPK pathways. These signals are immensely
important during progenitor and precursor B cell activation. We have focused our 
goals on the medicinal aspects of ER-signalling mechanisms and their effects on
polyclonal B cell activation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26299327  [PubMed - in process]


6. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 24;16(8):16816-32. doi: 10.3390/ijms160816816.

Differential DNA Methylation in Relation to Age and Health Risks of Obesity.

Mansego ML(1), Milagro FI(2), Zulet MÁ(3,)(4), Moreno-Aliaga MJ(1,)(5), Martínez 
JA(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)CIBERobn, Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la Nutrición, Institute of Health
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain and Department of Nutrition, Food Science and
Physiology, Nutrition Research Center, University of Navarra, Pamplona 31008,
Spain. mlmansego@unav.es. (2)CIBERobn, Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la
Nutrición, Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain and Department of
Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, Nutrition Research Center, University of 
Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain. fmilagro@unav.es. (3)CIBERobn, Fisiopatología de 
la Obesidad y la Nutrición, Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain and
Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, Nutrition Research Center, 
University of Navarra, Pamplona 31008, Spain. mazulet@unav.es. (4)Navarra
Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona 31008, Spain. mazulet@unav.es.
(5)Navarra Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona 31008, Spain.
mlmansego@unav.es. (6)CIBERobn, Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la Nutrición,
Institute of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain and Department of Nutrition, Food
Science and Physiology, Nutrition Research Center, University of Navarra,
Pamplona 31008, Spain. jalfmartinez@unav.es. (7)Navarra Institute for Health
Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona 31008, Spain. jalfmartinez@unav.es.

The aim of this study was to evaluate whether genome-wide levels of DNA
methylation are associated with age and the health risks of obesity (HRO);
defined according to BMI categories as "Low HRO" (overweight and class 1 obesity)
versus "High HRO" (class 2 and class 3 obesity). Anthropometric measurements were
assessed in a subsample of 48 volunteers from the Metabolic Syndrome Reduction in
Navarra (RESMENA) study and 24 women from another independent study, Effects of
Lipoic Acid and Eicosapentaenoic Acid in Human Obesity (OBEPALIP study). In the
pooled population; the methylation levels of 55 CpG sites were significantly
associated with age after Benjamini-Hochberg correction. In addition, DNA
methylation of three CpG sites located in ELOVL2; HOXC4 and PI4KB were further
negatively associated with their mRNA levels. Although no differentially
methylated CpG sites were identified in relation to HRO after multiple testing
correction; several nominally significant CpG sites were identified in genes
related to insulin signaling; energy and lipid metabolism. Moreover,
statistically significant associations between BMI or mRNA levels and two
HRO-related CpG sites located in GPR133 and ITGB5 are reported. As a conclusion, 
these findings from two Spanish cohorts add knowledge about the important role of
DNA methylation in the age-related regulation of gene expression. In addition; a 
relevant influence of age on DNA methylation in white blood cells was found, as
well as, on a trend level, novel associations between DNA methylation and
obesity.

PMCID: PMC4581172
PMID: 26213922  [PubMed - in process]


7. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 1;21(13):3061-70. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-3334.
Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Identification of a Candidate Gene Panel for the Early Diagnosis of Prostate
Cancer.

Leyten GH(1), Hessels D(2), Smit FP(2), Jannink SA(2), de Jong H(2), Melchers
WJ(3), Cornel EB(4), de Reijke TM(5), Vergunst H(6), Kil P(7), Knipscheer BC(8), 
Hulsbergen-van de Kaa CA(9), Mulders PF(1), van Oort IM(1), Schalken JA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department of Urology, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands. (2)Noviogendix, Department of Research and Development,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (3)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Department of Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Noviogendix, Department of
Research and Development, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (4)ZGT Hospital, Department 
of Urology, Hengelo, the Netherlands. (5)AMC University Medical Centre,
Department of Urology, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (6)CWZ Hospital, Department of
Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (7)St Elisabeth Hospital, Department of
Urology, Tilburg, the Netherlands. (8)Scheper Hospital, Department of Urology,
Emmen, the Netherlands. (9)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Department
of Pathology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (10)Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, Department of Urology, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. Noviogendix, Department
of Research and Development, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
jack.schalken@radboudumc.nl.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2015 May;12(5):242.

PURPOSE: Serum PSA (sPSA) testing has led to the identification of patients with 
indolent prostate cancer, and inevitably overtreatment has become a concern.
Progensa PCA3 urine testing was shown to improve the diagnosis of prostate
cancer, but its diagnostic value for aggressive prostate cancer is limited.
Therefore, urinary biomarkers that can be used for prediction of Gleason score =7
prostate cancer in biopsies are urgently needed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using gene expression profiling data, 39 prostate cancer
biomarkers were identified. After quantitative PCR analysis on tissue specimens
and urinary sediments, eight promising biomarkers for the urinary detection of
prostate cancer were selected (ONECUT2, HOXC4, HOXC6, DLX1, TDRD1, NKAIN1,
MS4A8B, PPFIA2). The hypothesis that biomarker combinations improve the
diagnostic value for aggressive prostate cancer was tested on 358 urinary
sediments of an intention-to-treat cohort.
RESULTS: A urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) had higher accuracy 
[area under the curve (AUC), 0.77; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.71-0.83] to
predict Gleason score =7 prostate cancer in biopsies compared with Progensa PCA3 
(AUC, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.62-0.75) or sPSA (AUC, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.65-0.78). Combining 
the three-gene panel with sPSA further improved the predictive accuracy (AUC,
0.81; 95% CI, 0.75-0.86). The accuracy of the three-gene predictive model was
maintained in subgroups with low sPSA concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The urinary three-gene panel (HOXC6, TDRD1, and DLX1) represents a
promising tool to identify patients with aggressive prostate cancer, also in
those with low sPSA values. The combination of the urinary three-gene panel with 
sPSA bears great potential for the early diagnosis of patients with clinically
significant prostate cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25788493  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):5933-50. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401702. Epub 2014 
Nov 12.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors upregulate B cell microRNAs that silence AID and
Blimp-1 expression for epigenetic modulation of antibody and autoantibody
responses.

White CA(1), Pone EJ(2), Lam T(1), Tat C(1), Hayama KL(2), Li G(1), Zan H(1),
Casali P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas School of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, 
TX 78229; and Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697. (2)Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas School of
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, 
TX 78229; and Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697 pcasali@uthscsa.edu.

Class-switch DNA recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM), which
require activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), and plasma cell
differentiation, which requires B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1
(Blimp-1), are critical for the generation of class-switched and hypermutated
(mature) Ab and autoantibody responses. We show that histone deacetylase
inhibitors valproic acid and butyrate dampened AICDA/Aicda (AID) and PRDM1/Prdm1 
(Blimp-1) mRNAs by upregulating miR-155, miR-181b, and miR-361 to silence
AICDA/Aicda, and miR-23b, miR-30a, and miR-125b to silence PRDM1/Prdm1, in human 
and mouse B cells. This led to downregulation of AID, Blimp-1, and X-box binding 
protein 1, thereby inhibiting CSR, SHM, and plasma cell differentiation without
altering B cell viability or proliferation. The selectivity of histone
deacetylase inhibitor-mediated silencing of AICDA/Aicda and PRDM1/Prdm1 was
emphasized by unchanged expression of HoxC4 and Irf4 (important
inducers/modulators of AICDA/Aicda), Rev1 and Ung (central elements for CSR/SHM),
and Bcl6, Bach2, or Pax5 (repressors of PRDM1/Prdm1 expression), as well as
unchanged expression of miR-19a/b, miR-20a, and miR-25, which are not known to
regulate AICDA/Aicda or PRDM1/Prdm1. Through these B cell-intrinsic epigenetic
mechanisms, valproic acid blunted class-switched and hypermutated T-dependent and
T-independent Ab responses in C57BL/6 mice. In addition, it decreased
class-switched and hypermutated autoantibodies, ameliorated disease, and extended
survival in lupus MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice. Our findings outline epigenetic
mechanisms that modulate expression of an enzyme (AID) and transcription factors 
(Blimp-1 and X-box binding protein 1) that are critical to the B cell
differentiation processes that underpin Ab and autoantibody responses. They also 
provide therapeutic proof-of-principle in autoantibody-mediated autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4258531
PMID: 25392531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Aug 27;6(251):251ra119. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009688.

Adult human neural crest-derived cells for articular cartilage repair.

Pelttari K(1), Pippenger B(1), Mumme M(1), Feliciano S(1), Scotti C(2),
Mainil-Varlet P(3), Procino A(4), von Rechenberg B(5), Schwamborn T(6), Jakob
M(1), Cillo C(4), Barbero A(1), Martin I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery and of Biomedicine, University Hospital Basel,
University of Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel, Switzerland. (2)Istituto Di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Via
R. Galeazzi 4, 20161 Milano, Italy. (3)AGINKO Research AG, Route de l'ancienne
Papeterie, P. O. Box 30, 1723 Marly, Switzerland. (4)Department of Medicine and
Surgery, Federico II Medical School, Via S. Pansini 5, 80131 Napoli, Italy.
(5)Musculoskeletal Research Unit, Equine Hospital, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (6)Cross-klinik, Bundesstrasse
1, 4009 Basel, Switzerland. (7)Departments of Surgery and of Biomedicine,
University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel,
Switzerland. ivan.martin@usb.ch.

In embryonic models and stem cell systems, mesenchymal cells derived from the
neuroectoderm can be distinguished from mesoderm-derived cells by their
Hox-negative profile--a phenotype associated with enhanced capacity of tissue
regeneration. We investigated whether developmental origin and Hox negativity
correlated with self-renewal and environmental plasticity also in differentiated 
cells from adults. Using hyaline cartilage as a model, we showed that adult human
neuroectoderm-derived nasal chondrocytes (NCs) can be constitutively
distinguished from mesoderm-derived articular chondrocytes (ACs) by lack of
expression of specific HOX genes, including HOXC4 and HOXD8. In contrast to ACs, 
serially cloned NCs could be continuously reverted from differentiated to
dedifferentiated states, conserving the ability to form cartilage tissue in vitro
and in vivo. NCs could also be reprogrammed to stably express Hox genes typical
of ACs upon implantation into goat articular cartilage defects, directly
contributing to cartilage repair. Our findings identify previously unrecognized
regenerative properties of HOX-negative differentiated neuroectoderm cells in
adults, implying a role for NCs in the unmet clinical challenge of articular
cartilage repair. An ongoing phase 1 clinical trial preliminarily indicated the
safety and feasibility of autologous NC-based engineered tissues for the
treatment of traumatic articular cartilage lesions.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25163479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Glia. 2014 Oct;62(10):1559-81. doi: 10.1002/glia.22700. Epub 2014 May 30.

Transcriptional profiling predicts overwhelming homology of Schwann cells,
olfactory ensheathing cells, and Schwann cell-like glia.

Ulrich R(1), Imbschweiler I, Kalkuhl A, Lehmbecker A, Ziege S, Kegler K, Becker
K, Deschl U, Wewetzer K, Baumgärtner W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany; Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Schwann cells (SCs), olfactory ensheathing cells (OECs), and central nervous
system Schwann cell-like glia (SG) represent a group of nerve growth factor
receptor p75 (NGFR)-positive cells, originating from different tissues. Because
of their pro-regenerative capacities, these cells are subjects in experimental
transplantation-based therapies of spinal cord trauma. The objective of this
study was to compare the transcriptomes of uninfected and canine distemper
virus-infected OECs, SCs, SG and fibroblasts (FBs) derived from four beagle dogs 
and cultured under identical conditions in vitro, employing canine genome 2.0
arrays (Affymetrix). Here, we observed a complete lack of transcriptional
differerences between OECs and SG, a high similarity of OECs/SG to SCs, and a
marked difference of SCs and OECs/SG towards FBs. Differentially expressed genes 
possibly involved in the maintenance of cell type-specific identity included an
up-regulation of HOXD8 and HOXC4 in SCs, and an up-regulation of CNTNAP2 and
EFEMP1 in OECs/SG. We identified cell type-specific biomarkers employing
supervised clustering with a K-nearest-neighbors algorithm and correlation-based 
feature selection. Thereby AQP1 and SCRG1 were predicted to be the most powerful 
biomarkers distinguishing SCs from OECs/SG. Immunofluorescence confirmed a higher
expression of SCRG1 in OECs and SG, and conversely a higher expression of AQP1 in
SCs in vitro. Furthermore, canine and murine olfactory nerves showed
SCRG1-positive, AQP1-negative OECs and/or axons, whereas sciatic nerves displayed
multifocal non-myelinated, AQP1-positive, SCRG1-negative cells. Conclusively,
OECs/SG are suggested to be a uniform cell type differing only in the tissue of
origin and highly related to SCs.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24889922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 May;44(3):371-4.

[Expression of HOXC4 gene during early development in zebrafish].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma JJ(1), He ZX, Shu LP, Yao DJ, Li L, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang 550004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of HOXC4 gene during early development in
zebrafish, study it's expression in hematopoiesis system with whole mount in situ
hybridization (WISH), then make a foundation work for further study of HOXC4 gene
in hematopoiesis development.
METHODS: The total RNA of different phases of zebrafish embryos was extracted,
and a fragment of HOXC4 gene was cloned with RT-PCR, then HOXC4 gene fragment and
pCS2 was digested with BamH I and Xho I restriction enzyme, after that HOXC4 gene
fragment was inserted into pCS2+ vector. After confirming the constructed
plasmid, the digoxingenin-labeled anti-sence mRNA probe of HOXC4 gene was
synthesized in vitro by using T3 RNA polymerase, the exprression pattern of HOXC4
during zebrafish embryogenesis using anti-sence probe with WISH was conducted.
RESULTS: HOXC4 gene was cloned by RT-PCR and HOXC4-pCS2+ plasmid was constructed 
and confirmed, expression of HOXC4 showed that it was expressed highly in nervous
system of wild-type (WT) Tuebingen zebrafish. CONCULSION: The expression pattern 
of HOXC4 during early development in zebrafish was obtained, and it is very
important for further study of HOXC4 gene function in zebrafish.

PMID: 23898515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Epigenetics. 2013 Feb;8(2):149-56. doi: 10.4161/epi.23398. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

DNA methylation profiles of long- and short-term glioblastoma survivors.

Shinawi T(1), Hill VK, Krex D, Schackert G, Gentle D, Morris MR, Wei W,
Cruickshank G, Maher ER, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalized Medicine, Department of Medical &
Molecular Genetics, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Birmingham College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Birmingham, UK.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant type of primary brain tumor
in adults and prognosis of most GBM patients is poor. However, a small percentage
of patients show a long term survival of 36 mo or longer after diagnosis.
Epigenetic profiles can provide molecular markers for patient prognosis:
recently, a G-CIMP positive phenotype associated with IDH1 mutations has been
described for GBMs with good prognosis. In the present analysis we performed
genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of short-term survivors (STS; overall
survival < 1 y) and long-term survivors (LTS; overall survival > 3 y) by
utilizing the HumanMethylation450K BeadChips to assess quantitative methylation
at > 480,000 CpG sites. Cluster analysis has shown that a subset of LTS showed a 
G-CIMP positive phenotype that was tightly associated with IDH1 mutation status
and was confirmed by analysis of the G-CIMP signature genes. Using high
stringency criteria for differential hypermethylation between non-cancer brain
and tumor samples, we identified 2,638 hypermethylated CpG loci (890 genes) in
STS GBMs, 3,101 hypermethylated CpG loci (1,062 genes) in LTS (wild type IDH1)
and 11,293 hypermethylated CpG loci in LTS (mutated for IDH1), reflecting the
CIMP positive phenotype. The location of differentially hypermethylated CpG loci 
with respect to CpG content, neighborhood context and functional genomic
distribution was similar in our sample set, with the majority of CpG loci
residing in CpG islands and in gene promoters. Our preliminary study also
identified a set of CpG loci differentially hypermethylated between STS and LTS
cases, including members of the homeobox gene family (HOXD8, HOXD13 and HOXC4),
the transcription factors NR2F2 and TFAP2A, and Dickkopf 2, a negative regulator 
of the wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3592900
PMID: 23291739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Autoimmunity. 2013 Mar;46(2):83-101. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2012.749244. Epub 2013
Jan 17.

Regulation of Aicda expression and AID activity.

Zan H(1), Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology and School of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-4120, USA. hzan@uci.edu

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) is expressed in a B cell
differentiation stage-specific fashion and is essential for immunoglobulin (Ig)
gene class switch DNA recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM). CSR
and SHM play a central role in the maturation of antibody and autoantibody
responses. AID displays a mutagenic activity by catalyzing targeted deamination
of deoxycytidine (dC) residues in DNA resulting in dU:dG mismatches, which are
processed into point-mutations in SHM or double-strand breaks (DSBs) in CSR.
Although AID specifically targets the Ig gene loci (IgH, Ig<U+03BA> and Ig<U+03BB>), it can
also home into a wide array of non-Ig genes in B-and non-B-cell backgrounds.
Aberrant expression of AID is associated with multiple diseases such as allergy, 
inflammation, autoimmunity and cancer. In autoimmune systemic lupus
erythematosus, dysregulated AID expression underpins increased CSR, SHM and
autoantibody production. As a potent mutator, AID is under stringent
transcriptional, post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation. AID is
also regulated in its targeting and enzymatic function. In resting naïve or
memory B cells, AID transcripts and protein are undetectable. These, however, are
readily and significantly up-regulated in B cells induced to undergo CSR and/or
SHM. Transcription factors, such as HoxC4 and NF-<U+03BA>B, which are up-regulated in a 
B cell lineage-and/or differentiation stage-specific manner, regulate the
induction of AID. HoxC4 induces AID expression by directly binding to the AID
gene promoter through an evolutionarily conserved 5'-ATTT-3' motif. HoxC4 is
induced by the same stimuli that induce AID and CSR. It is further up-regulated
by estrogen through three estrogen responsive elements in its promoter region.
The targeting of AID to switch (S) regions is mediated by 14-3-3 adaptor
proteins, which specifically bind to 5'-AGCT-3' repeats that are exist at high
frequency in S region cores. Like HoxC4, 14-3-3 adaptors are induced by the same 
stimuli that induce AID. These include "primary" inducing stimuli, that is, those
that play a major role in inducing AID, i.e., engagement of CD40 by CD154,
engagement of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) by microbial-associated molecular
patterns (MAMPs) and cross-linking of the BCR, as synergized by "secondary"
inducing stimuli, that is, those that synergize for AID induction and specify CSR
to different isotypes, i.e., switch-directing cytokines IL-4, TGF-ß or IFN-<U+03B3>. In 
this review, we focus on the multi-levels regulation of AID expression and
activity. We also discuss the dysregulation or misexpression of AID in
autoimmunity and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3762583
PMID: 23181381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Autoimmunity. 2013 Mar;46(2):128-37. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2012.748752. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

Hormones and AID: balancing immunity and autoimmunity.

Incorvaia E(1), Sicouri L, Petersen-Mahrt SK, Schmitz KM.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Editing in Immunity and Epigenetics, IFOM-Fondazione Istituto FIRC di
Oncologia Molecolare, Milano, Italy.

The human immune system is a complex dynamic network of soluble factors and
specialized cells that can and need to act in an instance or keep a lifelong
protection, with the consequence that health has to be maintained through genetic
and environmental stimuli. Autoimmunity is a multifactorial disease, where this
combination of genetic predisposition and environmental factors lead to disease
etiology. As some autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) or other B cell autoimmunities have a very
strong female gender bias, hormones, especially estrogen, have been implicated as
environmental factors in driving the disease. One of the key regulators of B cell
development is activation-induced deaminase (AID), as its molecular mechanism of 
cytosine deamination induces immunoglobulin affinity maturation and antibody
class switching. In this review we will highlight some of the recent findings of 
how estrogen directly and indirectly activates AID expression, which in turn can 
lead to immune hyper-stimulation. Those regulatory pathways can be direct when
the estrogen receptor (ER) binds the AID promoter, or indirect via activation of 
transcription factors that enhance AID expression (e.g., HoxC4). Estrogen's
influence on AID will also be discussed in terms of microRNA processing for
miRNA-155 and miRNA-181b. Important other external stimuli, such as EBV virus, in
conjunction with estrogen can add another layer of regulation during autoimmune
disease progression. Understanding these pathways will become more important as
AID has now been implicated to play an important role in immune tolerance and
actual elimination of autoantibodies.

PMID: 23181348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cytokine. 2013 Feb;61(2):608-13. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.10.018. Epub 2012 Nov
21.

APRIL stimulates NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated HoxC4 induction for AID expression in mouse B
cells.

Park SR(1), Kim PH, Lee KS, Lee SH, Seo GY, Yoo YC, Lee J, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon
302-718, Republic of Korea. srpark@konyang.ac.kr

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) plays a key role in B cell
immunoglobulin (Ig) class switch recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation
(SHM). We have previously reported that the highly conserved homeodomain HoxC4
transcription factor binds to the Aicda (AID gene) promoter to induce AID
expression. Here, we investigated the regulation of HoxC4 transcription by a
proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL) and B cell-activating factor belonging to
the TNF family (BAFF) in mouse B cells. APRIL substantially increased both HoxC4 
and AID expression, whereas BAFF induced the expression of AID but not HoxC4. To 
elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we constructed a HoxC4 gene promoter
reporter vector and analyzed the promoter induction after APRIL stimulation.
APRIL enhanced the HoxC4 promoter activity by 2.3-fold, and this increase
disappeared when the second putative NF-<U+03BA>B-binding promoter element (NBE2) was
mutated. Based on ChIP assays, we found that NF-<U+03BA>B bound to the HoxC4 promoter
NBE2 region. Furthermore, the overexpression of NF-<U+03BA>B augmented the APRIL-induced
HoxC4 promoter activity, while the expression of dominant negative-I<U+03BA>Ba
suppressed it. Taken together, our findings suggest that NF-<U+03BA>B mediates
APRIL-induced HoxC4 transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3723325
PMID: 23178148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(6):802-10. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4438. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Structural dynamics and epigenetic modifications of Hoxc loci along the
anteroposterior body axis in developing mouse embryos.

Min H(1), Lee JY, Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, Brain Korea 21 project for
Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.
mhkim1@yuhs.ac

Hox genes are organized as clusters and specify regional identity along the
anteroposterior body axis by sequential expression at a specific time and region 
during embryogenesis. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the sequential
spatio-temporal, collinear expression pattern of Hox genes are not fully
understood. Since epigenetic modifications such as chromatin architecture and
histone modifications have become crucial mechanisms for highly coordinated gene 
expressions, we examined such modifications. E14.5 mouse embryos were dissected
into three parts along the anteroposterior axis: brain, trunk-anterior, and
trunk-posterior. Then, structural changes and epigenetic modifications were
analyzed along the Hoxc cluster using chromosome conformation capture and
chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR methods. Hox non-expressing brain tissues had
more compact, heterochromatin-like structures together with the strong repressive
mark H3K27me3 than trunk tissues. In the trunk, however, a more loose
euchromatin-like topology with a reduced amount of H3K27me3 modifications were
observed along the whole cluster, regardless of their potency in gene activation.
The active mark H3K4me3 was rather closely associated with the collinear
expression of Hoxc genes; at trunk-anterior tissues, only 3' anterior Hoxc genes 
were marked by H3K4me3 upon gene activation, whereas whole Hoxc genes were marked
by H3K4me3 and showed expression in trunk-posterior tissues. Altogether, these
results indicated that loosening of the chromatin architecture and removing
H3K27me3 were not sufficient for, but rather the concomitant acquisition of
H3K4me3 drove the collinear expression of Hoxc genes.

PMCID: PMC3372884
PMID: 22719220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Haematologica. 2012 Feb;97(2):168-78. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.051235.

HOXC4 homeoprotein efficiently expands human hematopoietic stem cells and
triggers similar molecular alterations as HOXB4.

Auvray C(1), Delahaye A, Pflumio F, Haddad R, Amsellem S, Miri-Nezhad A, Broix L,
Yacia A, Bulle F, Fichelson S, Vigon I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris.

BACKGROUND: Expansion of hematopoietic stem cells represents an important
objective for improving cell and gene therapy protocols. Retroviral transduction 
of the HoxB4 homeogene in mouse and human hematopoietic stem cells and
hematopoietic progenitors is known to promote the cells' expansion. A safer
approach consists in transferring homeobox proteins into hematopoietic stem cells
taking advantage of the natural ability of homeoproteins to cross cell membranes.
Thus, HOXB4 protein transfer is operative for expanding human hematopoietic
cells, but such expansion needs to be improved.
DESIGN AND METHODS: To that aim, we evaluated the effects of HOXC4, a protein
encoded by a HOXB4 paralog gene, by co-culturing HOXC4-producing stromal cells
with human CD34(+) hematopoietic cells. Numbers of progenitors and stem cells
were assessed by in vitro cloning assays and injection into immuno-deficient
mice, respectively. We also looked for activation or inhibition of target
downstream gene expression.
RESULTS: We show that the HOXC4 homeoprotein expands human hematopoietic immature
cells by 3 to 6 times ex vivo and significantly improves the level of in vivo
engraftment. Comparative transcriptome analysis of CD34(+) cells subjected or not
to HOXB4 or HOXC4 demonstrated that both homeoproteins regulate the same set of
genes, some of which encode key hematopoietic factors and signaling molecules.
Certain molecules identified herein are factors reported to be involved in stem
cell fate or expansion in other models, such as MEF2C, EZH2, DBF4, DHX9, YPEL5
and Pumilio.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study may help to identify new HOX downstream key
factors potentially involved in hematopoietic stem cell expansion or in
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3269473
PMID: 22298821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Neurochem. 2011 Oct;119(2):262-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07405.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 2.

Crx broadly modulates the pineal transcriptome.

Rovsing L(1), Clokie S, Bustos DM, Rohde K, Coon SL, Litman T, Rath MF, Møller M,
Klein DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pharmacology, Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Cone-rod homeobox (Crx) encodes Crx, a transcription factor expressed selectively
in retinal photoreceptors and pinealocytes, the major cell type of the pineal
gland. In this study, the influence of Crx on the mammalian pineal gland was
studied by light and electron microscopy and by use of microarray and qRTPCR
technology, thereby extending previous studies on selected genes (Furukawa et al.
1999). Deletion of Crx was not found to alter pineal morphology, but was found to
broadly modulate the mouse pineal transcriptome, characterized by a>2-fold
down-regulation of 543 genes and a>2-fold up-regulation of 745 genes (p<0.05). Of
these, one of the most highly up-regulated (18-fold) was Hoxc4, a member of the
Hox gene family, members of which are known to control gene expression cascades. 
During a 24-h period, a set of 51 genes exhibited differential day/night
expression in pineal glands of wild-type animals; only eight of these were also
day/night expressed in the Crx<U+207B>/<U+207B> pineal gland. However, in the Crx<U+207B>/<U+207B> pineal
gland 41 genes exhibited differential night/day expression that was not seen in
wild-type animals. These findings indicate that Crx broadly modulates the pineal 
transcriptome and also influences differential night/day gene expression in this 
tissue. Some effects of Crx deletion on the pineal transcriptome might be
mediated by Hoxc4 up-regulation.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3422619
PMID: 21797868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Autoimmunity. 2011 Dec;44(8):585-98. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2011.577128. Epub 2011
May 18.

AID dysregulation in lupus-prone MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice increases class switch DNA
recombination and promotes interchromosomal c-Myc/IgH loci translocations:
modulation by HoxC4.

White CA(1), Seth Hawkins J, Pone EJ, Yu ES, Al-Qahtani A, Mai T, Zan H, Casali
P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and School of Biological Sciences, Institute for
Immunology, University of California, 3028 Hewitt Hall, Irvine, CA 92697-4120,
USA.

Erratum in
    Autoimmunity. 2011 Dec;44(8):664.

Immunoglobulin gene somatic hypermutation (SHM) and class switch DNA
recombination (CSR) play important roles in the generation of autoantibodies in
systemic lupus erythematosus. Systemic lupus is characterized by the production
of an array of pathogenic high-affinity mutated and class-switched, mainly IgG,
antibodies to a variety of self-antigens, including nuclear components, such as
dsDNA, histones, and chromatin. We previously found that MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice,
which develop a systemic autoimmune syndrome sharing many features with human
lupus, display greatly upregulated CSR, particularly to IgG2a, in B cells of the 
spleen, lymph nodes, and Peyer's patches. In MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice, the
significant upregulation of CSR is associated with increased expression of
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which is critical for CSR and SHM.
We also found that HoxC4 directly activates the promoter of the AID gene to
induce AID expression, CSR and SHM. Here, we show that in both lupus patients and
lupus-prone MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice, the expression of HoxC4 and AID is
significantly upregulated. To further analyze the role of HoxC4 in lupus, we
generated HoxC4(-/-) MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice. In these mice, HoxC4-deficiency
resulted in reduced AID expression, impaired CSR, and decreased serum anti-dsDNA 
IgG, particularly IgG2a, autoantibodies, which were associated with a reduction
in IgG deposition in kidney glomeruli. In addition, consistent with our previous 
findings in MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice that upregulated AID expression is associated
with extensive DNA lesions, comprising deletions and insertions in the IgH locus,
we found that c-Myc to IgH (c-Myc/IgH) translocations occur frequently in B cells
of MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice. The frequency of such translocations was significantly 
reduced in HoxC4(-/-) MRL/Fas(lpr/lpr) mice. These findings suggest that in lupus
B cells, upregulation of HoxC4 plays a major role in dysregulation of AID
expression, thereby increasing CSR and autoantibody production and promoting
c-Myc/IgH translocations.

PMCID: PMC3762595
PMID: 21585311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;16(22):5414-23. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0272. 
Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Differential gene expression in benign prostate epithelium of men with and
without prostate cancer: evidence for a prostate cancer field effect.

Risk MC(1), Knudsen BS, Coleman I, Dumpit RF, Kristal AR, LeMeur N, Gentleman RC,
True LD, Nelson PS, Lin DW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Urology and Pathology, University of Washington Medical Center,
1959 NW Pacific Street, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several malignancies are known to exhibit a "field effect," whereby
regions beyond tumor boundaries harbor histologic or molecular changes that are
associated with cancer. We sought to determine if histologically benign prostate 
epithelium collected from men with prostate cancer exhibits features indicative
of premalignancy or field effect.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Prostate needle biopsies from 15 men with high-grade
(Gleason 8-10) prostate cancer and 15 age- and body mass index-matched controls
were identified from a biospecimen repository. Benign epithelia from each patient
were isolated by laser capture microdissection. RNA was isolated, amplified, and 
used for microarray hybridization. Quantitative PCR was used to determine the
expression of specific genes of interest. Alterations in protein expression were 
analyzed through immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Overall patterns of gene expression in microdissected benign
prostate-associated benign epithelium (BABE) and cancer-associated benign
epithelium (CABE) were similar. Two genes previously associated with prostate
cancer, PSMA and SSTR1, were significantly upregulated in the CABE group (false
discovery rate <1%). Expression of other prostate cancer-associated genes,
including ERG, HOXC4, HOXC5, and MME, were also increased in CABE by quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR, although other genes commonly altered in prostate
cancer were not different between the BABE and CABE samples. The expression of
MME and PSMA proteins on immunohistochemistry coincided with their mRNA
alterations.
CONCLUSION: Gene expression profiles between benign epithelia of patients with
and without prostate cancer are very similar. However, these tissues exhibit
differences in the expression levels of several genes previously associated with 
prostate cancer development or progression. These differences may comprise a
field effect and represent early events in carcinogenesis.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2992073
PMID: 20935156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 26;285(48):37797-810. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.169086. Epub
2010 Sep 20.

Estrogen receptors bind to and activate the HOXC4/HoxC4 promoter to potentiate
HoxC4-mediated activation-induced cytosine deaminase induction, immunoglobulin
class switch DNA recombination, and somatic hypermutation.

Mai T(1), Zan H, Zhang J, Hawkins JS, Xu Z, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, University of California, Irvine, California
92697-4120, USA.

Estrogen enhances antibody and autoantibody responses through yet to be defined
mechanisms. It has been suggested that estrogen up-regulates the expression of
activation-induced cytosine deaminase (AID), which is critical for antibody class
switch DNA recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM), through direct
activation of this gene. AID, as we have shown, is induced by the HoxC4
homeodomain transcription factor, which binds to a conserved HoxC4/Oct site in
the AICDA/Aicda promoter. Here we show that estrogen-estrogen receptor (ER)
complexes do not directly activate the AID gene promoter in B cells undergoing
CSR. Rather, they bind to three evolutionarily conserved and cooperative estrogen
response elements (EREs) we identified in the HOXC4/HoxC4 promoter. By binding to
these EREs, ERs synergized with CD154 or LPS and IL-4 signaling to up-regulate
HoxC4 expression, thereby inducing AID and CSR without affecting B cell
proliferation or plasmacytoid differentiation. Estrogen administration in vivo
significantly potentiated CSR and SHM in the specific antibody response to the
4-hydroxy-3-nitrophenylacetyl hapten conjugated with chicken <U+03B3>-globulin. Ablation
of HoxC4 (HoxC4(-/-)) abrogated the estrogen-mediated enhancement of AID gene
expression and decreased CSR and SHM. Thus, estrogen enhances AID expression by
activating the HOXC4/HoxC4 promoter and inducing the critical AID gene activator,
HoxC4.

PMCID: PMC2988384
PMID: 20855884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Genet. 2009 Sep 22;10:60. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-10-60.

Characterization of the chromosomal inversion associated with the Koa mutation in
the mouse revealed the cause of skeletal abnormalities.

Katayama K(1), Miyamoto S, Furuno A, Akiyama K, Takahashi S, Suzuki H, Tsuji T,
Kunieda T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Okayama University, Okayama
700-8530, Japan. katayama@nvlu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Koala (Koa) is a dominant mutation in mice causing bushy muzzle and
pinna, and is associated with a chromosomal inversion on the distal half of
chromosome 15. To identify the gene responsible for the Koa phenotypes, we
investigated phenotypes of Koa homozygous mice and determined the breakpoints of 
the inversion with a genetic method using recombination between two different
chromosomal inversions.
RESULTS: Skeletal preparation of Koa homozygotes showed marked deformity of the
ribs and a wider skull with extended zygomatic arches, in addition to a general
reduction in the lengths of long bones. They also had open eyelids at birth
caused by a defect in the extension of eyelid anlagen during the embryonic
stages. The proximal and distal breakpoints of the Koa inversion were determined 
to be 0.8-Mb distal to the Trsps1 gene and to 0.1-Mb distal to the Hoxc4 gene,
respectively, as previously reported. The phenotypes of mice with the recombinant
inverted chromosomes revealed the localization of the gene responsible the Koa
phenotype in the vicinity of the proximal recombinant breakpoint. Expression of
the Trsps1 gene in this region was significantly reduced in the Koa homozygous
and heterozygous embryos.
CONCLUSION: While no gene was disrupted by the chromosomal inversion, an
association between the Koa phenotype and the proximal recombinant breakpoint,
phenotypic similarities with Trps1-deficient mice or human patients with TRSP1
mutations, and the reduced expression of the Trsps1 gene in Koa mice, indicated
that the phenotypes of the Koa mice are caused by the altered expression of the
Trps1 gene.

PMCID: PMC2758895
PMID: 19772620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Jun;11(2):269-79. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0068.

HOXC10 as a potential marker for discriminating between amnion- and
decidua-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Hwang JH(1), Seok OS, Song HR, Jo JY, Lee JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea
University College of Medicine , Seoul, Korea.

The HOX family of genes plays a fundamental role in the morphogenesis of
vertebrate embryonic cells. HOX genes are thought to be important for the
regulation of stem cells. We investigated HOX gene expression in mesenchymal stem
cells (MSCs) from human placentas. We isolated MSCs from human placentas and
confirmed stemness by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis and
differentiation studies. Using reverse transcription PCR, mRNA expression of 39
Class I HOX genes was measured in the MSCs. The expression of HOXB6, C4, C8, C10,
D3, D4, and D10 were measured by Western blot analysis. HOXC10 was expressed in
10 of 10 amnion-derived MSCs but in only 2 of 10 decidua-derived MSCs. HOXC4 and 
D10 were expressed in 100% of both amnion-derived MSCs and deciduas-derived MSCs.
HOXD4 was silent in all amnion-derived MSCs and deciduas-derived MSCs (n = 10).
HOX gene activation patterns might be a useful indicator for the detection of
MSCs of different tissue origins. We demonstrated that HOXC10 is a gene that may 
discriminate between amnion-derived MSCs and decidua-derived MSCs.

PMID: 19522674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nat Immunol. 2009 May;10(5):540-50. doi: 10.1038/ni.1725. Epub 2009 Apr 12.

HoxC4 binds to the promoter of the cytidine deaminase AID gene to induce AID
expression, class-switch DNA recombination and somatic hypermutation.

Park SR(1), Zan H, Pal Z, Zhang J, Al-Qahtani A, Pone EJ, Xu Z, Mai T, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine and School of Biological
Sciences, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.

The cytidine deaminase AID (encoded by Aicda in mice and AICDA in humans) is
critical for immunoglobulin class-switch recombination (CSR) and somatic
hypermutation (SHM). Here we show that AID expression was induced by the HoxC4
homeodomain transcription factor, which bound to a highly conserved HoxC4-Oct
site in the Aicda or AICDA promoter. This site functioned in synergy with a
conserved binding site for the transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and NF-kappaB.
HoxC4 was 'preferentially' expressed in germinal center B cells and was
upregulated by engagement of CD40 by CD154, as well as by lipopolysaccharide and 
interleukin 4. HoxC4 deficiency resulted in impaired CSR and SHM because of lower
AID expression and not some other putative HoxC4-dependent activity. Enforced
expression of AID in Hoxc4(-/-) B cells fully restored CSR. Thus, HoxC4 directly 
activates the Aicda promoter, thereby inducing AID expression, CSR and SHM.

PMCID: PMC2753990
PMID: 19363484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jul;81(1):56-66. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.075358. Epub 2009 
Apr 1.

Identification of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor-regulated genes
important for spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal in the rat.

Schmidt JA(1), Avarbock MR, Tobias JW, Brinster RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) provide the foundation for spermatogenesis
throughout the life of a male. Because SSCs of many species can colonize the
mouse testis, and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is
responsible for stimulating SSC self-renewal in rodents, we reasoned that
molecular mechanisms of SSC self-renewal are similar across species.
GDNF-regulated genes have been identified in mouse SSCs; however, downstream
targets of GDNF are unknown in other species. The objective of this work was to
identify GDNF-regulated genes in rat SSCs and to define the biological
significance of these genes for rat SSC self-renewal. We conducted microarray
analysis on cultured rat germ cells enriched for SSCs in the presence and absence
of GDNF. Many GDNF-regulated genes were identified, most notably, Bcl6b and Etv5,
which are important for mouse SSC self-renewal. Bcl6b was the most highly
regulated gene in both the rat and mouse. Additionally, we identified three novel
GDNF-regulated genes in rat SSCs: Bhlhe40, Hoxc4, and Tec. Small interfering RNA 
treatment for Bcl6b, Etv5, Bhlhe40, Hoxc4, and Tec resulted in a decrease in SSC 
number, as determined by transplantation, without a change in total cell number
within the culture. These data indicate that, like in the mouse SSC, Bcl6b and
Etv5 are important for rat SSC self-renewal, suggesting that these genes may be
important for SSCs in all mammals. Furthermore, identification of three novel
GDNF-regulated genes in the rat SSC extends our knowledge of SSC activity and
broadens the foundation for understanding this process in higher species,
including humans.

PMCID: PMC3093986
PMID: 19339709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;17(1):141-5.

[Effect of human cytomegalovirus infection on the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6
genes in the proliferation of lymphocytic progenitor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng JQ(1), Liu WJ, Chen HY, Guo QL, Chen A, Chen SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou 
646000, China.

The objective of this study was to observe the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6
genes in the process of differentiation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) to
colony forming unit-T Lymphocyte (CFU-TL) in vitro. and to explore the possible
mechanism of HCMV-induced maldevelopment of human cord blood CFU-TL on genetic
level through effecting the differentiation progress by human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV) with and/or all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), Normal CFU-TL culture was used
as blank control. After detection with MTT, mRNA expression levels in the human
cord blood CFU-TL hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes following HCMV infection and ATRA
treatment were detected by fluorogenic quantitative reserve transcription
polymerize chain reaction (FQ-RT-PCR) method. HCMV of 10(6) plaque formation unit
(PFU)/ml was diluted to 0.1 ml 10(5) PFU/ml and added into the infected group.
The results showed that the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes in the
differentiation process increased slightly on day 3, and were up to the most on
day 7 (p < 0.05), while became lower on day 12 respectively in normal group, HCMV
group and ATRA group. Compared with the expression of hoxc6, the expression of
hoxc4 was obviously higher in each group (p < 0.05). Compared with the expression
of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes in normal group, the expressions of hoxc4 and hoxc6 in
ATRA group were up-regulated remarkably (p < 0.05), while the expressions of
hoxc4 and hoxc6 in group HCMV were down-regulated (p < 0.05). It is concluded
that the regular expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes mRNA appeared in each group.
A positive co-relationship exits between hoxc4/hoxc6 genes and lymphocytic
progenitor hematopoiesis. Compared with the expression of hoxc6 gene, the
expression of hoxc4 gene is obviously higher in each group. HCMV can
down-regulate the expression of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes and lead to suppression
effect on cell morphology, which confirms that the normal hematopoietic lineage
determination and maturation rely on the stable and consistent expression of
homeobox gene. At the same condition, ATRA (6 x 10(-8) mol/L at 60 nmol/ml) can
up-regulate hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes expression. ATRA can up-regulate the expression
of hoxc4 and hoxc6 genes.

PMID: 19236766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Theory Biosci. 2009 May;128(2):109-20. doi: 10.1007/s12064-009-0056-1. Epub 2009 
Feb 19.

Hox cluster duplication in the basal teleost Hiodon alosoides
(Osteoglossomorpha).

Chambers KE(1), McDaniell R, Raincrow JD, Deshmukh M, Stadler PF, Chiu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
kchamber@wiley.com

Large-scale--even genome-wide--duplications have repeatedly been invoked as an
explanation for major radiations. Teleosts, the most species-rich vertebrate
clade, underwent a "fish-specific genome duplication" (FSGD) that is shared by
most ray-finned fish lineages. We investigate here the Hox complement of the
goldeye (Hiodon alosoides), a representative of Osteoglossomorpha, the most basal
teleostean clade. An extensive PCR survey reveals that goldeye has at least eight
Hox clusters, indicating a duplicated genome compared to basal actinopterygians. 
The possession of duplicated Hox clusters is uncoupled to species richness. The
Hox system of the goldeye is substantially different from that of other teleost
lineages, having retained several duplicates of Hox genes for which crown
teleosts have lost at least one copy. A detailed analysis of the PCR fragments as
well as full length sequences of two HoxA13 paralogs, and HoxA10 and HoxC4 genes 
places the duplication event close in time to the divergence of Osteoglossomorpha
and crown teleosts. The data are consistent with-but do not conclusively
prove-that Osteoglossomorpha shares the FSGD.

PMCID: PMC2683926
PMID: 19225820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Vet Dermatol. 2008 Dec;19(6):358-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3164.2008.00709.x. Epub 
2008 Nov 14.

The mouse hairy ears mutation exhibits an extended growth (anagen) phase in hair 
follicles and altered Hoxc gene expression in the ears.

Mentzer SE(1), Sundberg JP, Awgulewitsch A, Chao HH, Carpenter DA, Zhang WD,
Rinchik EM, You Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics and Genomics Group, Life Sciences Division, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, PO Box 2008, Bethel Valley Road, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6445,
USA.

The mouse In(15)2Rl (hairy ears, Eh) mutation is a paracentric inversion of the
distal half of chromosome 15 (Chr 15). Heterozygous Eh/+ mice display misshaped
and hairy ears that have more and longer hair than the ears of their wild-type
littermates. We mapped, cloned and sequenced both inversion breakpoints. No
protein-coding transcript was disrupted by either breakpoint. The proximal
breakpoint is located between syntrophin basic 1 (Sntb1) and hyaluronan synthase 
2 (Has2), and the distal breakpoint maps between homeobox C4 (Hoxc4) and
single-strand selective monofunctional uracil DNA glycosylase (Smug1), near the
middle and the telomere ends of Chr 15, respectively. The inversion spans ~47
megabases. Our genetic analysis suggests that the hairy-ear phenotype is caused
by the proximal breakpoint of the inversion-bearing Chr 15. Quantitative RNA
analysis by real-time polymerase chain reaction for the genes flanking the
breakpoint indicated no changes in expression levels except for some homeobox C
(Hoxc) genes whose expression was elevated in developing and mature skin of the
ears but not of other body regions. The increased hair length on the ears of Eh/+
mice was due to an extension of the anagen stage in the hair cycle, as determined
by histological analysis. Our data indicate that the Eh phenotype arises from
mis-expression of Hoxc genes.

PMCID: PMC3061202
PMID: 19037915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cir Pediatr. 2007 Oct;20(4):223-8.

[The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: the Hox 
genes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez L(1), Martínez-Calonge W, Matesanz R, Fernández-Dumont V, Pederiva F,
Vallejo MT, Salinas J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid.
lmartinezm.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Prenatal administration of adriamycin or nitrofen to pregnant mice
produce in the embryos, respectively, esophageal atresia/VACTERL association (EA)
or congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Various genes and signalling pathways
like sonic hedgehog, Gli family, retinoic acid and homeotic genes have been
pointed out in the origin of these malformations. Hox genes are master regulatory
genes involved in embryo segmentation and other main development processes.
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 knock-out mice show cardiac, tracheal, lung 
and diaphragmatic malformations, EA and phenotypes that resemble that of VACTERL 
syndrome. We present herein some of our findings in the expression of these genes
in both experimental models.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin 
or vehicle on embryonic days 7,5 and 8,5; embryos were recovered at four
endpoints (E13 to 16). On the other hand, nitrofen was given to pregnant mice on 
embryonic day 8th and embryos were recovered at E14, E16 and E19. The embryos or,
separately, their lungs and hearts, were randomly processed for
immunohistochemical or molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). We used antibodies for
Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins and specific primers for Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxb3,
Hoxb5, Hoxc4 and Hoxd3 genes.
RESULTS: EA: Upon immunohistochemistry, adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a
severe decrease in expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxb3 proteins in heart, skin, 
foregut but not in the heart. RT-PCR studies showed a statistically significant
decrease of the four genes studied in the lungs of OA mice when compared to
controls. CDH: Upon RT-PCR assessment the expression of Hoxa5 and Hoxb3 were
higher in nitrofen-exposed mice than in controls on E14 and E19 and weaker on
E16. As regards immunohistochemical localization, expression of the three genes
was similar in nitrofen and control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Both experimental models exhibit an alteration in the expression of 
several proximal Hox genes, specially in lung and car- diac tissues. The
malformations in these organs associated with CDH and EA could be in part caused 
by these alterations. Due to their specific participation in lung and foregut
morphogenesis, their study could let us to better understand the mechanisms of
CDH and EA.

PMID: 18351244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Crit Rev Immunol. 2007;27(4):367-97.

Regulation of aicda expression and AID activity: relevance to somatic
hypermutation and class switch DNA recombination.

Xu Z(1), Pone EJ, Al-Qahtani A, Park SR, Zan H, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, School of Medicine and School of Biological Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-4120, USA.

Expression and activity of activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) encoded by
the aicda gene are essential for immunoglobulin (Ig) gene somatic hypermutation
(SHM) and class switch DNA recombination (CSR). SHM and CSR unfold, in general,
in germinal centers and/are central to the maturation of effective antibody
responses. AID expression is induced by activated B-cell CD40 signaling, which is
critical for the germinal center reaction, and is further enhanced by other
stimuli, including interleukin-4 (IL-4) secreted from CD4+ T cells or Toll-like
receptor (TLR)-activating bacterial and/or viral molecules. Integration of
different intracellular signal transduction pathways, as activated by these
stimuli, leads to a dynamic aicda-regulating program, which involves both
positively acting trans-factors, such as Pax5, HoxC4, E47, and Irf8, and negative
modulators, such as Blimp1 and Id2, to restrict aicda expression primarily to
germinal center B cells. The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-K), which
functions downstream of activated B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling, likely plays
an important role in triggering the downregulation of aicda expression in
postgerminal center B cells and throughout plasmacytoid differentiation. In B
cells undergoing SHM and CSR, AID activity, and, possibly, AID targeting to the
Ig locus are regulated at a posttranslational level, including AID
dimerization/oligomerization, nuclear/cytoplasmic AID translocation, and
phosphorylation of the AID Ser38 residue by protein kinase A (PKA). Here, we
discuss the role of B-cell activation signals, transcription regulation programs,
and posttranslational modifications in controlling aicda expression and AID
activity, thereby delineating an integrated model of modulation of SHM and CSR in
the germinal center reaction.

PMCID: PMC2994649
PMID: 18197815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Leukemia. 2007 Aug;21(8):1836-9. Epub 2007 May 10.

The HOXB4 homeoprotein improves ex vivo generation of functional human NK-cell
progenitors.

Haddad R, Caignard A, Visentin G, Vigon I, Fichelson S, Amsellem S.

PMID: 17495974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Soc Biol. 2006;200(3):235-41.

[Ex vivo expansion of human hematopoietic stem cells by passive transduction of
the HOXB4 homeoprotein].

[Article in French]

Amsellem S(1), Fichelson S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département d'Hématologie, Inserm U567, CNRS UMR 8104,
Université Paris 5, Faculté de Médecine René Descartes, UM 3. Paris, F-75014
France. amsellem@cochin.inserm.fr

Expansion of human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is a challenge for cellular
therapy. It currently relies on either the use of recombinant cytokines or
transfer of transcription factor genes. Among these, the HOXB4 homeoprotein is of
particular interest since it promotes the expansion of mouse HSCs without
inducing leukemia. To prevent potential deleterious side effects associated with 
stable HOXB4 gene transfer into the cells, we took advantage of the ability of
homeoproteins to passively pass through cell membranes. We have shown that, when 
co-cultured with stromal cells engineered to secrete HOXB4, human stem cells and 
immature progenitors clearly were expanded. This expansion was associated with
enhanced stem cell repopulating capacity in vivo and maintenance of
pluripotentiality. The role that HOXB4 plays on stem cell expansion has also been
tested on human lymphoid progenitors. We found that our model of protein transfer
was also able to induce the expansion of the immature lympho-myeloid and pro-T/NK
progenitors as well as of more mature NK progenitors. We then looked for
synergistic activities between HOXB4 and other homeoproteins such as HOXC4. We
found that HOXC4 was able to promote the expansion of human hematopoietic cells
in vitro roughly as HOXB4 did and that the presence of both HOXB4 and HOXC4
molecules induced even higher expansion levels of these cells. Our method
provides a basis for developing cell therapy strategies using expanded HSCs that 
are not genetically modified.

PMID: 17417138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1759-65. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Murine mesenchymal and embryonic stem cells express a similar Hox gene profile.

Phinney DG(1), Gray AJ, Hill K, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Health Science Center, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA. dphinne@tulane.edu

Using degenerate oligonucleotide primers targeting the homeobox domain, we
amplified by PCR and sequenced 723 clones from five murine cell populations and
lines derived from embryonic mesoderm and adult bone marrow. Transcripts from all
four vertebrate Hox clusters were expressed by the different populations.
Hierarchical clustering of the data revealed that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
and the embryonic stem (ES) cell line D3 shared a similar Hox expression profile.
These populations exclusively expressed Hoxb2, Hoxb5, Hoxb7, and Hoxc4,
transcripts regulating self-renewal and differentiation of other stem cells.
Additionally, Hoxa7 transcript quantified by real-time PCR strongly correlated
(r2=0.89) with the number of Hoxa7 clones identified by sequencing, validating
that data from the PCR screen reflects differences in Hox mRNA abundance between 
populations. This is the first study to catalogue Hox transcripts in murine MSCs 
and by comparative analyses identify specific Hox genes that may contribute to
their stem cell character.

PMID: 16288716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Oct;22(5):497-501.

Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms and haplotypes in HOXC gene cluster
within susceptible region 12q13 of simple congenital heart disease.

Gong LG(1), Qiu GR, Jiang H, Xu XY, Zhu HY, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
PR China.

OBJECTIVE: In the candidate region 12q13 of simple congenital heart disease(CHD),
four single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs) in HOXC4 gene were chosen in order to 
investigate the distribution of SNP and haplotypes in simple CHD patients and
normal people.
METHODS: The genotype of 4 SNPs in 108 simple CHD patients and 200 normal people 
were analyzed by restriction fragment length polymorphism(RFLP) and denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography(DHPLC). The statistical contingency table 
method was used to analyze SNP genotype frequency and gene frequency in patients 
and control group; then, the haplotypes were established and their frequencies in
the two groups were assessed by PHASE software.
RESULTS: C16476T polymorphism was not detected; A17860G located in 3' flanking
sequence of HOXC5 gene displayed significant difference between the two groups.
The G allele frequency in simple CHD patients was higher than that in healthy
controls(P < 0.05); the distribution of frequencies of 4 haplotypes showed
significant difference(P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: The A17860G located in 3'flanking sequence of HOXC5 gene is
associated with simple CHD; the risk of CHD in the persons with G17860 is higher 
than that in those with A17860. the haplotype of 3 SNPs may be linked with the
susceptible gene of simple CHD.

PMID: 16215934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005 Jul;46(7):1061-6.

Upregulated hoxC4 induces CD14 expression during the differentiation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Kim DY(1), Choi SJ, Kim SH, Chung HY, Yi S, Kim DW, Kim CC, Han TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, SBRI, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Homeobox (hox) genes encode transcription factors which are critically involved
in embryonic development. The 39 different hox genes are organized into four
unlinked chromosomal gene clusters (hoxA-D) in mammals and a number of studies
have suggested that hox genes play important roles in human leukemogenesis. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells carrying the PML-RARa fusion protein, respond 
well by differentiating in their response to an all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)
treatment. We examined the expression of the individual hox genes during this
differentiation. Besides the constitutive expression of hoxA9 and no expression
of hoxB7, the expression of hoxC4 increased significantly during differentiation 
of NB4 cells (PML-RAR(alpha)+). We also examined the expression of hoxC4 in bone 
marrow cells from APL patients and found that the hoxC4 expression was
reproducibly induced during an ATRA treatment. To further examine this finding,
HoxC4 was stably expressed in NB4 cells by retroviral transduction. The NB4 cells
expressing HoxC4 showed differentiated phenotypes including a CD14 expression,
which strongly suggests that upregulated hoxC4 is functionally involved in NB4
cell differentiation in response to ATRA. Upregulation of CD14 is at the
transcription level and mediated by the homeodomain of the HoxC4.

PMID: 16019559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Cell. 2005 Jan;8(1):75-84.

Tbx5 and Tbx4 are not sufficient to determine limb-specific morphologies but have
common roles in initiating limb outgrowth.

Minguillon C(1), Del Buono J, Logan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Morphological differences between forelimbs and hindlimbs are thought to be
regulated by Tbx5 expressed in the forelimb and Tbx4 and Pitx1 expressed in the
hindlimb. Gene deletion and misexpression experiments have suggested that these
factors have two distinct functions during limb development: the initiation
and/or maintenance of limb outgrowth and the specification of limb-specific
morphologies. Using genetic methods in the mouse, we have investigated the roles 
of Tbx5, Tbx4, and Pitx1 in both processes. Our results support a role for Tbx5
and Tbx4, but not for Pitx1, in initiation of limb outgrowth. In contrast to
conclusions from gene misexpression experiments in the chick, our results
demonstrate that Tbx5 and Tbx4 do not determine limb-specific morphologies.
However, our results support a role for Pitx1 in the specification of
hindlimb-specific morphology. We propose a model in which positional codes, such 
as Pitx1 and Hox genes in the lateral plate mesoderm, dictate limb-specific
morphologies.

PMID: 15621531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3545-57.

Beta-catenin signaling is required for neural differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Otero JJ(1), Fu W, Kan L, Cuadra AE, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. j-otero@northwestern.edu

Culture of embryonic stem (ES) cells at high density inhibits both beta-catenin
signaling and neural differentiation. ES cell density does not influence
beta-catenin expression, but a greater proportion of beta-catenin is targeted for
degradation in high-density cultures. Moreover, in high-density cultures,
beta-catenin is preferentially localized to the membrane further reducing
beta-catenin signaling. Increasing beta-catenin signaling by treatment with
Wnt3a-conditioned medium, by overexpression of beta-catenin, or by overexpression
of a dominant-negative form of E-cadherin promotes neurogenesis. Furthermore,
beta-catenin signaling is sufficient to induce neurogenesis in high-density
cultures even in the absence of retinoic acid (RA), although RA potentiates the
effects of beta-catenin. By contrast, RA does not induce neurogenesis in
high-density cultures in the absence of beta-catenin signaling. Truncation of the
armadillo domain of beta-catenin, but not the C terminus or the N terminus,
eliminates its proneural effects. The proneural effects of beta-catenin reflect
enhanced lineage commitment rather than proliferation of neural progenitor cells.
Neurons induced by beta-catenin overexpression either alone or in association
with RA express the caudal neuronal marker Hoxc4. However, RA treatment inhibits 
the beta-catenin-mediated generation of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons,
suggesting that not all of the effects of RA are dependent upon beta-catenin
signaling. These observations suggest that beta-catenin signaling promotes neural
lineage commitment by ES cells, and that beta-catenin signaling may be a
necessary co-factor for RA-mediated neuronal differentiation. Further,
enhancement of beta-catenin signaling with RA treatment significantly increases
the numbers of neurons generated from ES cells, thus suggesting a method for
obtaining large numbers of neural species for possible use in for ES cell
transplantation.

PMID: 15262888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):42258-69. Epub 2004 Jul 13.

The HoxC4 homeodomain protein mediates activation of the immunoglobulin heavy
chain 3' hs1,2 enhancer in human B cells. Relevance to class switch DNA
recombination.

Kim EC(1), Edmonston CR, Wu X, Schaffer A, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, College of Medicine and School of Biological Sciences, 
University of California, Irvine, California 92697-4120, USA.

The immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) 3' regulatory region modulates IgH locus
transcription, upon induction by specific trans-acting factors, and plays a
significant role in class switch DNA recombination (CSR) and, perhaps, somatic
hypermutation (SHM). CSR and SHM are central to the maturation of the antibody
response. In contrast to the single 5'-hs3a-hs1,2-hs3b-hs4-3 ' mouse IgH 3 '
regulatory region, the human IgH 3 ' regulatory region exists as a
5'-hs3-hs1,2-hs4-3' cluster duplicated 3 ' of Calpha1 and Calpha2. We show here
that the human hs1,2 element is the strongest enhancer of transcription, as
directed by a V(H)1 or the ECS-Igamma3 promoter, thereby suggesting a dominant
role for hs1,2 over hs3 and hs4 in the overall activity of the 3 ' regulatory
region. Within hs1,2, we identified three regions (1, 2, and 3) that are all
necessary, but individually not sufficient, for enhancement of transcription. In 
region 2, a HoxC4 site and a HoxC4/embedded octamer (HoxC4/Oct) site are
conserved across human, mouse, rat, and rabbit. These two sites recruit HoxC4 and
Oct-1/Oct-2, which act synergistically with the Oca-B coactivator to effect the
full hs1,2-enhancing activity. HoxC4, Oct-1/Oct-2, and Oca-B recruitment is
negligible in pro-B cells, moderate in pre-B cells, and maximal in germinal
center B cells and plasma cells, where HoxC4, Oct-2, and Oca-B expression
correlates with hs1,2 activation and ongoing CSR. The hs1,2mediated enhancement
of V(H) and C(H) promoter-driven transcription as induced by HoxC4 and
Oct-1/Oct-2 suggests an important role of these homeodomain proteins in the
overall regulation of the IgH locus expression.

PMCID: PMC4631311
PMID: 15252056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genet Mol Res. 2003 Sep 30;2(3):260-70.

Molecular cytogenetic assignment of genes to bovine chromosome 5.

De Donato M(1), Gallagher DS Jr, Lehn C, Gill C, Taylor JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Texas A and M University, College Station, TX
77843, USA. dedonato@usa.net

Seven genes were assigned by molecular cytogenetic methods to bovine chromosome
5. To accomplish this, specific primers were either publicly available or were
designed from highly conserved regions of the publicly available mammalian gene
sequences. The identity of the amplified segments was verified by sequencing and 
alignment with the published sequences. The optimized primers that amplified the 
desired bovine genes were used for screening a bovine bacterial artificial
chromosome library. The positive clones were localized to a specific band of
bovine chromosome 5 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The genes HOXC4, SP1
and IGFBP6 were localized to band q21, COL2A1 was localized to bands q21-q23,
IGF1 was localized to band q26, MB to band q31 and the gene CYP2D6 was localized 
to band q35. The cytogenetic assignment of SP1, IGFBP6, COL2A1, IGF1, MB and
CYP2D6 is first reported here and the assignment of HOXC4 refines the previous
assignment of this gene. The identification and localization of these genes
further support the development of the human to bovine comparative map through
characterizing the homologous segments conserved in the evolution of these
species. This information will be useful for the future localization of genes
that affect economically important traits in bovines.

PMID: 14966674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cancer Res. 2003 Sep 15;63(18):5879-88.

Aberrant HOXC expression accompanies the malignant phenotype in human prostate.

Miller GJ(1), Miller HL, van Bokhoven A, Lambert JR, Werahera PN, Schirripa O,
Lucia MS, Nordeen SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

Dysregulation of HOX gene expression has been implicated as a factor in
malignancies for a number of years. However, no consensus has emerged regarding
specific causative genes. Using a degenerate reverse transcription-PCR technique,
we show up-regulation of genes from the HOXC cluster in malignant prostate cell
lines and lymph node metastases. When relative expression levels of the four HOX 
clusters were examined, lymph node metastases and cell lines derived from lymph
node metastases exhibited very similar patterns, patterns distinct from those in 
benign cells or malignant cell lines derived from other tumor sites. Specific
reverse transcription-PCR for HOXC4, HOXC5, HOXC6, and HOXC8 confirmed
overexpression of these genes in malignant cell lines and lymph node metastases. 
Laser capture microdissection and examination of paired tumor/normal prostate
epithelial cells also indicated overexpression of these HOXC genes in primary
tumor cells. Our data indicate a possible link between expression of HOXC genes
and malignancy in prostate cells. Overexpression of HOXC8 in LNCaP prostate
cancer cells suppressed transactivation by androgen receptors. We speculate that 
HOXC overexpression may predispose tumor cells to androgen independence by
necessitating adaptation to diminished androgen signaling.

PMID: 14522913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 20;278(25):23141-50. Epub 2003 Apr 2.

Selective inhibition of class switching to IgG and IgE by recruitment of the
HoxC4 and Oct-1 homeodomain proteins and Ku70/Ku86 to newly identified ATTT
cis-elements.

Schaffer A(1), Kim EC, Wu X, Zan H, Testoni L, Salamon S, Cerutti A, Casali P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Immunoglobulin (Ig) class switching is central to the maturation of the antibody 
response as IgG, IgA, and IgE are endowed with more diverse biological effector
functions than IgM. It is induced upon engagement of CD40 on B lymphocytes by
CD40L expressed by activated CD4+ T cells and exposure of B cells to T
cell-secreted cytokines including interleukin-4 and transforming growth
factor-beta. It begins with germ line IH-CH transcription and unfolds through
class switch DNA recombination (CSR). We show here that the HoxC4 and Oct-1
homeodomain proteins together with the Ku70/Ku86 heterodimer bind as a complex to
newly identified switch (S) regulatory ATTT elements (SREs) in the Igamma and
Iepsilon promoters and downstream regions to dampen basal germ line Igamma-Cgamma
and Iepsilon-Cepsilon transcriptions and repress CSR to Cgamma and Cepsilon. This
mechanism is inactive in the Calpha1/Calpha2 loci because of the lack of SREs in 
the Ialpha1/Ialpha2 promoters. Accordingly, in resting human IgM+IgD+ B cells,
HoxC4, Oct-1, and Ku70/Ku86 can be readily identified as bound to the Igamma and 
Iepsilon promoters but not the Ialpha1/Ialpha2 promoters. CD40 signaling
dissociates the HoxC4.Oct-1. Ku complex from the Igamma and Iepsilon promoter
SREs, thereby relieving the IH-CH transcriptional repression and allowing CSR to 
unfold. Dissociation of HoxC4.Oct-1. Ku from DNA is hampered by CD153 engagement,
a CD40-signaling inhibitor. Thus, these findings outline a HoxC4.Oct-1.
Ku-dependent mechanism of selective regulation of class switching to IgG and IgE 
and further suggest distinct co-evolution and shared CSR activation pathways in
the Cgamma and Cepsilon as opposed to the Calpha1/Calpha2 loci.

PMID: 12672812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):16848-56. Epub 2001 Feb 20.

The binding of Ku antigen to homeodomain proteins promotes their phosphorylation 
by DNA-dependent protein kinase.

Schild-Poulter C(1), Pope L, Giffin W, Kochan JC, Ngsee JK, Traykova-Andonova M, 
Haché RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Loeb Health Research Institute at the Ottawa
Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1Y 4E9, Canada.

The Ku antigen (70- and 80-kDa subunits) is a regulatory subunit of DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK) that promotes the recruitment of the catalytic subunit of
DNA-PK (DNA-PKcs) to DNA ends and to specific DNA sequences from which the kinase
is activated. Ku and DNA-PKcs plays essential roles in double-stranded DNA break 
repair and V(D)J recombination and have been implicated in the regulation of
specific gene transcription. In a yeast two-hybrid screen of a Jurkat T cell cDNA
library, we have identified a specific interaction between the 70-kDa subunit of 
Ku heterodimer and the homeodomain of HOXC4, a homeodomain protein expressed in
the hematopoietic system. Unexpectedly, a similar interaction with Ku was
observed for several additional homeodomain proteins including octamer
transcription factors 1 and 2 and Dlx2, suggesting that specific binding to Ku
may be a property shared by many homeodomain proteins. Ku-homeodomain binding was
mediated through the extreme C terminus of Ku70 and was abrogated by amino acid
substitutions at Lys595/Lys596. Ku binding allowed the recruitment of the
homeodomain to DNA ends and dramatically enhanced the phosphorylation of
homeodomain-containing proteins by DNA-PK. These results suggest that Ku
functions as a substrate docking protein for signaling by DNA-PK to homeodomain
proteins from DNA ends.

PMID: 11279128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Development. 2000 Dec;127(23):5093-100.

Loss- and gain-of-function mutations show a polycomb group function for Ring1A in
mice.

del Mar Lorente M(1), Marcos-Gutiérrez C, Pérez C, Schoorlemmer J, Ramírez A,
Magin T, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Cell Biology, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas,
Velázquez 144, Spain.

The products of the Polycomb group (PcG) of genes act as transcriptional
repressors involved in the maintenance of homeotic gene expression patterns
throughout development, from flies to mice. Biochemical and molecular evidence
suggests that the mouse Ring1A gene is a member of the PcG of genes. However,
genetic evidence is needed to establish PcG function for Ring1A, since contrary
to all other murine PcG genes, there is no known Drosophila PcG gene encoding a
homolog of the Ring1A protein. To study Ring1A function we have generated a mouse
line lacking Ring1A and mouse lines overexpressing Ring1A. Both Ring1A(-/-)and
Ring1A(+/-) mice show anterior transformations and other abnormalities of the
axial skeleton, which indicates an unusual sensitivity of axial skeleton
patterning to Ring1A gene dosage. Ectopic expression of Ring1A also results in
dose-dependent anterior transformations of vertebral identity, many of which,
interestingly, are shared by Ring1A(-/-) mice. In contrast, the alterations of
Hox gene expression observed in both type of mutant mice are subtle and involve a
reduced number of Hox genes. Taken together, these results provide genetic
evidence for a PcG function of the mouse Ring1A gene.

PMID: 11060235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Exp Hematol. 2000 May;28(5):569-74.

The retroviral transduction of HOXC4 into human CD34(+) cells induces an in vitro
expansion of clonogenic and early progenitors.

Daga A(1), Podesta M, Capra MC, Piaggio G, Frassoni F, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)IST National Institute for Cancer Research, Universita di Genova, Genova,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: +HOX genes are expressed in the hematopoietic system and increasing
data point to their involvement in the control of proliferation and/or
differentiation. Genes belonging to the C cluster are preferentially expressed in
developing and differentiated lymphoid lineages. However, recent studies
demonstrated, by RT-PCR, that the HOXC4 gene is also actively transcribed in the 
most undifferentiated hematopoietic cells (CD34(+)38(low)) and in more mature
myeloid and erythroid progenitors. We evaluated the expression of HOXC4 protein
on human CD34(+) cells and the in vitro effect of its overexpression on
proliferation and differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We assessed the expression of HOXC4 on human CD34(+) cells
using a polyclonal antibody raised against the C-terminal portion of the protein 
expressed using the baculovirus system. Overexpression of HOXC4 in human CD34(+) 
cells was obtained by retroviral gene transfer; its effect on clonogenic (CFU-GM,
BFU-E, and CFU-GEMM) and early progenitors (LTC-IC) was evaluated.
RESULTS: The HOXC4 protein is indeed expressed in human CD34(+) cells, and its
overexpression in human CD34(+) cells increases the proliferation potential of
clonogenic and early progenitors. CFU-GM showed a median threefold expansion
(range: 1.1-19.4; p < 0.002) compared with control transduced with the vector
alone. The increment of BFU-E was higher (median ninefold, range 2.5-35; p < 0.
0009) and erythroid colonies presented a larger size with normal morphology. An
even more marked effect was observed on LTC-IC (median 13, onefold; range
4.1-102.1, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that HOXC4 is expressed in CD34(+) cells and that its 
overexpression induces an in vitro expansion of committed as well as very early
hematopoietic progenitors. The most striking effect was obtained on LTC-IC with
an expansion of 13.1-fold. The enforced expression of HOXC4 induced a significant
increase (p < 0.009) in the number of erythroid colonies compared with CFU-GM,
although without perturbing, at least in vitro, the maturation program of the
cells. On the other hand, the effect of the gene overexpression did not induce
any skewing in the colony types derived from the myeloid lineage.

PMID: 10812247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gastroenterology. 1999 Dec;117(6):1339-51.

Coordinated expression of 3' hox genes during murine embryonal gut development:
an enteric Hox code.

Pitera JE(1), Smith VV, Thorogood P, Milla PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, England. J.Pitera@ich.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hox genes are highly conserved developmental control genes
that may be organized and expressed in the form of a code required for correct
morphogenesis. Little is known about their control of the embryonal gut. However,
Hox paralogues 4 and 5, which are expressed at the sites of origin of vagal
neural crest cells and splanchnic mesoderm, are likely to be important. We have
studied the expression domains of these genes in the gut both spatially and
temporally.
METHODS: CD1 mice embryos of embryonic days E8.5-E17.5 were studied. The spatial 
and temporal expression patterns of messenger RNA of Hoxa4, b4, c4, d4, a5, c5,
and b5 homeoprotein were determined by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry in whole embryos, whole gastrointestinal tracts, and
vibratome sections.
RESULTS: There were different spatial, temporal, and combinatorial expression
patterns in different morphological regions: foregut, prececal gut, cecum, and
postcecal gut. Two dynamic gradients, rostral and caudal, were coordinated with
nested expression domains along the gut primordium. Region-specific domains were 
present in the stomach and cecum.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression patterns of genes in paralogous groups 4 and 5
suggest that they are organized to form a specific enteric Hox code required for 
correct enteric development.

PMID: 10579975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Leukemia. 1998 Nov;12(11):1724-32.

Differentiation and cell-type-restricted expression of HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 in 
myeloid leukemias and normal myeloid cells.

Bijl JJ(1), van Oostveen JW, Walboomers JM, Brink AT, Vos W, Ossenkoppele GJ,
Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Academic Hospital of the Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

HOX genes have shown a lineage-specific expression in hematopoiesis and are
suggested as being involved in the expression of certain adhesion molecules.
Recently, we have demonstrated that HOXC4 and HOXC6, but not HOXC5, are expressed
during lymphoid differentiation. Reports on the expression of these genes in
myeloid leukemias and normal myeloid cells are still scarce. Therefore, we have
investigated the expression of HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 in purified subpopulations 
of bone marrow in addition to 36 specimens of acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs),
eight chronic myeloid leukemias (CMLs), several myeloid cell lines and cutaneous 
localizations of three myelomonocytic leukemias and one granulocytic sarcoma by
RT-PCR and partly by RNA in situ hybridization (RISH). HOXC4 and HOXC6
transcripts were both detected by RT-PCR in 22/36 and 24/36 AMLs, respectively.
The distribution of HOXC4 and HOXC6 gene expression over the different types of
AML was largely similar and covered all types of AML. In contrast, HOXC5 gene
expression was found in only 6/32 AMLs. Expression of HOXC5 was restricted to
AMLs of the granulocytic (FAB M1-M3), early monocytic (FAB M4) and early
erythroid (FAB M6) lineage. In general, except in one FAB M5b case, no expression
of HOXC5 was found in AMLs derived from late stages of monocytic (FAB M5) and
megakaryocytic (FAB M7) lineages. As for HOXC4 and HOXC6, expression of HOXC5 was
absent in CMLs. Using RISH significant HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 expression was
found in a number of additionally studied AML samples of different FAB
classification (M2, M4, M5b and M5b), (M2 and M5b) (M2, M4, M5b), respectively.
In tissue localizations of leukemias a different expression pattern of HOXC4,
HOXC5 and HOXC6 was found. In contrast to mature leukemic stages of myeloid
differentiation, these skin localizations of leukemias expressed HOXC5 and HOXC6.
HOXC4 expression was found both in leukemic cells derived from peripheral blood
and from cutaneous localizations. Besides HOXC4 expression in monocytes no
expression of HOXC4, HOXC5 and HOXC6 was found in granulocytes and monocytes,
colonies of growth factor-induced CD34+ bone marrow cells. In earliest
CD34+/CD38low and high cell fractions of bone marrow only HOXC4 and in
megakaryocytic cells both HOXC4 and HOXC6 were found. Thus, the expression
patterns of these HOXC genes found in the limited number of cell fractions of
normal bone marrow suggest that the expression patterns found in AMLs and CMLs
might reflect the normal situation. Furthermore, the presence of HOXC5 and HOXC6 
expression specifically in skin infiltrates of late differentiation stages of
myeloid leukemias, suggests an additional role for these genes in the positioning
of these myeloid cells in skin tissue.

PMID: 9823947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Feb;110(2):110-5.

HOX homeobox genes exhibit spatial and temporal changes in expression during
human skin development.

Stelnicki EJ(1), Kömüves LG, Kwong AO, Holmes D, Klein P, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence
HJ, Adzick NS, Harrison M, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

The spatial and temporal deployment of HOX homeobox genes along the spinal axis
and in limb buds during fetal development is a key program in embryonic pattern
formation. Although we have previously reported that several of the HOX homeobox 
genes are expressed during murine skin development, there is no information about
developmental expression of HOX genes in human skin. We have now used reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, in conjunction with a set of degenerate 
oligonucleotide primers, to identify a subset of HOX genes that are expressed
during human fetal skin development. In situ hybridization analyses demonstrated 
that there were temporal and spatial shifts in expression of these genes. Strong 
HOXA4 expression was detected in the basal cell layers of 10 wk fetal epidermis
and throughout the epidermis and dermis of 17 wk skin, whereas weak signal was
present in the granular layer of newborn and adult skin. The expression patterns 
of HOXA5 and HOXA7 were similar, but their expression was weaker. In situ
hybridization analysis also revealed strong HOXC4 and weaker HOXB7 expression
throughout fetal development, whereas HOXB4 was expressed at barely detectable
levels. Differential HOX gene expression was also observed in developing hair
follicles, and sebaceous and sweat glands. None of the HOX genes examined were
detected in the adult dermis.

PMID: 9457903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Blood. 1997 Nov 15;90(10):4116-25.

HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 expression in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma: preferential
expression of the HOXC5 gene in primary cutaneous anaplastic T-cell and
oro-gastrointestinal tract mucosa-associated B-cell lymphomas.

Bijl JJ(1), van Oostveen JW, Walboomers JM, Horstman A, van den Brule AJ,
Willemze R, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Most of the 39 members of the homeobox (HOX) gene family are believed to control 
blood cell development. HOXC4 and HOXC6 gene expression levels increase with
differentiation of lymphoid cells. In contrast, HOXC5 is not expressed in the
lymphoid lineage, but was found in lymphoid cell lines, representing the
neoplastic equivalents of various differentiation stages of T and B lymphocytes. 
In the present study, we investigated the HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 gene expression
pattern in 89 non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs) of different histologic subtypes and
originating from different sites. Using RNA in situ hybridization and
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, we found
expression of HOXC4 in 83 of 88 and HOXC6 in 77 of 88 NHLs and leukemias
investigated. In contrast, HOXC5 expression was found in only 26 of 87 NHLs and
appeared to be preferentially expressed by two specific subsets of lymphomas, ie,
primary cutaneous anaplastic T-cell lymphomas (9 of 9) and extranodal marginal
zone B-cell lymphomas (maltomas; 7 of 9). These results indicate that, in
contrast to HOXC4 and HOXC6, HOXC5 shows a type- and site-restricted expression
pattern in both T- and B-cell NHLs.

PMID: 9354682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Pathol. 1997 Oct;151(4):1067-74.

HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 expression in primary cutaneous lymphoid lesions. High
expression of HOXC5 in anaplastic large-cell lymphomas.

Bijl JJ(1), Rieger E, van Oostveen JW, Walboomers JM, Kreike M, Willemze R,
Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Homeobox (HOX) genes are involved in the lineage-specific differentiation of bone
marrow stem cells. Recently, we reported a largely similar expression pattern of 
HOXC4 and HOXC6 in normal and neoplastic cells of the lymphoid lineage. In
contrast, HOXC5 was specifically expressed in a subset of B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas (B-NHL) but not in normal lymphocytes or lymphoid leukemias. This might
suggest a role for HOXC5 in the pathogenesis of these lymphomas. In the present
study the expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 in primary cutaneous lymphomas
was investigated. Using RNA in situ hybridization (RISH) and semiquantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we found strong
expression of HOXC4 and HOXC6 in all, except one, primary cutaneous lymphomas and
all reactive cutaneous lymphoid infiltrates. Interestingly, a strong expression
of HOXC5 in primary anaplastic CD30+ large T-cell lymphomas was found. RISH was
consistently negative for HOXC5 in all other types of primary cutaneous B- and
T-cell lymphomas. However, by semiquantitative RT-PCR these lymphomas showed a
weak expression of HOXC5 mRNA. Therefore, we concluded that these lymphomas
express low constitutive levels of HOXC5 mRNA. Furthermore, HOXC5 expression was 
consistently absent in reactive cutaneous lymphoid infiltrates, hyperplastic
tonsils and lymph nodes, and peripheral blood lymphocytes either unstimulated or 
stimulated by a cocktail of CD3 and CD28 antibodies. As a strong expression of
HOXC5 in primary cutaneous lymphomas was observed only in anaplastic large T-cell
lymphomas and reactive control tissues lacked HOXC5 expression, these data
strongly support a role for HOXC5 in the genesis of anaplastic large-T-cell
lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC1858029
PMID: 9327740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nat Genet. 1997 May;16(1):79-83.

Organization of the Fugu rubripes Hox clusters: evidence for continuing evolution
of vertebrate Hox complexes.

Aparicio S(1), Hawker K, Cottage A, Mikawa Y, Zuo L, Venkatesh B, Chen E,
Krumlauf R, Brenner S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute for Developmental Biology and Cancer Research,
Cambridge, UK. saparici@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

The clustered organization of Hox genes provides a powerful opportunity to
examine gene gain and loss in evolution because physical linkage is a key
diagnostic feature which allows homology to be established unambiguously.
Furthermore, Hox genes play a key role in determination of axial and appendicular
skeletal morphology and may be a key component of the evolution of diverse
metazoan body forms. Despite suggestions that changes in Hox gene number played a
role in evolution of metazoan body plans, there has been a general lack of
evidence for such variation amongst gnathostomes (or indeed any vertebrate) and
it has therefore been widely assumed that differential regulation may be the key 
element in all vertebrate Hox evolution. We have studied the Hox gene clusters of
a teleost fish, Fugu rubripes, to test the possibility that Hox organization may 
have varied since the origin of jawed vertebrates. We have identified four Hox
complexes in Fugu and found an unprecedented degree of variation when compared
with tetrapod clusters. Our data show that: Fugu clusters are widely variant with
respect to length; at least nine genes have been lost; there is a new group-2
paralogue; and pseudo-gene remnants of group-1 and group-3 paralogues were found 
in the Hoxc complex, when compared with the present mammalian clusters. We show
that gene loss after duplication of the prototypical vertebrate Hox clusters is a
key feature of both tetrapod and fish evolution.

PMID: 9140399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Biol. 1996 Jul 10;177(1):232-49.

Targeted disruption of hoxc-4 causes esophageal defects and vertebral
transformations.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah, 84112, USA.

Mice carrying a nonfunctional allele of hoxc-4 have been generated by gene
targeting. The phenotype of mice homozygous for this mutation is strikingly
different from those reported in mice lacking the paralogous genes hoxa-4,
hoxb-4, and hoxd-4. In contrast to the mutants of the paralogous family members, 
hoxc-4 homozygotes do not manifest abnormalities in the cervical vertebrae, but
instead show vertebral defects that extend from the second thoracic vertebra (t2)
to t11. Therefore, defects do not correspond to the anterior limit of expression 
of hoxc-4, but rather begin within the region of strong hoxc-4 expression in the 
prevertebral anlagen (i.e., pv7-14). While hoxc-4 mutant homozygotes that reach
adulthood are fertile and appear outwardly normal, most die before weaning age.
The high lethality appears to result from partial or complete blockage of the
lumen of the esophagus over a large portion of its length, as well as
disorganization of the esophageal musculature. Although the Drosophila homolog of
hoxc-4, Deformed, is autoregulated, mutation of the hoxc-4 gene does not affect
transcription of its paralogous family members. However, in hoxc-4 mutant
embryos, transcription of both the hoxc-5 and hoxc-6 genes is altered. Employment
of cissolidustrans analysis showed that the hoxc-4 mutation acts in cis to affect
the pattern of hoxc-5 expression. Therefore, this mutation is likely to cause a
reduction of hoxc-5 function as well as complete loss of hoxc-4 function.

PMID: 8660891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Blood. 1996 Mar 1;87(5):1737-45.

Expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 in human lymphoid cell lines, leukemias,
and benign and malignant lymphoid tissue.

Bijl J(1), van Oostveen JW, Kreike M, Rieger E, van der Raaij-Helmer LM,
Walboomers JM, Corte G, Boncinelli E, van den Brule AJ, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Free University Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Besides their regulatory role in embryogenesis, homeobox (HOX) genes are
expressed in a specific manner in hematopoietic cell lineages, implying a role in
the molecular regulation of hematopoiesis. Some HOX C cluster genes are found to 
be expressed in lymphoid cells of mice and humans. Their function and expression 
in normal hematopoiesis are still largely unknown. We have studied the mRNA
expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 in several stages of lymphocyte maturation 
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and RNA in situ
hybridization (RISH). We examined CD34+/CD38low and CD34+/CD38high cells obtained
from normal donor bone marrow (BM), a panel of 19 lymphoid cell lines, several
types of leukemias and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHL), and lymphocytes isolated
from tonsillar tissue and peripheral blood (PB). HOXC4 and HOXC6 were found to be
expressed during maturation in B- and T-lymphoid cells. The expression of each
gene was found to be initiated at different cell maturation stages. HOXC4
transcripts were present in CD34+/CD38low cells, which are thought to comprise
stem cells and noncommitted progenitor cells, and in subsequent stages to
terminally maturated lymphoid cells. HOXC6 expression is initiated in equivalents
of prothymocyte and pre-pre-B cell stage and remains present in mature cells.
However, HOXC5 is only expressed in neoplastic cell lines and in neoplastic cells
of NHL, but not in CD34+ BM cells, nor in resting or activated lymphoid cells
isolated from tonsil, PB, or in leukemia cells. In cell lines, weak expression of
HOXC5 is initiated in equivalents of pre-B cell and common thymocyte stage and is
continuously expressed in mature cell lines. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that
expression levels of HOXC5 were much lower than those of HOXC4 and HOXC6;
furthermore an increase of expression of HOXC4, HOXC5, and HOXC6 during lymphoid 
cell differentiation was demonstrated. Thus, mainly mature lymphoid cell lines
and neoplastic cells of NHL do express HOXC5, in contrast to the lack of
expression in normal lymphoid cells and leukemias. These findings suggest
involvement of HOXC5 in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 8634419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Biol. 1996 Feb 25;174(1):55-64.

Targeted disruption in the mouse Hoxc-4 locus results in axial skeleton homeosis 
and malformation of the xiphoid process.

Saegusa H(1), Takahashi N, Noguchi S, Suemori H.

Author information: 
(1)Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology in Meiji Institute of Health
Science, Japan.

Hoxc-4 is a mouse homeobox gene located at the 3' end of the HoxC cluster. Of the
HoxC genes, Hoxc-4 is expressed in the most anterior regions of the central
nervous system and prevertebral column. To investigate its role in mouse
development, we have generated Hoxc-4 mutant mice by gene targeting. Mice
homozygous for the Hoxc-4 mutation are viable and fertile. Analysis of the
skeletal system of homozygous mutants revealed various abnormalities in the
cervical and thoracic regions. The most frequent abnormality was a partial
posterior homeotic transformation of the seventh cervical vertebra. Less
frequently, anterior transformations of the third and eighth thoracic vertebrae
were observed. Furthermore, the xiphoid process of the sternum was malformed such
that it had an aperture or a fissure. Although Hoxc-4 is expressed abundantly in 
the central nervous system, no obvious defects were observed. These results
suggest that Hoxc-4 is required for specifying cervical and thoracic vertebral
identity.

PMID: 8626021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Blood. 1995 Apr 15;85(8):2084-90.

Expression of HOXC4 homeoprotein in the nucleus of activated human lymphocytes.

Meazza R(1), Faiella A, Corsetti MT, Airoldi I, Ferrini S, Boncinelli E, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy.

We have analyzed the expression of homeoproteins of the HOX family in resting and
activated lymphoid cells and in neoplastic lymphoid cell lines by the use of
monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) already shown to react with the homeoproteins
HOXA10, HOXC6, and HOXD4, respectively. Anti-HOXA10 and C6 MoAbs DIDi not show
any reactivity with the lymphoid cells tested, whereas anti-HOXD4 MoAb stained
few resting peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and most phytohemagglutinin
(PHA)-stimulated PBLs as early as 6 hours after stimulation. The pattern of
staining of PHA-activated PBLs is reminiscent of the stages of nucleolar
fragmentation in different phases of the cell cycle. The MoAb reacted also with
activated or Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cells, with clonal or polyclonal T 
and natural killer (NK) cells, with leukemic T-cell lines, and with a Burkitt's
lymphoma cell line. RNAse protection experiments, per formed with probes specific
for HOXD4 or for the highly homologous HOXA4, HOXB4, and HOXC4, belonging to the 
same paralogy group, indicated that only HOXC4 mRNA is present in resting or
activated PBLs. Northern blot analysis on polyA+ RNA from activated PBLs or Raji 
cells showed the presence of two different HOXC4 transcripts of 2.8 and 1.9 kb.
Gel retardation and Southwestern blot assays showed the presence of a 32-kD
homeoprotein with DNA-binding properties typical of a HOX4 homeoprotein in
nucleolar extracts of PHA-activated, but not of resting, lymphocytes. Taken
together, these data indicate that the HOXC4 homeoprotein is expressed in
activated and/or proliferating lymphocytes of the T-, B-, or NK-cell lineage,
whereas it is weakly expressed in a minority of resting cells. The early
expression and the nucleolar localization suggest an involvement of HOXC4 in the 
regulation of genes controlling lymphocyte activation and/or proliferation.

PMID: 7718879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Invest Dermatol. 1994 Sep;103(3):341-6.

Expression of the homeobox gene HOXC4 in keratinocytes of normal skin and
epithelial skin tumors is correlated with differentiation.

Rieger E(1), Bijl JJ, van Oostveen JW, Soyer HP, Oudejans CB, Jiwa NM, Walboomers
JM, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Free University Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Homeobox (HOX) genes share a highly conserved 183-bp sequence. The encoded
proteins are capable of binding to specific DNA sequences and functioning as
transcription factors. HOX genes play a critical role in the temporal and spatial
differentiation of cells during embryogenesis. In several adult tissues, HOX
genes are expressed in a constant, tissue-specific pattern, whereas in malignant 
tumors of these tissues an altered expression pattern was found. We investigated 
the expression of HOXC4 in adult normal skin by reverse-transcription polymerase 
chain reaction and non-radioactive RNA in situ hybridization. Moreover, HOXC4
expression was studied in various epidermal neoplasms (solar keratosis, six
specimens; Bowen's disease, four; squamous cell carcinoma, nine; basal cell
carcinoma, three) by RNA in situ hybridization. HOXC4 was found to be expressed
in the suprabasal layers of the epidermis in normal skin specimens and the
adjacent non-lesional epidermis of all other specimens. Atypical keratinocytes of
solar keratoses and Bowen's disease as well as basaloid cells of basal cell
carcinomas were negative. In squamous cell carcinoma, well differentiated areas
with keratinization showed HOXC4 expression, whereas poorly differentiated areas 
were negative. Immunostaining with an antibody against cytokeratin 10, a marker
of epidermal differentiation, was performed. A good correlation between the
distribution pattern of HOXC4 and cytokeratin 10 in the lesions examined was
found. These results suggest that HOXC4 is expressed mainly in differentiated
keratinocytes. Lack of differentiation (as in neoplastic cells) is accompanied by
downregulation of HOXC4 expression.

PMID: 7915745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


