
1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 28;12(3):e1005738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005738.
eCollection 2016.

Bat Accelerated Regions Identify a Bat Forelimb Specific Enhancer in the HoxD
Locus.

Booker BM(1,)(2), Friedrich T(2,)(3), Mason MK(4), VanderMeer JE(1,)(2), Zhao
J(1,)(2,)(5), Eckalbar WL(1,)(2), Logan M(6,)(7), Illing N(4), Pollard
KS(2,)(3,)(8), Ahituv N(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States of America. (3)Gladstone Institutes, San
Francisco, California, United States of America. (4)Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. (5)Key Laboratory
of Advanced Control and Optimization for Chemical Processes of the Ministry of
Education, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.
(6)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom. (7)Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, Guys Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Division of Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States of America.

The molecular events leading to the development of the bat wing remain largely
unknown, and are thought to be caused, in part, by changes in gene expression
during limb development. These expression changes could be instigated by
variations in gene regulatory enhancers. Here, we used a comparative genomics
approach to identify regions that evolved rapidly in the bat ancestor, but are
highly conserved in other vertebrates. We discovered 166 bat accelerated regions 
(BARs) that overlap H3K27ac and p300 ChIP-seq peaks in developing mouse limbs.
Using a mouse enhancer assay, we show that five Myotis lucifugus BARs drive gene 
expression in the developing mouse limb, with the majority showing differential
enhancer activity compared to the mouse orthologous BAR sequences. These include 
BAR116, which is located telomeric to the HoxD cluster and had robust forelimb
expression for the M. lucifugus sequence and no activity for the mouse sequence
at embryonic day 12.5. Developing limb expression analysis of Hoxd10-Hoxd13 in
Miniopterus natalensis bats showed a high-forelimb weak-hindlimb expression for
Hoxd10-Hoxd11, similar to the expression trend observed for M. lucifugus BAR116
in mice, suggesting that it could be involved in the regulation of the bat HoxD
complex. Combined, our results highlight novel regulatory regions that could be
instrumental for the morphological differences leading to the development of the 
bat wing.

PMID: 27019019  [PubMed - in process]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7608. [Epub ahead of print]

Detection of aberrant methylation of a six-gene panel in serum DNA for diagnosis 
of breast cancer.

Shan M(1,)(2), Yin H(1), Li J(3), Li X(4), Wang D(5), Su Y(1), Niu M(1), Zhong
Z(1), Wang J(1), Zhang X(1), Kang W(6), Pang D(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Cancer Surgery, the Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, P.R. China. (2)Translational Medicine Research and
Cooperation Center of Northern China, Heilongjiang Academy of Medical Sciences,
Harbin, P.R. China. (3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, P.R. China. (4)Department of Pathology, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, P.R. China. (5)College of Bioinformatics Science and 
Technology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, P.R. China. (6)Department of
Oncology, General Hospital of Heilongjiang Province Land Reclamation
Headquarters, Harbin, P.R. China.

Detection of breast cancer at an early stage is the key for successful treatment 
and improvement of outcome. However the limitations of mammography are well
recognized, especially for those women with premenopausal breast cancer. Novel
approaches to breast cancer screening are necessary, especially in the developing
world where mammography is not feasible. In this study, we examined the promoter 
methylation of six genes (SFN, P16, hMLH1, HOXD13, PCDHGB7 and RASSF1a) in
circulating free DNA (cfDNA) extracted from serum. We used a high-throughput DNA 
methylation assay (MethyLight) to examine serum from 749 cases including breast
cancer patients, patients with benign breast diseases and healthy women. The
six-gene methylation panel test achieved 79.6% and 82.4% sensitivity with a
specificity of 72.4% and 78.1% in diagnosis of breast cancer when compared with
healthy and benign disease controls, respectively. Moreover, the methylation
panel positive group showed significant differences in the following independent 
variables: (a) involvement of family history of tumors; (b) a low proliferative
index, ki-67; (c) high ratios in luminal subtypes. Additionally the panel also
complemented some breast cancer cases which were neglected by mammography or
ultrasound. These data suggest that epigenetic markers in serum have potential
for diagnosis of breast cancer.

PMID: 26918343  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Dec 1;8(12):15591-8. eCollection 2015.

Molecular mechanism of Hoxd13-mediated congenital malformations in rat embryos.

Wang F(1), Du M(1), Wang R(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang W(1), Li H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ultrasonography, Maternal and Children Health Hospital of
Tangshan City China. (2)Department of Ultrasonography, The Affiliated Hospital of
North China University of Science and Technology China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanism of Hoxd13-mediated congenital
malformations in rat embryos.
METHODS: SD female rats were mated with male rats in a 1:1 mating scheme. Thirty 
pregnant female rats were randomly divided into three groups: the control group
receiving a normal diet, the model group receiving a vitamin A-deficient diet,
and the treatment group receiving a vitamin A-deficient diet supplemented with
pcDNA-Hoxd13. The expression of Hoxd13 mRNA and protein in normal embryonic
tissue and congenital malformations was determined by RT-PCR and Western blot
analysis. At day 20, rats were dissected, and the fetal weight, body and tail
length, and the number of live births, absorbed fetus, and stillbirth in each
group were recorded. Wnt and Slim1 expression was detected by RT-PCR and Western 
blot analysis. ß-catenin and c-myc expression was also quantified by Western blot
analysis.
RESULTS: The expression of Hoxd13 mRNA and protein in congenital malformations
was significantly lower compared with normal embryonic tissue (P<0.01). The
administration of exogenous Hoxd13 in the treatment group markedly increased the 
fetal weight, body and tail length (P<0.05), improved the embryonic survival
rate, and reduced the embryonic resorption rate and stillbirth rate (P<0.05).
Exogenous Hoxd13 markedly promoted the expression of Wnt2, Wnt5a, Wnt7b and Slim1
protein and mRNA (P<0.01), and the expression of ß-catenin and c-myc protein in
congenital malformations (P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Hoxd13 expression was decreased in rat embryos with congenital
malformations. The administration of exogenous Hoxd13 alleviated fetal
malformation probably through stimulation of Slim1 expression and Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4730041
PMID: 26884828  [PubMed - in process]


4. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 Feb 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Underlying genetic factors of the VATER/VACTERL association with special emphasis
on the "Renal" phenotype.

Reutter H(1,)(2), Hilger AC(3), Hildebrandt F(4), Ludwig M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127,
Bonn, Germany. reutter@uni-bonn.de. (2)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric
Intensive Care, Children's Hospital-University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
reutter@uni-bonn.de. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53127, Bonn, Germany. (4)Department of Medicine, Boston
Children's Hospital-Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of
Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The acronym VATER/VACTERL association (OMIM #192350) refers to the rare
non-random co-occurrence of the following component features (CFs): vertebral
defects (V), anorectal malformations (A), cardiac defects (C), tracheoesophageal 
fistula with or without esophageal atresia (TE), renal malformations (R), and
limb defects (L). According to epidemiological studies, the majority of patients 
with VATER/VACTERL association present with a "Renal" phenotype comprising a
large spectrum of congenital renal anomalies. This finding is supported by
evidence linking all of the human disease genes for the VATER/VACTERL association
identified to date, namely, FGF8, FOXF1, HOXD13, LPP, TRAP1, and ZIC3, with renal
malformations. Here we review these genotype-phenotype correlations and suggest
that the elucidation of the genetic causes of the VATER/VACTERL association will 
ultimately provide insights into the genetic causes of the complete spectrum of
congenital renal anomalies per se.

PMID: 26857713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Leukemia. 2016 Feb 5. doi: 10.1038/leu.2016.11. [Epub ahead of print]

GFI1 as a novel prognostic and therapeutic factor for AML/MDS.

Hönes JM(1), Botezatu L(1), Helness A(2), Vadnais C(2), Vassen L(1), Robert F(3),
Hergenhan SM(1), Thivakaran A(1), Schütte J(1), Al-Matary YS(1), Lams RF(1),
Fraszscak J(2), Makishima H(4), Radivoyevitch T(4), Przychodzen B(4), da
Conceição Castro SV(5,)(6), Görgens A(5), Giebel B(5), Klein-Hitpass L(7),
Lennartz K(7), Heuser M(8), Thiede C(9), Ehninger G(9), Dührsen U(1), Maciejewski
J(4), Möröy T(2,)(10), Khandanpour C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. (2)Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal (IRCM), Hematopoiesis and Cancer Research Unit, and Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada. (3)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal
(IRCM), Chromatin and Genomic Expression Research Unit, and Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada. (4)Department of Translational Hematology and
Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland, USA. (5)Institute for
Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Germany. (6)CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, Brasília.
(7)Institute for Cell Biology (Tumor Research), University Hospital Essen,
University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. (8)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis,
Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (9)Medical Clinic and Polyclinic, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (10)Département de microbiologie,
infectiologie et immunologie, Université de Montréal.

Genetic and epigenetic aberrations contribute to the initiation and progression
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). GFI1, a zinc-finger transcriptional repressor
exerts its function by recruiting histone-deacetylases (HDACs) to target genes.
We present data that low expression of GFI1 is associated with an inferior
prognosis of AML patients. To elucidate the mechanism behind this, we generated a
humanized mouse strain with reduced GFI1expression (GFI1-KD). Here we show that
AML development induced by onco-fusion proteins such as MLL-AF9 or NUP98-HOXD13
is accelerated in mice with low human GFI1 expression. Leukemic cells from
animals that express low levels of GFI1 show increased H3K9 acetylation compared 
to leukemic cells from mice with normal human GFI1 expression resulting in the
upregulation of genes involved in leukemogenesis. We investigated a new
epigenetic therapy approach for this subgroup of AML patients. We could show that
AML blasts from GFI1-KD mice and from AML patients with low GFI1 levels were more
sensitive to treatment with histone acetyltransferase inhibitors (HATis) than
cells with normal GFI1 expression levels. We suggest therefore that GFI1 has a
dose-dependent role in AML progression and development. GFI1 level are involved
in epigenetic regulation that could open new therapeutic approaches for
AML-patients.Leukemia accepted article preview online, 05 February 2016.
doi:10.1038/leu.2016.11.

PMID: 26847026  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 14;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2370-6.

Identification of genomic aberrations in hemangioblastoma by droplet digital PCR 
and SNP microarray highlights novel candidate genes and pathways for
pathogenesis.

Mehrian-Shai R(1), Yalon M(2), Moshe I(3), Barshack I(4,)(5), Nass D(6), Jacob
J(7), Dor C(8), Reichardt JK(9), Constantini S(10,)(11), Toren A(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and
Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
ruty.shai@sheba.health.gov.il. (2)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. michal@droren.co.il. (3)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. itaimoshe@gmail.com. (4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (5)Institute of 
Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (6)Institute of Pathology, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. Dvora.Nass@sheba.health.gov.il. (7)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Jasmine.Jacob@sheba.health.gov.il. (8)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. Chen.Gefen@sheba.health.gov.il. (9)Division of Tropical Health and 
Medicine, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
Juergen.reichardt@jcu.edu.au. (10)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (11)Department of
Pediatric Neurosurgery, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv-Sourasky Medical
Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (12)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. amost@post.tau.ac.il.
(13)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
amost@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: The genetic mechanisms underlying hemangioblastoma development are
still largely unknown. We used high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism
microarrays and droplet digital PCR analysis to detect copy number variations
(CNVs) in total of 45 hemangioblastoma tumors.
RESULTS: We identified 94 CNVs with a median of 18 CNVs per sample. The most
frequently gained regions were on chromosomes 1 (p36.32) and 7 (p11.2). These
regions contain the EGFR and PRDM16 genes. Recurrent losses were located at
chromosome 12 (q24.13), which includes the gene PTPN11.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first high-resolution genome-wide view of
chromosomal changes in hemangioblastoma and identify 23 candidate genes: EGFR,
PRDM16, PTPN11, HOXD11, HOXD13, FLT3, PTCH, FGFR1, FOXP1, GPC3, HOXC13, HOXC11,
MKL1, CHEK2, IRF4, GPHN, IKZF1, RB1, HOXA9, and micro RNA, such as hsa-mir-196a-2
for hemangioblastoma pathogenesis. Furthermore, our data implicate that cell
proliferation and angiogenesis promoting pathways may be involved in the
molecular pathogenesis of hemangioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4712606
PMID: 26768750  [PubMed - in process]


7. J Hum Genet. 2016 Jan 14. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.172. [Epub ahead of print]

Variable expressivity of the phenotype in two families with brachydactyly type E,
craniofacial dysmorphism, short stature and delayed bone age caused by novel
heterozygous mutations in the PTHLH gene.

Jamsheer A(1,)(2), Sowinska-Seidler A(1), Olech EM(1), Socha M(1), Kozlowski
K(3), Pyrkosz A(4), Trzeciak T(5), Materna-Kiryluk A(1,)(2), Latos-Bielenska
A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland. (2)NZOZ Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney,
NSW, Australia. (4)Department of General and Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. (5)Department of Orthopedics and
Traumatology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Brachydactyly refers to shortening of digits due to hypoplasia or aplasia of
bones forming the hands and/or feet. Isolated brachydactyly type E (BDE), which
is characterized by shortened metacarpals and/or metatarsals, results in a small 
proportion of patients from HOXD13 or PTHLH mutations, although in the majority
of cases molecular lesion remains unknown. BDE, like other brachydactylies, shows
clinical heterogeneity with highly variable intrafamilial and interindividual
expressivity. In this study, we investigated two Polish cases (one familial and
one sporadic) presenting with BDE and additional symptoms due to novel PTHLH
mutations. Apart from BDE, the affected family showed short stature, mild
craniofacial dysmorphism and delayed bone age. Sanger sequencing of PTHLH
revealed a novel heterozygous frameshift mutation c.258delC(p.N87Tfs*18) in two
affected individuals and one relative manifesting mild brachydactyly. The
sporadic patient, in addition to BDE, presented with craniofacial dysmorphism,
normal stature and bone age, and was demonstrated to carry a de novo heterozygous
c.166C>T(p.R56*) mutation. Our paper reports on the two novel truncating PTHLH
variants, resulting in variable combination of BDE and other symptoms. Data shown
here expand the knowledge on the phenotypic presentation of PTHLH mutations,
highlighting significant clinical variability and incomplete penetrance of the
PTHLH-related symptoms.Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 14
January 2016; doi:10.1038/jhg.2015.172.

PMID: 26763883  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Cell Death Differ. 2016 Jan 8. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2015.159. [Epub ahead of print]

PUMA promotes apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitors driving leukemic progression
in a mouse model of myelodysplasia.

Guirguis AA(1,)(2), Slape CI(3), Failla LM(4), Saw J(1), Tremblay CS(1), Powell
DR(5,)(6), Rossello F(7,)(8), Wei A(1,)(2), Strasser A(9), Curtis DJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Central Clinical School, Monash
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (2)Department of Clinical Haematology, The
Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (4)Bone Marrow
Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)Bioinformatics Platform, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (6)School
of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biomedical and Psychological Sciences, Monash 
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (7)Department of Anatomy and Developmental
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (8)Australian Regenerative
Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (9)Molecular
Genetics of Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research (WEHI), Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis with
resultant cytopenias. Increased apoptosis and aberrantly functioning progenitors 
are thought to contribute to this phenotype. As is the case for other
malignancies, overcoming apoptosis is believed to be important in progression
toward acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Using the NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) transgenic
mouse model of MDS, we previously reported that overexpression of the
anti-apoptotic protein BCL2, blocked apoptosis and improved cytopenias,
paradoxically, delaying leukemic progression. To further understand this
surprising result, we examined the role of p53 and its pro-apoptotic effectors,
PUMA and NOXA in NHD13 mice. The absence of p53 or PUMA but not NOXA reduced
apoptosis and expanded the numbers of MDS-repopulating cells. Despite a similar
effect on apoptosis and cell numbers, the absence of p53 and PUMA had
diametrically opposed effects on progression to AML: absence of p53 accelerated
leukemic progression, while absence of PUMA significantly delayed progression.
This may be explained in part by differences in cellular responses to DNA damage.
The absence of p53 led to higher levels of <U+03B3>-H2AX (indicative of persistent DNA
lesions) while PUMA-deficient NHD13 progenitors resolved DNA lesions in a manner 
comparable to wild-type cells. These results suggest that targeting PUMA may
improve the cytopenias of MDS without a detrimental effect on leukemic
progression thus warranting further investigation.Cell Death and Differentiation 
advance online publication, 8 January 2016; doi:10.1038/cdd.2015.159.

PMID: 26742432  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Jul;31(4):255-8.

[Analysis of HOXD13 gene in polydactyly in dispersion type].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhaoliang L, Biao W, Xiuying S, Qicai L, Meishui W, Houbing Z.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze HOXD13 gene in polydactyly in dispersion type of Fujian Han
population in order to know whether there is mutation in HOXD13.
METHODS: All members were evaluated physically and radlologically. Genomic DNA
was extracted from peripheral blood of the patients who were treated from Dec.
2012 to Apr. 2013, their parents, grandparents, and normal volunteers from our
department. The polymerase chain reaction ( PCR) , agarose gel electrophoresis
and DNA sequence analysis were adopted to analyze HOXD13 from six cases with
polydactyly and forty normal volunteers.
RESULTS: All patients had no family history. A heterozygous synonymous mutation, 
c. 291 C > T( p. A60A), was detected in exon 1 of the HOXD13 Gene in five of the 
polydactyly patients. Similar mutation was not detected in one brachy dactyly
patient and the forty normal volunteers.
CONCLUSION: A heterozygous synonymous mutation, c.291C > T (p. A60A), of the
HOXD13 gene may be related with polydactyly in dispersion type of Chinese han
population.

PMID: 26665923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Blood. 2016 Feb 4;127(5):616-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-06-653113. Epub 2015 Dec
4.

Targeting of the bone marrow microenvironment improves outcome in a murine model 
of myelodysplastic syndrome.

Balderman SR(1), Li AJ(2), Hoffman CM(3), Frisch BJ(1), Goodman AN(4), LaMere
MW(1), Georger MA(4), Evans AG(2), Liesveld JL(1), Becker MW(1), Calvi LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, 
and. (4)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY.

In vitro evidence suggests that the bone marrow microenvironment (BMME) is
altered in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs). Here, we study the BMME in MDS in
vivo using a transgenic murine model of MDS with hematopoietic expression of the 
translocation product NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13). This model exhibits a prolonged
period of cytopenias prior to transformation to leukemia and is therefore ideal
to interrogate the role of the BMME in MDS. In this model, hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells (HSPCs) were decreased in NHD13 mice by flow cytometric
analysis. The reduction in the total phenotypic HSPC pool in NHD13 mice was
confirmed functionally with transplantation assays. Marrow microenvironmental
cellular components of the NHD13 BMME were found to be abnormal, including
increases in endothelial cells and in dysfunctional mesenchymal and osteoblastic 
populations, whereas megakaryocytes were decreased. Both CC chemokine ligand 3
and vascular endothelial growth factor, previously shown to be increased in human
MDS, were increased in NHD13 mice. To assess whether the BMME contributes to
disease progression in NHD13 mice, we performed transplantation of NHD13 marrow
into NHD13 mice or their wild-type (WT) littermates. WT recipients as compared
with NHD13 recipients of NHD13 marrow had a lower rate of the combined outcome of
progression to leukemia and death. Moreover, hematopoietic function was superior 
in a WT BMME as compared with an NHD13 BMME. Our data therefore demonstrate a
contributory role of the BMME to disease progression in MDS and support a
therapeutic strategy whereby manipulation of the MDS microenvironment may improve
hematopoietic function and overall survival.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4742549 [Available on 2017-02-04]
PMID: 26637787  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):11407-13. eCollection 2015.

Prognostic significance of HOXD13 expression in human breast cancer.

Zhong ZB(1), Shan M(1), Qian C(1), Liu T(1), Shi QY(1), Wang J(1), Liu Y(2), Liu 
Y(1), Huang YX(1), Pang D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University Harbin, China. (2)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Harbin Medical University Harbin, China. (3)Department of Breast Surgery,
The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin Medical University Harbin, China ;
Heilongjiang Academy of Medical Sciences Heilongjiang, China.

Homeobox protein Hox-D13 has been recognized as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic 
cancer. To evaluate the function of HOXD13 in invasive breast cancer
pathogenesis, we examined HOXD13 expression in 434 breast cancer tissues and 230 
their counterpart normal breast tissues by immunohistochemistry using a tissue
microarray (TMA). The association between HOXD13 expression and
clinicopathological factors was analyzed by use of Chi-square test. Kaplan-Meier 
survival curves and log-rank tests were applied to analyze the survival status.
Cox regression was applied for multivariate analysis of prognosis. We found that 
low HOXD13 expression accounts for 84.3% in breast cancer tissues. Low HOXD13
expression was significantly associated with large tumor size (P=0.038) and
positive lymph node metastasis (LNM) (P=0.026). In Kaplan-Meier survival curves
and log-rank tests, the patients with HOXD13-negative breast cancer showed
significantly poorer outcomes (69.867 ± 1.058 months) in terms of overall
survival (OS) than positive-HOXD13-expression patients (76.248 ± 1.069 months)
(P=0.003). And in multivariate analysis, low level of HOXD13 expression was a
significant unfavorable prognostic factor. So we conclude that down-regulation of
HOXD13 might be a potentially useful prognostic marker for patients with breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4637683
PMID: 26617867  [PubMed - in process]


12. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):10716-24. eCollection 2015.

HOXD13 methylation status is a prognostic indicator in breast cancer.

Zhong Z(1), Shan M(1), Wang J(1), Liu T(1), Xia B(1), Niu M(1), Ren Y(1), Pang
D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University Harbin, China. (2)Department of Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor
Hospital of Harbin Medical University Harbin, China ; Heilongjiang Academy of
Medical Sciences China.

Homeobox protein Hox-D13 is encoded by HOXD13 gene which is frequently methylated
in cancer and has been recognized as a tumor suppressor in pancreatic cancer. In 
this study, we examined HOXD13 mRNA expression in 40 pairs of breast cancers and 
corresponding normal breast tissues. Bisulfite sequencing of HOXD13 promoter was 
performed in 6 pairs of breast tumors and corresponding normal breast tissues to 
examine the potential HOXD13 CpG methylated sites. HOXD13 DNA methylation
frequency analysis was performed using MethyLight in 196 pairs of breast cancers 
and corresponding normal breast samples. DNA methylation status and
clinico-pathological features were investigated. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis
and Cox proportional hazards models were utilized to assess the effect of
methylation status on overall survival. We found that 60% (24/40) of breast
cancers showed low HOXD13 mRNA expression when compared with corresponding normal
breast tissue. The predicted CpG island was located in the -1325 bp to +675 bp
region. Next, the -332 bp site in HOXD13 gene promoter was further examined and
in 57.7% (113/196) samples methylation was detected at this site. HOXD13
methylation was correlated with larger tumor size (P = 0.004), but not with other
clinico-pathological parameters. In addition, patients with methylated -HOXD13
promoter had worse overall survival (OS) (P = 0.005). Based on our results we
conclude that HOXD13 methylation is a common event in primary breast cancer and
is associated with poor survival of breast cancer patients. HOXD13 methylation
could therefore potentially be used as a prognostic factor for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4637597
PMID: 26617782  [PubMed - in process]


13. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Mar;170(3):615-21. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37464. Epub 2015
Nov 18.

A homozygous HOXD13 missense mutation causes a severe form of synpolydactyly with
metacarpal to carpal transformation.

Ibrahim DM(1,)(2), Tayebi N(1,)(2), Knaus A(1), Stiege AC(2), Sahebzamani A(3),
Hecht J(2,)(4), Mundlos S(1,)(2,)(5,)(4), Spielmann M(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (2)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 
Germany. (3)Department of Genetic Welfare Organization, Kerman, Iran. (4)Berlin
Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (5)Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative Therapies 
(BSRT), Berlin, Germany.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a rare congenital limb disorder characterized by
syndactyly between the third and fourth fingers and an additional digit in the
syndactylous web. In most cases SPD is caused by heterozygous mutations in HOXD13
resulting in the expansion of a N-terminal polyalanine tract. If homozygous, the 
mutation results in severe shortening of all metacarpals and phalanges with a
morphological transformation of metacarpals to carpals. Here, we describe a novel
homozygous missense mutation in a family with unaffected consanguineous parents
and severe brachydactyly and metacarpal-to-carpal transformation in the affected 
child. We performed whole exome sequencing on the index patient, followed by
Sanger sequencing of parents and patient to investigate cosegregation. The
DNA-binding ability of the mutant protein was tested with electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. We demonstrate that the c.938C>G (p.313T>R) mutation in
the DNA-binding domain of HOXD13 prevents binding to DNA in vitro. Our results
show to our knowledge for the first time that a missense mutation in HOXD13
underlies severe brachydactyly with metacarpal-to-carpal transformation. The
mutation is non-penetrant in heterozygous carriers. In conjunction with the
literature we propose the possibility that the metacarpal-to-carpal
transformation results from a homozygous loss of functional HOXD13 protein in
humans in combination with an accumulation of non-functional HOXD13 that might be
able to interact with other transcription factors in the developing limb. © 2015 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26581570  [PubMed - in process]


14. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2015;53 Suppl 2:S188-93.

[The role of developmental HOX genes in cervical cancer].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

López-Romero R(1), Marrero-Rodríguez D, Romero-Morelos P, Villegas V, Valdivia A,
Arreola H, Huerta-Padilla V, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de
Oncología, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal, México. rlopez_99@yahoo.com.

Cervical cancer (CC) is a multifactorial disease associated to genetic,
environmental and epigenetic factors, being the infection by human papillomavirus
the main etiologic agent. Additionally, the alteration in the expression of
transcription factors has been considered of importance for the development of
this tumor. HOX genes encode a group of transcription factors involved in
cellular proliferation and differentiation processes during the development of
embryonic structures in vertebrates; their aberrant expression is associated with
tumorigenesis and metastasis. A range of evidence suggests a role for HOX genes
in the development of cervical neoplastic cell. Studies in CC cell lines, primary
tumors and premalignant lesions have suggested the involvement of HOXA1, HOXC5,
C6, C8 and C10, HOXD9 and HOXD13 in the process of cervical carcinogenesis. Also,
the de novo expression of genes HOXB2, B4, B13 and HOXC11-C13 appears to be
involved in the process of malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cell. 
These data would allow to open a field in search of new molecular markers in
cervical cancer and the development of new therapeutic strategies for this
malignancy.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26462515  [PubMed - in process]


15. Hum Mutat. 2015 Dec;36(12):1150-4. doi: 10.1002/humu.22859. Epub 2015 Sep 14.

Targeted Resequencing of 29 Candidate Genes and Mouse Expression Studies
Implicate ZIC3 and FOXF1 in Human VATER/VACTERL Association.

Hilger AC(1), Halbritter J(2,)(3), Pennimpede T(4,)(5), van der Ven A(1,)(2),
Sarma G(6), Braun DA(2), Porath JD(2), Kohl S(2), Hwang DY(2), Dworschak
GC(1,)(2), Hermann BG(4), Pavlova A(7), El-Maarri O(7,)(8), Nöthen MM(1,)(9),
Ludwig M(10), Reutter H(1,)(6), Hildebrandt F(2,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department 
of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology,
University Clinic Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (4)Department of Developmental
Genetics, Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada. (6)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care,
Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (7)Institute of
Experimental Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany. (8)Department of Natural Sciences, Lebanese American University,
Byblos/Beirut, Lebanon. (9)Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center,
University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (10)Department of Clinical Chemistry and
Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (11)Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland.

The VATER/VACTERL association describes the combination of congenital anomalies
including vertebral defects, anorectal malformations, cardiac defects,
tracheoesophageal fistula with or without esophageal atresia, renal
malformations, and limb defects. As mutations in ciliary genes were observed in
diseases related to VATER/VACTERL, we performed targeted resequencing of 25
ciliary candidate genes as well as disease-associated genes (FOXF1, HOXD13, PTEN,
ZIC3) in 123 patients with VATER/VACTERL or VATER/VACTERL-like phenotype. We
detected no biallelic mutation in any of the 25 ciliary candidate genes; however,
identified an identical, probably disease-causing ZIC3 missense mutation
(p.Gly17Cys) in four patients and a FOXF1 de novo mutation (p.Gly220Cys) in a
further patient. In situ hybridization analyses in mouse embryos between E9.5 and
E14.5 revealed Zic3 expression in limb and prevertebral structures, and Foxf1
expression in esophageal, tracheal, vertebral, anal, and genital tubercle
tissues, hence VATER/VACTERL organ systems. These data provide strong evidence
that mutations in ZIC3 or FOXF1 contribute to VATER/VACTERL.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4643331 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26294094  [PubMed - in process]


16. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;32(4):481-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2015.04.006.

[Mutation analysis of HOXD13 gene in a Chinese family affected with autosomal
dominant synpolydactyly].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Xin Q, Shan S, Li J, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, Institute of
Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P. R. China. liuqiji@sdu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To detect potential mutation in a Chinese family affected with
autosomal-dominant synpolydactyly and to provide the basis for prenatal
diagnosis.
METHODS: Inheritance pattern was determined by clinical examination and pedigree 
analysis. Blood samples were obtained from members of the family. Genomic DNA was
extracted and sequenced following PCR amplification. Suspected mutation was
confirmed by subclone sequencing and agarose gel electrophoresis.
RESULTS: A 27 bp expansion mutation in exon 1 of HOXD13 was identified in all
affected individuals from the family but not in unaffected members and normal
controls. The mutation has caused insertion of 9 alanines in the
polyalanine-expansion region of HOXD13 protein.
CONCLUSION: A polyalanine-expansion within the HOXD13 probably underlies the
disease in this family.

PMID: 26252089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Blood. 2015 Sep 24;126(13):1585-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-635227. Epub 2015 
Jul 22.

PKR inhibits the DNA damage response, and is associated with poor survival in AML
and accelerated leukemia in NHD13 mice.

Cheng X(1), Byrne M(2), Brown KD(3), Konopleva MY(4), Kornblau SM(4), Bennett
RL(1), May WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL; and University of Florida
Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, FL; (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL; and University of Florida Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, FL;
Division of Hematology-Oncology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN; (3)University of Florida Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, FL; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL; and. 
(4)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Sep 24;126(13):1523-4.

Increased expression of the interferon-inducible double-stranded RNA-activated
protein kinase (PKR) has been reported in acute leukemia and solid tumors, but
the role of PKR has been unclear. Now, our results indicate that high PKR
expression in CD34(+) cells of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients correlates
with worse survival and shortened remission duration. Significantly, we find that
PKR has a novel and previously unrecognized nuclear function to inhibit DNA
damage response signaling and double-strand break repair. Nuclear PKR antagonizes
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) activation by a mechanism dependent on
protein phosphatase 2A activity. Thus, inhibition of PKR expression or activity
promotes ATM activation, <U+03B3>-H2AX formation, and phosphorylation of NBS1 following 
ionizing irradiation. PKR transgenic but not PKR null mice demonstrate a mutator 
phenotype characterized by radiation-induced and age-associated genomic
instability that was partially reversed by short-term pharmacologic PKR
inhibition. Furthermore, the age-associated accumulation of somatic mutations
that occurs in the Nup98-HOXD13 (NHD13) mouse model of leukemia progression was
significantly elevated by co-expression of a PKR transgene, whereas knockout of
PKR expression or pharmacologic inhibition of PKR activity reduced the frequency 
of spontaneous mutations in vivo. Thus, PKR cooperated with the NHD13 transgene
to accelerate leukemia progression and shorten survival. Taken together, these
results indicate that increased nuclear PKR has an oncogenic function that
promotes the accumulation of potentially deleterious mutations. Thus, PKR
inhibition may be a therapeutically useful strategy to prevent leukemia
progression or relapse, and improve clinical outcomes.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4582335
PMID: 26202421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):1066-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.06.014. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

MicroRNA-196b is transcribed from an autonomous promoter and is directly
regulated by Cdx2 and by posterior Hox proteins during embryogenesis.

Fantini S(1), Salsi V(1), Vitobello A(2), Rijli FM(2), Zappavigna V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41125, Italy. (2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Life
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G. Campi 213/d, Modena
41125, Italy. Electronic address: zappavigna.vincenzo@unimore.it.

The miR-196 miRNA gene family located within the Hox gene clusters has been shown
to function during embryogenesis and to be aberrantly expressed in various
malignancies, including leukaemia, melanoma, and colorectal cancer. Despite its
involvement in numerous biological processes, the control of miR-196 expression
is still poorly defined. We identified the miR-196b promoter and found that the
mature miR-196b originates from a large, non-coding primary transcript, which
starts within an autonomous TATA box promoter and is not in physical continuity
with either the Hoxa10 or Hoxa9 main primary transcripts. A ~680bp genomic
fragment, spanning the pri-miR-196b transcription start site, is sufficient to
recapitulate the neural tube expression pattern of miR-196 during embryogenesis. 
This region contains potential binding sites for Cdx and 5'Hox transcription
factors. Two of these sites revealed to be necessary for neural tube expression
and were bound in vivo by Cdx2 and Hoxd13. We show that Cdx2 is required for
miR-196 expression and that both Cdx2 and 5'Hox, but not 3'Hox, are able to
activate the miR-196b promoter. The possible role of Cdx2- and 5'Hox-mediated
regulation of miR-196 expression in vertebrate anterior-posterior (AP) axis
formation during embryogenesis is discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26141604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jun;23(3):756-60. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.03.031.

[Follicular Helper T Cells and Expression of PD-1 in Mice with Myelodysplastic
Syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui NB(1), Wang HQ(1), Li DG(2), Yan YJ(2), Meng AM(2), Shao ZH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300052, China. (2)Institute of Radiation Medicine, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Tianjing 300192, China. (3)Department of Hematology, General
Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300052, China. E-mail:
shaozonghong@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the complete blood count, morphological changes,
follicular T helper (Tfh) cells and expression of PD-1 in bone marrow and spleen 
of mice with myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS) and to explore their significance in
pathogenesis of MDS.
METHODS: The 10 male NUP98-HOXD13 transgenic mice and 10 male homologous
wild-type C57BL/6J mice were used for experments. The complete blood count,
morphological change of NUP98-HOXD13 transgenic mice and wild-type C57BL/6J were 
detected by routine methods. The level of Tfh cells and expression of PD-1 in
bone marrow and spleen were measured by flow cytometry. The PD-1 mRNA of bone
marrow mononuclear cells and spleen cells were analyzed by real-time PCR method.
RESULTS: The counts of RBC, neutrophile and platelet in above- mentioned
transgenic mice were less than that in wild type C57BL/6J mice. As compared with 
wild type C57BL/6J mice, the morphology of RBC and platelet in transgenic mice
was some abnormal, including bi-nucleated erythrocytes, ringed mucleated
neutrophil and erythroblastic islands. The count of Tfh cells in transgenic mice 
was less than that in wild type mice, but the expression of PD-1 was higher. The 
expression of BMMNC PD-1 mRNA was obviously higher than that in wild type mice.
CONCLUSION: The pancytopenia and dysplasia, decrease of Tfh cells and increase of
PD-1 expression have been observed in NUP98-HOXD13 transgenic mice, which may be 
one of important reasons for promoting malignant clone and leading to impair anti
immune respones.

PMID: 26117032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1613-25. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988048.

Overexpression of HOX genes is prevalent in Ewing sarcoma and is associated with 
altered epigenetic regulation of developmental transcription programs.

Svoboda LK(1), Harris A, Bailey NJ, Schwentner R, Tomazou E, von Levetzow C,
Magnuson B, Ljungman M, Kovar H, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)a Translational Oncology Program and the Departments of Pediatric and
Communicable Diseases; University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , MI USA.

The polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 are highly overexpressed by Ewing sarcoma
(ES), a tumor of stem cell origin that is driven by EWS-ETS fusion oncogenes,
most commonly EWS-FLI1. In the current study we analyzed expression of
transcription programs that are controlled by polycomb proteins during embryonic 
development to determine if they are abnormal in ES. Our results show that
polycomb target gene expression in ES deviates from normal tissues and stem cells
and that, as expected, most targets are relatively repressed. However, we also
discovered a paradoxical up regulation of numerous polycomb targets and these
were highly enriched for homeobox (HOX) genes. Comparison of HOX profiles between
malignant and non-malignant tissues revealed a distinctive HOX profile in ES,
which was characterized by overexpression of posterior HOXD genes. In addition,
ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 during stem cell differentiation led to aberrant
up regulation of posterior HOXD genes. Mechanistically, this up regulation was
associated with altered epigenetic regulation. Specifically, ES and EWS-FLI1+
stem cells displayed a relative loss of polycomb-dependent H3K27me3 and gain of
trithorax-dependent H3K4me3 at the promoters of posterior HOXD genes and also at 
the HOXD11.12 polycomb response element. In addition, a striking correlation was 
evident between HOXD13 and other genes whose regulation is coordinately regulated
during embryonic development by distal enhancer elements. Together, these studies
demonstrate that epigenetic regulation of polycomb target genes, in particular
HOXD genes, is altered in ES and that these changes are mediated downstream of
EWS-FLI1.

PMCID: PMC4622732
PMID: 25625846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):848-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1375. Epub 2014 Dec
30.

SUMO ligase PIAS1 functions as a target gene selective androgen receptor
coregulator on prostate cancer cell chromatin.

Toropainen S(1), Malinen M(1), Kaikkonen S(1), Rytinki M(1), Jääskeläinen T(2),
Sahu B(3), Jänne OA(4), Palvimo JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio,
Finland. (2)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211
Kuopio, Finland Institute of Dentistry, University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211
Kuopio, Finland. (3)Institute of Biomedicine, Physiology, Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland Research Programs Unit,
Genome-Scale Biology, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, FI-00014
Helsinki, Finland. (4)Institute of Biomedicine, Physiology, Biomedicum Helsinki, 
University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland. (5)Institute of Biomedicine, 
University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland jorma.palvimo@uef.fi.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that plays a
central role in the development and growth of prostate carcinoma. PIAS1 is an AR-
and SUMO-interacting protein and a putative transcriptional coregulator
overexpressed in prostate cancer. To study the importance of PIAS1 for the
androgen-regulated transcriptome of VCaP prostate cancer cells, we silenced its
expression by RNAi. Transcriptome analyses revealed that a subset of the
AR-regulated genes is significantly influenced, either activated or repressed, by
PIAS1 depletion. Interestingly, PIAS1 depletion also exposed a new set of genes
to androgen regulation, suggesting that PIAS1 can mask distinct genomic loci from
AR access. In keeping with gene expression data, silencing of PIAS1 attenuated
VCaP cell proliferation. ChIP-seq analyses showed that PIAS1 interacts with AR at
chromatin sites harboring also SUMO2/3 and surrounded by H3K4me2; androgen
exposure increased the number of PIAS1-occupying sites, resulting in nearly
complete overlap with AR chromatin binding events. PIAS1 interacted also with the
pioneer factor FOXA1. Of note, PIAS1 depletion affected AR chromatin occupancy at
binding sites enriched for HOXD13 and GATA motifs. Taken together, PIAS1 is a
genuine chromatin-bound AR coregulator that functions in a target gene selective 
fashion to regulate prostate cancer cell growth.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333416
PMID: 25552417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biomol NMR Assign. 2015 Oct;9(2):267-70. doi: 10.1007/s12104-014-9589-4. Epub
2014 Dec 10.

Chemical shift assignments of mouse HOXD13 DNA binding domain bound to duplex
DNA.

Turner M(1), Zhang Y(1), Carlson HL(2), Stadler HS(2,)(3), Ames JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA.
(2)Shriners Hospital for Children Research Department, 3101 SW Sam Jackson Park
Road, Portland, OR, 97239, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, 
Oregon Health and Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland,
OR, 97239, USA. (4)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, CA, 
95616, USA. jbames@ucdavis.edu.

The homeobox gene (Hoxd13) codes for a transcription factor protein that binds to
AT-rich DNA sequences and controls expression of proteins that control embryonic 
morphogenesis. We report NMR chemical shift assignments of mouse Hoxd13 DNA
binding domain bound to an 11-residue DNA duplex (BMRB No. 25133).

PMCID: PMC4465062 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25491407  [PubMed - in process]


23. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2015 Nov;90(4):1163-78. doi: 10.1111/brv.12150. Epub
2014 Oct 31.

How the pterosaur got its wings.

Tokita M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 16
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A.

Throughout the evolutionary history of life, only three vertebrate lineages took 
to the air by acquiring a body plan suitable for powered flight: birds, bats, and
pterosaurs. Because pterosaurs were the earliest vertebrate lineage capable of
powered flight and included the largest volant animal in the history of the
earth, understanding how they evolved their flight apparatus, the wing, is an
important issue in evolutionary biology. Herein, I speculate on the potential
basis of pterosaur wing evolution using recent advances in the developmental
biology of flying and non-flying vertebrates. The most significant morphological 
features of pterosaur wings are: (i) a disproportionately elongated fourth
finger, and (ii) a wing membrane called the brachiopatagium, which stretches from
the posterior surface of the arm and elongated fourth finger to the anterior
surface of the leg. At limb-forming stages of pterosaur embryos, the zone of
polarizing activity (ZPA) cells, from which the fourth finger eventually
differentiates, could up-regulate, restrict, and prolong expression of 5'-located
Homeobox D (Hoxd) genes (e.g. Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13) around the ZPA through 
pterosaur-specific exploitation of sonic hedgehog (SHH) signalling. 5'Hoxd genes 
could then influence downstream bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signalling to
facilitate chondrocyte proliferation in long bones. Potential expression of Fgf10
and Tbx3 in the primordium of the brachiopatagium formed posterior to the
forelimb bud might also facilitate elongation of the phalanges of the fourth
finger. To establish the flight-adapted musculoskeletal morphology shared by all 
volant vertebrates, pterosaurs probably underwent regulatory changes in the
expression of genes controlling forelimb and pectoral girdle musculoskeletal
development (e.g. Tbx5), as well as certain changes in the mode of cell-cell
interactions between muscular and connective tissues in the early phase of their 
evolution. Developmental data now accumulating for extant vertebrate taxa could
be helpful in understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms of body-plan
evolution in extinct vertebrates as well as extant vertebrates with unique
morphology whose embryonic materials are hard to obtain.

© 2014 The Author. Biological Reviews © 2014 Cambridge Philosophical Society.

PMID: 25361444  [PubMed - in process]


24. Blood. 2014 Dec 4;124(24):3608-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-564666. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Modeling de novo leukemogenesis from human cord blood with MN1 and NUP98HOXD13.

Imren S(1), Heuser M(2), Gasparetto M(3), Beer PA(1), Norddahl GL(1), Xiang P(1),
Chen L(1), Berg T(4), Rhyasen GW(1), Rosten P(1), Park G(5), Moon Y(6), Weng
AP(1), Eaves CJ(1), Humphries RK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada; (2)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem
Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; (3)Division of 
Hematology, Hematologic Malignancies, University of Colorado AMC, Aurora, CO;
(4)Department of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University of Frankfurt,
Frankfurt/Main, Germany; (5)Department of Pathology, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital,
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea; (6)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Medical School of Inha University, Incheon, Korea; and. (7)Terry Fox
Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; 
Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

Leukemic transformation of human cells is a complex process. Here we show that
forced expression of MN1 in primitive human cord blood cells maintained on
stromal cells in vitro induces a transient, but not serially transplantable,
myeloproliferation in engrafted mice. However, cotransduction of an activated HOX
gene (NUP98HOXD13) with MN1 induces a serially transplantable acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Further characterization of the leukemic cells generated from the
dually transduced cells showed the activation of stem cell gene expression
signatures also found in primary human AML. These findings show a new forward
genetic model of human leukemogenesis and further highlight the relevance of
homeobox transcription factors in the transformation process.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4256911
PMID: 25339361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Exp Ther Med. 2014 Nov;8(5):1569-1574. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

Functional classification and mutation analysis of a synpolydactyly kindred.

Zhou J(1), Chen Y(1), Cao K(1), Zou Y(2), Zhou H(2), Hu F(1), Ni B(2), Chen Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Genetics and
Birth Health of Hunan Province, Family Planning Institute of Hunan Province,
Changsha, Hunan 410078, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to analyze a congenital syndactyly/polydactyly
kindred and propose a new functional classification method of clinical
significance. The modes of inheritance and mutational mechanisms were also
determined using genetic analyses. Hand and foot anatomy and functions were
measured using photographic images, X-ray imaging and grip ability tests. Genetic
analysis comprised the genotyping of polymorphic microsatellite markers at known 
polydactyly-associated loci and the sequencing of the candidate gene. A
functional classification system was devised to divide the clinical features into
three types, which included mild, moderate or severe deformity. The family was
concluded to have syndactyly type II with autosomal dominant inheritance. The
microsatellites, D2S2310 and D2S2314, at the 2q31-32 chromosome, which have
previously been associated with synpolydactyly type I, were found to be
associated with the disorder in the current family. A 27-bp insertion mutation
was identified in the affected individuals in the HOXD13 gene at this locus. The 
insertion added a further nine alanine residues to the polyalanine stretch within
the encoded protein. In conclusion, the functional classification method
described in the present study may be used to guide surgical approaches to
treatment. A family was identified in whom expansion of the polyalanine tract in 
the HOXD13 gene causes autosomal dominant hereditary synpolydactyly.

PMCID: PMC4186389
PMID: 25289061  [PubMed]


26. Neoplasia. 2014 Aug;16(8):627-33. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.07.004.

Progressive genomic instability in the Nup98-HoxD13 model of MDS correlates with 
loss of the PIG-A gene product.

Byrne M(1), Bennett RL(1), Cheng X(1), May WS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology and the University
of Florida Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, FL 32610. (2)Department of
Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology and the University of Florida
Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, FL 32610. Electronic address: smay@ufl.edu.

The Nup98-HoxD13 (NHD13) fusion gene was identified in a patient with
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). When transgenically expressed in 
hematopoietic cells, mice faithfully recapitulate human disease with serial
progression from peripheral blood (PB) cytopenias and increased bone marrow (BM) 
blasts to acute leukemia. It is well accepted that genomic instability in
dysplastic hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPC) drives the evolution of MDS
to acute leukemia. Findings here demonstrate that reticulocytes, myeloid and
lymphoid PB cells of NHD13 mice, display an increase in the age-associated loss
of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked surface proteins versus wild type
controls. These data correlate with a progressive increase in the DNA damage
response as measured by <U+03B3>-H2AX activity, accumulating BM blasts as the disease
progresses and finally development of acute leukemia. These findings clearly
demonstrate a state of progressive genomic instability that increases the
likelihood of a "second hit" or complimentary mutation later in the disease to
trigger development of acute leukemia and underscores the mechanistic nature of
how the NUP98-HoxD13 transgene induces progression of MDS to acute leukemia.
Additionally, these data support the use of the PIG-A assay as an efficient,
real-time surrogate marker of the genomic instability that occurs in the MDS
HSPCs. Key Point The PIG-A assay is a sensitive, nonlethal method for the serial 
assessment of genomic instability in mouse models of MDS.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4234872
PMID: 25220590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Genetics. 2014 Nov;198(3):1117-26. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.167460. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

Genetic interactions between Shox2 and Hox genes during the regional growth and
development of the mouse limb.

Neufeld SJ(1), Wang F(2), Cobb J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N
1N4, Canada. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada jacobb@ucalgary.ca.

The growth and development of the vertebrate limb relies on homeobox genes of the
Hox and Shox families, with their independent mutation often giving
dose-dependent effects. Here we investigate whether Shox2 and Hox genes function 
together during mouse limb development by modulating their relative dosage and
examining the limb for nonadditive effects on growth. Using double mRNA
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in single embryos, we first show that
Shox2 and Hox genes have associated spatial expression dynamics, with Shox2
expression restricted to the proximal limb along with Hoxd9 and Hoxa11
expression, juxtaposing the distal expression of Hoxa13 and Hoxd13. By generating
mice with all possible dosage combinations of mutant Shox2 alleles and HoxA/D
cluster deletions, we then show that their coordinated proximal limb expression
is critical to generate normally proportioned limb segments. These epistatic
interactions tune limb length, where Shox2 underexpression enhances, and Shox2
overexpression suppresses, Hox-mutant phenotypes. Disruption of either Shox2 or
Hox genes leads to a similar reduction in Runx2 expression in the developing
humerus, suggesting their concerted action drives cartilage maturation during
normal development. While we furthermore provide evidence that Hox gene function 
influences Shox2 expression, this regulation is limited in extent and is unlikely
on its own to be a major explanation for their genetic interaction. Given the
similar effect of human SHOX mutations on regional limb growth, Shox and Hox
genes may generally function as genetic interaction partners during the growth
and development of the proximal vertebrate limb.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4224156
PMID: 25217052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Environ Toxicol. 2016 Mar;31(3):261-8. doi: 10.1002/tox.22040. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Genetic research and structural dysplasia assessment of anorectal malformations
in neonatal male rats induced by di(n-butyl) phthalate.

Liu ZH(1), Li EH(1), Xu DL(1), Sun WL(2), Hong Y(3), Zhao W(1), Xia SJ(1), Jiang 
JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shanghai First People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiaotong University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, China. (2)Department of 
Geriatrics, Shanghai First People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, China. (3)Department of Central
Laboratory, Shanghai First People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong
University, 100 Haining Road, Shanghai, 200080, China.

This study was the first to investigate the genetic abnormalities and structural 
dysplasia of anorectal malformations (ARMs) in male rats induced by di(n-butyl)
phthalate (DBP). DBP was administered to timed-pregnant rats to establish the ARM
rat model. The incidence of ARMs in male offspring was 39.5%. In neonatal period,
decreased body weight and anogenital distance were observed. The general image
and histological analysis of male offspring confirmed the presence of ARMs.
Anatomical examination of the ARM male rats revealed the dysplasia in solid
organs (heart-lung, liver, spleen, and kidney). The decreases of serum
testosterone concentration and androgen receptor expression in terminal rectum
were indicative of the antiandrogenic effects of DBP. Moreover, significant
decreased mRNA expressions of these androgen-related genes such as sonic
hedgehog, Gli2, Gli3, bone morphogenetic protein 4, Wnt5a, Hoxa13, Hoxd13,
fibroblast growth factor 10, and fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 were found
in terminal rectum of the ARM male pubs. These results demonstrated that
development of ARM rats was impaired by maternal exposure to DBP. The
antiandrogenic effects of DBP disturbing the androgen-related signaling networks 
might play an important role in the occurrence of ARMs. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc. Environ Toxicol 31: 261-268, 2016.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25213187  [PubMed - in process]


29. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Sep;41(9):6291-6. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3511-0. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

ChIP-seq analysis of androgen receptor in LNCaP cell line.

Tao S(1), He H, Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, 88 Jiefang Road, Hangzhou, 310009, China,
ttsieng@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    Tao S, He H, Chen Q. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1479.

The aim of this study was to screen target genes and gene functions of androgen
receptor (AR) in LNCaP cell line by ChIP-seq data analysis. We downloaded the
gene expression profile GSE14092 from Gene Expression Omnibus database and
selected ChIP-seq data (GSM353644) of AR stimulated by androgen R1881 (R1881
stimulation group) and the ChIP-seq data (GSM353643) of AR without R1881
stimulation (control group). MACS peak calling software was used to identify the 
AR binding cites. After target genes selection and function analysis, motif
finding analysis was utilized to predict the AR co-located transcription
regulation factors, and we analyzed their functions through GO enrichment
analysis. Total 27202 and 2730 AR binding sites were detected in the R1881
stimulation group and the control group, respectively and 398 and 58 target genes
were identified in R1881 stimulation group and control group, respectively. Based
on GO enrichment analysis, 20 biological processes which AR regulated in the
LNCaP cells were enriched, including xenobiotic metabolic process, positive
regulation of interleukin-2 production and cellular response to sterol etc. We
finally identified 99 transcription factors with high motif enrichment
significant levels, and the enrichment of AR co-located transcription factors was
significantly enriched in the biological process of regulation of cell
proliferation in which 13 transcription factors were involved (FOXJ1, FOXM1, NF1,
SOX2, HOXD13, FOXO1, FOXP3, FOXO4, SOX9, PGR, DBP, JUN and TLX1). The analysis of
AR target genes and gene functions help us to elucidate the mechanism of the
prostate cancer on a molecular level. In addition, it will pave the way to
effective therapies for prostatic cancer. However, further experiments are still 
needed to confirm our results.

PMID: 24985976  [PubMed]


30. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 3;9(6):e98945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098945. eCollection 
2014.

Timed deletion of Twist1 in the limb bud reveals age-specific impacts on autopod 
and zeugopod patterning.

Loebel DA(1), Hor AC(2), Bildsoe HK(1), Tam PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South
Wales, Australia; Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia. (2)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research
Institute, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

Twist1 encodes a transcription factor that plays a vital role in limb
development. We have used a tamoxifen-inducible Cre transgene, Ubc-CreERT2, to
generate time-specific deletions of Twist1 by inducing Cre activity in mouse
embryos at different ages from embryonic (E) day 9.5 onwards. A novel forelimb
phenotype of supernumerary pre-axial digits and enlargement or partial
duplication of the distal radius was observed when Cre activity was induced at
E9.5. Gene expression analysis revealed significant upregulation of Hoxd10,
Hoxd11 and Grem1 in the anterior half of the forelimb bud at E11.5. There is also
localized upregulation of Ptch1, Hand2 and Hoxd13 at the site of ectopic digit
formation, indicating a posterior molecular identity for the supernumerary
digits. The specific skeletal phenotypes, which include duplication of digits and
distal zeugopods but no overt posteriorization, differ from those of other Twist1
conditional knockout mutants. This outcome may be attributed to the deferment of 
Twist1 ablation to a later time frame of limb morphogenesis, which leads to the
ectopic activation of posterior genes in the anterior tissues after the
establishment of anterior-posterior anatomical identities in the forelimb bud.

PMCID: PMC4044014
PMID: 24893291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2014 May 1;9(5):e96192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096192. eCollection 
2014.

Mutations in the homeodomain of HOXD13 cause syndactyly type 1-c in two Chinese
families.

Dai L(1), Liu D(1), Song M(1), Xu X(1), Xiong G(2), Yang K(2), Zhang K(1), Meng
H(1), Guo H(1), Bai Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)Department of Thoracic and
Cardiac Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e104309.

BACKGROUND: Syndactyly type 1 (SD1) is an autosomal dominant limb malformation
characterized in its classical form by complete or partial webbing between the
third and fourth fingers and/or the second and third toes. Its four subtypes (a, 
b, c, and d) are defined based on variable phenotypes, but the responsible gene
is yet to be identified. SD1-a has been mapped to chromosome 3p21.31 and SD1-b to
2q34-q36. SD1-c and SD1-d are very rare and, to our knowledge, no gene loci have 
been identified.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In two Chinese families with SD1-c, linkage and haplotype
analyses mapped the disease locus to 2q31-2q32. Copy number variation (CNV)
analysis, using array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH),
excluded the possibility of microdeletion or microduplication. Sequence analyses 
of related syndactyly genes in this region identified c.917G>A (p.R306Q) in the
homeodomain of HOXD13 in family A. Analysis on family B identified the mutation
c.916C>G (p.R306G) and therefore confirmed the genetic homogeneity. Luciferase
assays indicated that these two mutations affected the transcriptional activation
ability of HOXD13. The spectrum of HOXD13 mutations suggested a close
genotype-phenotype correlation between the different types of HOXD13-Syndactyly. 
Overlaps of the various phenotypes were found both among and within families
carrying the HOXD13 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations (p.R306Q and p.R306G) in the homeodomain of HOXD13 cause
SD1-c. There are affinities between SD1-c and synpolydactyly. Different limb
malformations due to distinct classes of HOXD13 mutations should be considered as
a continuum of phenotypes and further classification of syndactyly should be done
based on phenotype and genotype.

PMCID: PMC4006867
PMID: 24789103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Stem Cells. 2014 May;32(5):1361-6. doi: 10.1002/stem.1635.

Brief report: Loss of p15Ink4b accelerates development of myeloid neoplasms in
Nup98-HoxD13 transgenic mice.

Humeniuk R(1), Koller R, Bies J, Aplan P, Wolff L.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.

Homeostasis of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells is a tightly regulated
process. The disturbance of the balance in the hematopoietic progenitor pool can 
result in favorable conditions for development of diseases such as
myelodysplastic syndromes and leukemia. It has been shown recently that mice
lacking p15Ink4b have skewed differentiation of common myeloid progenitors toward
the myeloid lineage at the expense of erythroid progenitors. The lack of p15INK4B
expression in human leukemic blasts has been linked to poor prognosis and
increased risk of myelodysplastic syndromes transformation to acute myeloid
leukemia. However, the role of p15Ink4b in disease development is just beginning 
to be elucidated. This study examines the collaboration of the loss of p15Ink4b
with Nup98-HoxD13 translocation in the development of hematological malignancies 
in a mouse model. Here, we report that loss of p15Ink4b collaborates with
Nup98-HoxD13 transgene in the development of predominantly myeloid neoplasms,
namely acute myeloid leukemia, myeloproliferative disease, and myelodysplastic
syndromes. This mouse model could be a very valuable tool for studying p15Ink4b
function in tumorigenesis as well as preclinical drug testing.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24449168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 9;9(1):e85313. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085313. eCollection 
2014.

Mutation screening and array comparative genomic hybridization using a 180K
oligonucleotide array in VACTERL association.

Winberg J(1), Gustavsson P(2), Papadogiannakis N(3), Sahlin E(2), Bradley F(1),
Nordenskjöld E(1), Svensson PJ(4), Annerén G(5), Iwarsson E(2), Nordgren A(2),
Nordenskjöld A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine and Surgery and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden ; Clinical Genetics Unit, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Women's and Children's
Health and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden ; Pediatric Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of Immunology, Genetics and
Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

In order to identify genetic causes of VACTERL association (V vertebral defects, 
A anorectal malformations, C cardiac defects, T tracheoesofageal fistula, E
esophageal atresia, R renal anomalies, L limb deformities), we have collected DNA
samples from 20 patients diagnosed with VACTERL or with a VACTERL-like phenotype 
as well as samples from 19 aborted fetal cases with VACTERL. To investigate the
importance of gene dose alterations in the genetic etiology of VACTERL
association we have performed a systematic analysis of this cohort using a 180K
array comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) platform. In addition, to
further clarify the significance of PCSK5, HOXD13 and CHD7 genes in the VACTERL
phenotype, mutation screening has been performed. We identified pathogenic gene
dose imbalances in two fetal cases; a hemizygous deletion of the FANCB gene and a
(9;18)(p24;q12) unbalanced translocation. In addition, one pathogenic mutation in
CHD7 was detected, while no apparent disease-causing mutations were found in
HOXD13 or PCSK5. Our study shows that although large gene dose alterations do not
seem to be a common cause in VACTERL association, array-CGH is still important in
clinical diagnostics to identify disease cause in individual cases.

PMCID: PMC3887047
PMID: 24416387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genome Res. 2014 Apr;24(4):580-91. doi: 10.1101/gr.157529.113. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Age-related epigenetic drift in the pathogenesis of MDS and AML.

Maegawa S(1), Gough SM, Watanabe-Okochi N, Lu Y, Zhang N, Castoro RJ, Estecio MR,
Jelinek J, Liang S, Kitamura T, Aplan PD, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA;

The myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal hematologic disorder that
frequently evolves to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Its pathogenesis remains
unclear, but mutations in epigenetic modifiers are common and the disease often
responds to DNA methylation inhibitors. We analyzed DNA methylation in the bone
marrow and spleen in two mouse models of MDS/AML, the NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) mouse 
and the RUNX1 mutant mouse model. Methylation array analysis showed an average of
512/3445 (14.9%) genes hypermethylated in NHD13 MDS, and 331 (9.6%) genes
hypermethylated in RUNX1 MDS. Thirty-two percent of genes in common between the
two models (2/3 NHD13 mice and 2/3 RUNX1 mice) were also hypermethylated in at
least two of 19 human MDS samples. Detailed analysis of 41 genes in mice showed
progressive drift in DNA methylation from young to old normal bone marrow and
spleen; to MDS, where we detected accelerated age-related methylation; and
finally to AML, which markedly extends DNA methylation abnormalities. Most of
these genes showed similar patterns in human MDS and AML. Repeat element
hypomethylation was rare in MDS but marked the transition to AML in some cases.
Our data show consistency in patterns of aberrant DNA methylation in human and
mouse MDS and suggest that epigenetically, MDS displays an accelerated aging
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3975058
PMID: 24414704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Clin Chim Acta. 2014 Mar 20;430:129-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.01.002. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

A patient with five chromosomal rearrangements and a 2q31.1 microdeletion.

Wang T(1), Mao J(1), Liu MJ(1), Choy KW(2), Li HB(1), Cram DS(3), Li H(1), Chen
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproduction and Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated
Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou 215002, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Joint Centre 
with Utrecht University-Genetic Core, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China. (3)Berry Genomics, Ltd., China. (4)Center for Reproduction and
Genetics, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Suzhou Hospital, Suzhou 215002,
China. Electronic address: cyandzh@sohu.com.

BACKGROUND: Complex chromosomal rearrangements and chromosomal deletion and
duplication syndromes are commonly associated with abnormal clinical phenotypes. 
The 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome is a rare cytogenetic event that leads to limb 
and multi-internal organ anomalies. In this study we investigated the genetic
basis of the physical and mental symptoms exhibited by a 4-year-old boy with a
suspected 2q31.1 deletion.
METHODS: Cytogenetic and molecular techniques including karyotyping, array-based 
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and real-time PCR were used to identify the nature and extent of
chromosome abnormalities in the patient.
RESULTS: A 3.6Mb interstitial microdeletion of 2q31.1 was identified in
association with complex balanced genomic structural rearrangements involving
chromosomes 2, 3, 6, 15 and 18. The 2q31.1 deletion resulted in the loss of one
copy of several known disease genes, including GAD1, DCAF17, SLC25A12 and ITGA6
associated with mental retardation and facial abnormalities and DLX1/DLX2
partially associated with limb abnormalities. Two additional genes, HOXD13 and
CHN1, required for normal limb and eye development that map immediately distal to
the 2q31.1 deletion had normal copy numbers, although CHN1 was found to express
at a lower level in patient's lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: We speculated that the 2q31.1 deletion and/or translocation may have
a positional effect which reduces expression of HOXD13 and CHN1 causing
haplo-insufficiency, and in combination with the hemizygous expression of the
disease genes at 2q31.1, provides a plausible explanation for the diverse
clinical symptoms exhibited by the patient.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Dec;52(4):575-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2013.10.022.

VACTERL association with hydrocephalus in a fetus conceived by in vitro
fertilization and embryo transfer.

Chen CP(1), Chang TY(2), Chen YY(3), Chern SR(4), Su JW(5), Wang W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan;
Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Chinese
Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan; Institute of Clinical and Community Health Nursing, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cpc_mmh@yahoo.com. (2)Taiji Fetal Medicine Center, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Department of Medical Research, Mackay Memorial
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Bioengineering, Tatung University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: We present a case of VACTERL association with hydrocephalus
(VACTERL-H) in a fetus conceived by in vitro fertilization (IVF) and embryo
transfer (ET) and review the literature.
CASE REPORT: A 35-year-old woman presented with multiple fetal anomalies at 22
weeks of gestation. She and her husband were non-consanguineous and there was no 
family history of congenital malformations. This was her second pregnancy
conceived via IVF-ET. Two embryos had been implanted and only one survived. She
underwent chorionic villus sampling at 17 weeks of gestation because of
oligohydramnios and advanced maternal age. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a
karyotype of 46,XY, and array comparative genomic hybridization analysis revealed
no genomic imbalance. Prenatal ultrasound at 21 weeks of gestation revealed a
singleton with fetal biometry equivalent to 18 weeks, ventriculomegaly, a small
cerebellum, and a ventricular septal defect. Level II ultrasound showed a single 
umbilical artery, scoliosis, a right club hand, radial aplasia, and renal
agenesis. The parents elected to terminate the pregnancy at 22 weeks of
gestation, and a fetus was delivered with bilateral arthrogryposis, right radial 
aplasia, a club hand and thumb aplasia, hypoplasia of the left thumb, scoliosis, 
and an imperforate anus. The clinical findings were consistent with the diagnosis
of VACTERL-H. Molecular analysis of PTEN, FANCB, and HOXD13 genes revealed no
mutation.
CONCLUSION: Prenatal diagnosis of radial ray defects in fetuses conceived by
assisted reproductive technology should include a differential diagnosis of
VACTERL association with anorectal malformation. VACTERL-H may occur in pregnancy
after IVF-ET.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24411047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Evodevo. 2014 Nov 19;5:44. doi: 10.1186/2041-9139-5-44. eCollection 2014.

HoxA and HoxD expression in a variety of vertebrate body plan features reveals an
ancient origin for the distal Hox program.

Archambeault S(1), Taylor JA(1), Crow KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, 1600 Holloway Ave, San 
Francisco, CA 94132 USA.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes are master regulatory genes that specify positional
identities during axial development in animals. Discoveries regarding their
concerted expression patterns have commanded intense interest due to their
complex regulation and specification of body plan features in jawed vertebrates. 
For example, the posterior HoxD genes switch to an inverted collinear expression 
pattern in the mouse autopod where HoxD13 switches from a more restricted to a
less restricted domain relative to its neighboring gene on the cluster. We refer 
to this program as the 'distal phase' (DP) expression pattern because it occurs
in distal regions of paired fins and limbs, and is regulated independently by
elements in the 5' region upstream of the HoxD cluster. However, few taxa have
been evaluated with respect to this pattern, and most studies have focused on
pectoral fin morphogenesis, which occurs relatively early in development.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate for the first time that the DP expression pattern
occurs with the posterior HoxA genes, and is therefore not solely associated with
the HoxD gene cluster. Further, DP Hox expression is not confined to paired fins 
and limbs, but occurs in a variety of body plan features, including paddlefish
barbels - sensory adornments that develop from the first mandibular arch (the
former 'Hox-free zone), and the vent (a medial structure that is analogous to a
urethra). We found DP expression of HoxD13 and HoxD12 in the paddlefish barbel;
and we present the first evidence for DP expression of the HoxA genes in the
hindgut and vent of three ray-finned fishes. The HoxA DP expression pattern is
predicted by the recent finding of a shared 5' regulatory architecture in both
the HoxA and HoxD clusters, but has not been previously observed in any body plan
feature.
CONCLUSIONS: The Hox DP expression pattern appears to be an ancient module that
has been co-opted in a variety of structures adorning the vertebrate bauplan.
This module provides a shared genetic program that implies deep homology of a
variety of distally elongated structures that has played a significant role in
the evolution of morphological diversity in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC4407844
PMID: 25908959  [PubMed]


38. Cancer Res. 2014 Feb 15;74(4):1079-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0912. Epub
2013 Dec 26.

NUP98 fusion oncoproteins promote aneuploidy by attenuating the mitotic spindle
checkpoint.

Salsi V(1), Ferrari S, Gorello P, Fantini S, Chiavolelli F, Mecucci C, Zappavigna
V.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Modena; and Department of Hematology, University of Perugia,
University Hospital S. Maria della Misericordia, Perugia, Italy.

NUP98 is a recurrent fusion partner in chromosome translocations that cause acute
myelogenous leukemia. NUP98, a nucleoporin, and its interaction partner Rae1,
have been implicated in the control of chromosome segregation, but their
mechanistic contributions to tumorigenesis have been unclear. Here, we show that 
expression of NUP98 fusion oncoproteins causes mitotic spindle defects and
chromosome missegregation, correlating with the capability of NUP98 fusions to
cause premature securin degradation and slippage from an unsatisfied spindle
assembly checkpoint (SAC). NUP98 fusions, unlike wild-type NUP98, were found to
physically interact with the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C)(Cdc20) 
and to displace the BubR1 SAC component, suggesting a possible mechanistic basis 
for their interference with SAC function. In addition, NUP98 oncoproteins
displayed a prolonged half-life in cells. We found that NUP98 stability is
controlled by a PEST sequence, absent in NUP98 oncoproteins, whose deletion
reproduced the aberrant SAC-interfering activity of NUP98 oncoproteins. Together,
our findings suggest that NUP98 oncoproteins predispose myeloid cells to
oncogenic transformation or malignant progression by promoting whole chromosome
instability.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24371226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Hand Surg Eur Vol. 2014 Nov;39(9):926-33. doi: 10.1177/1753193413514363. Epub
2013 Dec 3.

Embryology of familial (non-syndromic) brachydactyly of the hand.

Al-Qattan MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
moqattan@hotmail.com.

Isolated familial non-syndromic brachydactyly is interesting from the
embryological point of view because the phenotypes of isolated brachydactyly are 
frequently overlapping, yet they are caused by different gene mutations and the
ring finger is frequently relatively preserved. We review the embryology of
isolated familial brachydactyly with special attention to these two features.

© The Author(s) 2013.

PMID: 24300509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2014 Jan 1;385(1):83-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.10.013. Epub 2013
Oct 23.

Regulation of cell polarity in the cartilage growth plate and perichondrium of
metacarpal elements by HOXD13 and WNT5A.

Kuss P(1), Kraft K, Stumm J, Ibrahim D, Vallecillo-Garcia P, Mundlos S, Stricker 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, 14195 Berlin, 
Germany; Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité University Medicine,
Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

The morphology of bones is genetically determined, but the molecular mechanisms
that control shape, size and the overall gestalt of bones remain unclear. We
previously showed that metacarpals in the synpolydactyly homolog (spdh) mouse,
which carries a mutation in Hoxd13 similar to the human condition synpolydactyly 
(SPD), were transformed to carpal-like bones with cuboid shape that lack cortical
bone and a perichondrium and are surrounded by a joint surface. Here we provide
evidence that spdh metacarpal growth plates have a defect in cell polarization
with a random instead of linear orientation. In parallel prospective perichondral
cells failed to adopt the characteristic flattened cell shape. We observed a
similar cell polarity defect in metacarpals of Wnt5a(-/-) mice. Wnt5a and the
closely related Wnt5b were downregulated in spdh handplates, and HOXD13 induced
expression of both genes in vitro. Concomitant we observed mislocalization of
core planar cell polarity (PCP) components DVL2 and PRICKLE1 in spdh metacarpals 
indicating a defect in the WNT/PCP pathway. Conversely the WNT/ß-CATENIN pathway,
a hallmark of joint cells lining carpal bones, was upregulated in the
perichondral region. Finally, providing spdh limb explant cultures with cells
expressing either HOXD13 or WNT5A led to a non-cell autonomous partial rescue of 
cell polarity the perichondral region and restored the expression of perichondral
markers. This study provides a so far unrecognized link between HOX proteins and 
cell polarity in the perichondrium and the growth plate, a failure of which leads
to transformation of metacarpals to carpal-like structures.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24161848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gene. 2013 Dec 15;532(2):297-301. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.040. Epub 2013 Sep 
18.

A splice donor site mutation in HOXD13 underlies synpolydactyly with cortical
bone thinning.

Shi X(1), Ji C, Cao L, Wu Y, Shang Y, Wang W, Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Center for Medical Genomics, Key Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Ministry of Public Health and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry of
Education, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

Synpolydactyly 1(SPD1) is a dominantly inherited distal limb anomaly that is
characterized by incomplete digit separation and increased number of digits. SPD1
is most commonly caused by polyalanine repeat expansions and mutations in the
homeodomain of the HOXD13. We report a splice donor site mutation in HOXD13
associated in most cases with cortical bone thinning. In vitro study of
transcripts and truncated protein analysis indicated that c.781+1G>A mutation
results in truncated HOXD13 protein p.G190fsX4. Luciferase assay indicated that
the truncated HOXD13 protein failed to bind to DNA. The mechanism for this
phenotype was truncated protein loss of function.

© 2013.

PMID: 24055421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Dyn. 2014 Jan;243(1):37-48.

Joining the fingers: a HOXD13 Story.

Brison N, Debeer P, Tylzanowski P.

Synpolydactyly (SPD, OMIM 186000) is a rare congenital limb disorder
characterized by syndactyly between the third and fourth fingers and between the 
fourth and fifth toes, with partial or complete digit duplication in the
syndactylous web. The majority of these anomalies co-segregate with mutations in 
the HOXD13 gene,a homeobox transcription factor crucial for distal limb
development. Different classes of HOXD13 mutations are involved in the
pathogenesis of synpolydactyly, but an unequivocal genotypephenotype correlation
cannot always be achieved due to the clinical heterogeneity and reduced
penetrance of SPD. All mutations identified so far mapped to the N-terminal
polyalanine tract or to the C-terminal homeodomain of HOXD13,causing typical or
atypical features of SPD, respectively. However, mutations outside of these
domains cause a broad variety of clinical features that complicate the
differential diagnosis. The existing animal models that are currently used to
study HOXD13 (mal)function are therefore instrumental in unraveling potential
genotype-phenotype correlations. Both mouse- and chick-based approaches allow the
in vivo study of the pathogenic mechanism by which HOXD13 mutations cause SPD
phenotypes as well as help in identifying the transcriptional targets.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24038517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Genome Res. 2013 Dec;23(12):2091-102. doi: 10.1101/gr.157610.113. Epub 2013 Aug
30.

Distinct global shifts in genomic binding profiles of limb
malformation-associated HOXD13 mutations.

Ibrahim DM(1), Hansen P, Rödelsperger C, Stiege AC, Doelken SC, Horn D, Jäger M, 
Janetzki C, Krawitz P, Leschik G, Wagner F, Scheuer T, Schmidt-von Kegler M,
Seemann P, Timmermann B, Robinson PN, Mundlos S, Hecht J.

Author information: 
(1)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany;

Gene regulation by transcription factors (TFs) determines developmental programs 
and cell identity. Consequently, mutations in TFs can lead to dramatic phenotypes
in humans by disrupting gene regulation. To date, the molecular mechanisms that
actually cause these phenotypes have been difficult to address experimentally.
ChIP-seq, which couples chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput
sequencing, allows TF function to be investigated on a genome-wide scale,
enabling new approaches for the investigation of gene regulation. Here, we
present the application of ChIP-seq to explore the effect of missense mutations
in TFs on their genome-wide binding profile. Using a retroviral expression system
in chicken mesenchymal stem cells, we elucidated the mechanism underlying a novel
missense mutation in HOXD13 (Q317K) associated with a complex hand and foot
malformation phenotype. The mutated glutamine (Q) is conserved in most
homeodomains, a notable exception being bicoid-type homeodomains that have lysine
(K) at this position. Our results show that the mutation results in a shift in
the binding profile of the mutant toward a bicoid/PITX1 motif. Gene expression
analysis and functional assays using in vivo overexpression studies confirm that 
the mutation results in a partial conversion of HOXD13 into a TF with
bicoid/PITX1 properties. A similar shift was not observed with another mutation, 
Q317R, which is associated with brachysyndactyly, suggesting that the
bicoid/PITX1-shift observed for Q317K might be related to the severe clinical
phenotype. The methodology described can be used to investigate a wide spectrum
of TFs and mutations that have not previously been amenable to ChIP-seq
experiments.

PMCID: PMC3847778
PMID: 23995701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nano Lett. 2013 Oct 9;13(10):4632-41. doi: 10.1021/nl401658c. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Focal amplification of HOXD-harboring chromosome region is implicated in
multiple-walled carbon nanotubes-induced carcinogenicity.

Wu P(1), Yuan SS, Ho CC, Hsieh WY, Hong QS, Yu SL, Chen W, Chen HY, Wang CD, Li
KC, Yang PC, Chen HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University , Taipei, Taiwan 112.

Multiple-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) may cause carcinogenesis. We found that
long-term exposure to MWCNTs can induce irreversible oncogenic transformation of 
human bronchial epithelial cells and tumorigenicity in vivo. A genome-wide
array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) analysis revealed global
chromosomal aberration in MWCNTs-treated clones, predominantly at chromosome
2q31-32, where the potential oncogenes HOXD9 and HOXD13 are located. Functional
assays confirmed that this variation can modulate oncogenic signaling and plays a
part in MWCNTs-induced tumorigenesis, suggesting that MWCNTs are carcinogens that
act by altering genomic stability and oncogenic copy numbers.

PMID: 23984819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Leuk Res. 2014 Jan;38(1):95-102. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.07.008. Epub 2013
Aug 16.

Oxidative stress leads to increased mutation frequency in a murine model of
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Chung YJ(1), Robert C(2), Gough SM(1), Rassool FV(2), Aplan PD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology and Marlene & Stewart Greenebaum Cancer
Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
Electronic address: aplanp@mail.nih.gov.

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are characterized by ineffective
hematopoiesis, dysplasia, and transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Although it has been suggested that additional mutations lead to progression of
MDS to AML, the causative agent(s) for such mutations remains unclear. Oxidative 
stress is a potential cause, therefore, we evaluated levels of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) transgenic mice, a murine model for MDS.
Increased levels of ROS were detected in bone marrow nucleated cells (BMNC) that 
express CD71, a marker for cell proliferation, as well as immature, lineage
negative bone marrow nucleated cells from NHD13 mice. In addition to the increase
in ROS, increased DNA double strand breaks and activation of a G2/M phase cell
cycle checkpoint were noted in NHD13 BMNC. Finally, using an in vivo assay for
mutation frequency, we detected an increased mutation frequency in NHD13 BMNC.
These results suggest that oxidative stress may contribute to disease progression
of MDS to AML through ineffective repair of DNA damage and acquisition of
oncogenic mutations.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3872269
PMID: 23958061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Bone. 2013 Nov;57(1):237-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.07.039. Epub 2013 Aug 12.

A novel mutation outside homeodomain of HOXD13 causes synpolydactyly in a Chinese
family.

Zhou X(1), Zheng C, He B, Zhu Z, Li P, He X, Zhu S, Yang C, Lao Z, Zhu Q, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microsurgery and Orthopedic Trauma, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

INTRODUCTION: Human synpolydactyly (SPD), belonging to syndactyly (SD) II, is
caused by mutations in homeobox d13 (HOXD13). Here, we describe the study of a
two-generation Chinese family with a variant form of synpolydactyly.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The sequence of the HOXD13 gene was analyzed. Luciferase
assays were conducted to determine whether the mutation affected the function of 
the HOXD13 protein.
RESULTS: We identified a novel c.659G>C (p.Gly220Ala) mutation outside the HOXD13
homeodomain responsible for the disease in this family. This mutation was not
found in any of the unaffected family members and healthy control. Luciferase
assays demonstrated that this mutation affected the transcriptional activation
ability of HOXD13 (only approximately 84.7% of wild type, p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Phenotypes displayed by individuals carrying the novel mutation
present additional features, such as the fifth finger clinodactyly, which is not 
always associated with canonical SPD. This finding enhances our understanding
about the phenotypic spectrum associated with HOXD13 mutations and advances our
understanding of human limb development.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Bone Joint J. 2013 Jul;95-B(7):929-34. doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.95B7.31708.

Metatarsal transfer for the treatment of post-axial metatarsal-type foot
synpolydactyly: a new technique that allows for comfortable shoe wearing.

Sahin O(1), Kuru I, Akgun RC, Sahin BS, Canbeyli ID, Tuncay IC.

Author information: 
(1)Baskent University Hospital, Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology,
Ankara, Turkey. orcunsahin@yahoo.com

We analysed the clinical and radiological outcomes of a new surgical technique
for the treatment of heterozygote post-axial metatarsal-type foot synpolydactyly 
with HOX-D13 genetic mutations with a mean follow-up of 30.9 months (24 to 42). A
total of 57 feet in 36 patients (mean age 6.8 years (2 to 16)) were treated with 
this new technique, which transfers the distal part of the duplicated fourth
metatarsal to the proximal part of the fifth metatarsal. Clinical and
radiological assessments were undertaken pre- and post-operatively and any
complications were recorded. Final outcomes were evaluated according to the
methods described by Phelps and Grogan. Forefoot width was reduced and the
lengths of the all reconstructed toes were maintained after surgery. Union was
achieved for all the metatarsal osteotomies without any angular deformities.
Outcomes at the final assessment were excellent in 51 feet (89%) and good in six 
(11%). This newly described surgical technique provides for painless, comfortable
shoe-wearing after a single, easy-to-perform operation with good clinical,
radiological and functional outcomes.

PMID: 23814245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):430-3. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.040. Epub 2013 Jun
25.

Absence of nasal bone and brachydactyly: a probable new familial syndrome.

Guo H, Wang RH, Bai Y, Yang DY.

Brachydactyly is a relatively common congenital abnormality and can be associated
with many other malformations. However, brachydactyly in association with absence
of nasal bone is rare. Two Chinese siblings with a combination of nasal bone
absence and brachydactyly are presented, apparently without other abnormalities. 
This combination of features do not fit into any previously described syndrome
and we suggest that this case represents a new familial syndrome. Molecular
genetics screening didn't revealed any specific pathogenic variants in the two
siblings.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Dyn. 2013 Sep;242(9):1094-100. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23993. Epub 2013 Jun 27.

mRNA fluorescence in situ hybridization to determine overlapping gene expression 
in whole-mount mouse embryos.

Neufeld SJ(1), Zhou X, Vize PD, Cobb J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Whole-mount in situ hybridization (ISH) is a prevalent tool to
examine the spatial distribution of gene transcripts in intact embryos.
Chromogenic-based methods of signal development are commonly used in mouse
embryos because of their high sensitivity. Fluorescence techniques, however,
offer several advantages over chromogenic methods including the ability to
visualize multiple signals in a specimen at once.
RESULTS: We describe a procedure for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
for whole mouse embryos up to embryonic day 13.5. We show that this approach
successfully produces a bright expression signal for several genes, validating
the procedure in multiple tissues. Further, we show that double FISH can be used 
to visualize the expression of two genes in a single embryo by determining that
Hoxd13 and Shh are co-expressed in both the limb bud and the hindgut. Finally, we
demonstrate that FISH can be paired with confocal microscopy to take optical
sections of interior regions of the embryo.
CONCLUSIONS: FISH is a valid alternative to chromogenic-based ISH for visualizing
gene expression in whole mouse embryos. This work provides a framework to add
additional fluorescence signals in the mouse such as visualizing both mRNA and
protein by pairing the procedure with immunofluorescence.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23749471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2013 Dec;28(12):1621-7. doi: 10.1007/s00384-013-1725-6.
Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Anorectal malformation associated with a mutation in the P63 gene in a family
with split hand-foot malformation.

Su P(1), Yuan Y, Huang Y, Wang W, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical University,
Shenyang City, 110004, China.

PURPOSE: The aims of this study were to identify the mutation gene of a Chinese
family with anorectal malformation (ARM) associated with split hand-foot
malformation and to determine the spatiotemporal expression of the mutated gene
during hindgut and anorectum development in human embryos.
METHOD: A Chinese family with intrafamilial clinically variable manifestation was
analyzed and primers were designed for exons 3-14 of P63, DLX5, DLX6, DAC, and
HOXD13 as candidate genes and direct sequence analysis of the exons was
performed. Immunohistochemical study of mutated gene in the hindgut and anorectum
of human embryos of 4th-10th weeks was performed.
RESULT: Affected individuals were found to have an Arg227Gln P63 gene mutation.
From the 4th-10th weeks of gestation of the human embryo, the P63-positive cells 
were mainly located on the epithelium of the apical urorectal septum, hindgut,
and cloacal membrane. After the anorectum ruptured during the 8th week, the P63
remained strongly immunoreactive on the epithelium of the anal canal and urethra,
but the mucous membrane of the rectum exhibited no reaction.
CONCLUSIONS: The mutation identified strongly suggests a causal relationship
between the ARM phenotype and P63. The expression of P63 was persistently active 
during the dynamic and incessant septation of the cloaca and hindgut, suggesting 
that P63 may play a pivotal role in the morphogenesis of the hindgut and
anorectum.

PMCID: PMC3898126
PMID: 23736768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Urol. 2013 Nov;190(5):1884-92. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.05.061. Epub 2013 May
30.

Hypospadias and genes related to genital tubercle and early urethral development.

Carmichael SL(1), Ma C, Choudhry S, Lammer EJ, Witte JS, Shaw GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, California. Electronic address: scarmichael@stanford.edu.

PURPOSE: We determined whether variants in genes associated with genital tubercle
(the anlage for the penis) and early urethral development were associated with
hypospadias in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined 293 relatively common tag single nucleotide
polymorphisms in BMP4, BMP7, FGF8, FGF10, FGFR2, HOXA13, HOXD13, HOXA4, HOXB6,
SRY, WT1, WTAP, SHH, GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3. The analysis included 624 cases (81
mild, 319 moderate, 209 severe, 15 undetermined severity) and 844 population
based nonmalformed male controls born in California from 1990 to 2003.
RESULTS: There were 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms for which any of the
comparisons (ie overall or for a specific severity) had a p value of less than
0.01. The homozygous variant genotypes for 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms in
BMP7 were associated with at least a twofold increased risk of hypospadias
regardless of severity. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms for FGF10 were
associated with threefold to fourfold increased risks, regardless of severity.
For 4 of them the results were restricted to whites. For GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3
there were 12 associated single nucleotide polymorphisms but results were
inconsistent by severity and race/ethnicity. For SHH 1 single nucleotide
polymorphism was associated with a 2.4-fold increased risk of moderate
hypospadias. For WT1 6 single nucleotide polymorphisms were associated with
approximately a twofold increased risk, primarily for severe hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence that single nucleotide polymorphisms in
several genes that contribute to genital tubercle and early urethral development 
are associated with hypospadias risk.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4103581
PMID: 23727413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1579-84. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35956. Epub 2013 
May 17.

Genetic heterogeneity in type III familial cutaneous syndactyly and linkage to
chromosome 7q36.

Al-Qattan MM(1), Shamseldin HE, Al Mazyad M, Al Deghaither S, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.

The ZRS (zone of polarizing activity regulatory sequence) is a long-range
limb-specific Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) enhancer. In humans, the ZRS is located in
chromosome 7q36 within intron 5 of LMBR1; approximately 1 Mb telomeric of SHH.
Point mutations and duplications of the ZRS lead to a variable phenotype of
preaxial polydactyly/triphalangeal thumb, tibial hypoplasia, radial ray
deficiency, and type IV familial syndactyly (syndactyly of all digits with
polydactyly). The ZRS is conserved among mammals and fish and regulates the
expression of SHH. In mice, the conserved ZRS within the Lmbr1 gene is found in
chromosome 5. The Hammertoe (Hm) mouse mutants have a mutation in the Lmbr1 locus
and show syndactyly of digits 2-5 without polydactyly. No previous reports have
described isolated syndactyly without polydactyly to be related to the LMBR1
locus in humans. In this report, we describe a family with simple cutaneous
syndactyly involving digits 2-5, without polydactyly which is consistent with the
phenotype of type III syndactyly. The locus we identified on ch7q36.3 is syntenic
to the Hm locus; and affected members of the family had a phenotype analogous to 
Hm. Hence, the type of syndactyly described in the current report may be
equivalent to Hm mice.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23686920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2014 Apr;472(4):1101-5. doi: 10.1007/s11999-013-3008-5.

Review of the molecular development of the thumb: digit primera.

Oberg KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Human Anatomy, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, 
CA, 92313, USA, koberg@llu.edu.

Erratum in
    Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2013 Aug;471(8):2729.

BACKGROUND: The thumb, or digit 1, is not a typical digit. In addition to its
unusual mobility and function, its formation is also unusual. It is the last
digit to form and the most commonly targeted when limb development is disrupted. 
The thumb domain is defined by the overlapping expression of HOXA13, TBX5, GLI3R,
and HOXD13 and, importantly, by an absence of other distal HOXD transcription
factors. This brief review, combining developmental biology and clinical
genetics, discusses the current understanding of how the thumb domain is
established.

PMCID: PMC3940735
PMID: 23619737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Genes Evol. 2013 Sep;223(5):279-87. doi: 10.1007/s00427-013-0443-y. Epub 2013
Apr 6.

Exploring the effects of gene dosage on mandible shape in mice as a model for
studying the genetic basis of natural variation.

Boell L(1), Pallares LF, Brodski C, Chen Y, Christian JL, Kousa YA, Kuss P,
Nelsen S, Novikov O, Schutte BC, Wang Y, Tautz D.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Evolutionsbiologie, August-Thienemann-str. 2, 24306
Plön, Germany.

Mandible shape in the mouse is a complex trait that is influenced by many genetic
factors. However, little is known about the action of single genes on adult
mandible shape so far, since most developmentally relevant genes are already
required during embryogenesis, i.e., knockouts lead to embryonic death or severe 
deformations, before the mandible is fully formed. We employ here a geometric
morphometric approach to identify subtle phenotypic differences caused by dosage 
effects of candidate genes. We use mouse strains with specific gene modifications
(knockouts and knockins) to compare heterozygous animals with controls from the
same stock, which is expected to be equivalent to a change of gene expression of 
the respective locus. Such differences in expression level are also likely to
occur as part of the natural variation. We focus on Bmp pathway genes (Bmp4, its 
antagonist Noggin, and combinations of Bmp5-7 genotypes), but include also two
other developmental control genes suspected to affect mandible development in
some way (Egfr and Irf6). In addition, we study the effects of Hoxd13, as well as
an extracellular matrix constituent (Col2a1). We find that subtle but significant
shape differences are caused by differences in gene dosage of several of these
genes. The changes seen for Bmp4 and Noggin are partially compatible with the
action of these genes known from birds and fish. We find significant shape
changes also for Hoxd13, although this gene has so far only been implicated in
skeletal patterning processes of the limbs. Comparing the effect sizes of gene
dosage changes to the variation found in natural populations of mice as well as
quantitative trait loci (QTL) effects on mandible shape, we find that the effect 
sizes caused by gene dosage changes are at the lower end of the spectrum of
natural variation, but larger than the average additive effects found in QTL
studies. We conclude that studying gene dosage effects have the potential to
provide new insights into aspects of craniofacial development, variation, and
evolution.

PMCID: PMC4013528
PMID: 23563729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Hum Genomics. 2013 Apr 5;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1479-7364-7-9.

Salamander Hox clusters contain repetitive DNA and expanded non-coding regions: a
typical Hox structure for non-mammalian tetrapod vertebrates?

Voss SR(1), Putta S, Walker JA, Smith JJ, Maki N, Tsonis PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.
srvoss@uky.edu

Hox genes encode transcription factors that regulate embryonic and post-embryonic
developmental processes. The expression of Hox genes is regulated in part by the 
tight, spatial arrangement of conserved coding and non-coding sequences. The
potential for evolutionary changes in Hox cluster structure is thought to be low 
among vertebrates; however, recent studies of a few non-mammalian taxa suggest
greater variation than originally thought. Using next generation sequencing of
large genomic fragments (>100 kb) from the red spotted newt (Notophthalamus
viridescens), we found that the arrangement of Hox cluster genes was conserved
relative to orthologous regions from other vertebrates, but the length of introns
and intergenic regions varied. In particular, the distance between hoxd13 and
hoxd11 is longer in newt than orthologous regions from vertebrate species with
expanded Hox clusters and is predicted to exceed the length of the entire HoxD
clusters (hoxd13-hoxd4) of humans, mice, and frogs. Many repetitive DNA sequences
were identified for newt Hox clusters, including an enrichment of DNA
transposon-like sequences relative to non-coding genomic fragments. Our results
suggest that Hox cluster expansion and transposon accumulation are common
features of non-mammalian tetrapod vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3630018
PMID: 23561734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Epigenetics. 2013 Feb;8(2):149-56. doi: 10.4161/epi.23398. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

DNA methylation profiles of long- and short-term glioblastoma survivors.

Shinawi T(1), Hill VK, Krex D, Schackert G, Gentle D, Morris MR, Wei W,
Cruickshank G, Maher ER, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalized Medicine, Department of Medical &
Molecular Genetics, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Birmingham College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Birmingham, UK.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant type of primary brain tumor
in adults and prognosis of most GBM patients is poor. However, a small percentage
of patients show a long term survival of 36 mo or longer after diagnosis.
Epigenetic profiles can provide molecular markers for patient prognosis:
recently, a G-CIMP positive phenotype associated with IDH1 mutations has been
described for GBMs with good prognosis. In the present analysis we performed
genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of short-term survivors (STS; overall
survival < 1 y) and long-term survivors (LTS; overall survival > 3 y) by
utilizing the HumanMethylation450K BeadChips to assess quantitative methylation
at > 480,000 CpG sites. Cluster analysis has shown that a subset of LTS showed a 
G-CIMP positive phenotype that was tightly associated with IDH1 mutation status
and was confirmed by analysis of the G-CIMP signature genes. Using high
stringency criteria for differential hypermethylation between non-cancer brain
and tumor samples, we identified 2,638 hypermethylated CpG loci (890 genes) in
STS GBMs, 3,101 hypermethylated CpG loci (1,062 genes) in LTS (wild type IDH1)
and 11,293 hypermethylated CpG loci in LTS (mutated for IDH1), reflecting the
CIMP positive phenotype. The location of differentially hypermethylated CpG loci 
with respect to CpG content, neighborhood context and functional genomic
distribution was similar in our sample set, with the majority of CpG loci
residing in CpG islands and in gene promoters. Our preliminary study also
identified a set of CpG loci differentially hypermethylated between STS and LTS
cases, including members of the homeobox gene family (HOXD8, HOXD13 and HOXC4),
the transcription factors NR2F2 and TFAP2A, and Dickkopf 2, a negative regulator 
of the wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3592900
PMID: 23291739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Science. 2012 Dec 14;338(6113):1476-80. doi: 10.1126/science.1226804.

Hox genes regulate digit patterning by controlling the wavelength of a
Turing-type mechanism.

Sheth R(1), Marcon L, Bastida MF, Junco M, Quintana L, Dahn R, Kmita M, Sharpe J,
Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Sociedad para el Desarrollo
Regional de Cantabria-Universidad de Cantabria, 39011 Santander, Spain.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Dec 14;338(6113):1406.
    Genome Biol. 2013;14(1):101.

The formation of repetitive structures (such as stripes) in nature is often
consistent with a reaction-diffusion mechanism, or Turing model, of
self-organizing systems. We used mouse genetics to analyze how digit patterning
(an iterative digit/nondigit pattern) is generated. We showed that the
progressive reduction in Hoxa13 and Hoxd11-Hoxd13 genes (hereafter referred to as
distal Hox genes) from the Gli3-null background results in progressively more
severe polydactyly, displaying thinner and densely packed digits. Combined with
computer modeling, our results argue for a Turing-type mechanism underlying digit
patterning, in which the dose of distal Hox genes modulates the digit period or
wavelength. The phenotypic similarity with fish-fin endoskeleton patterns
suggests that the pentadactyl state has been achieved through modification of an 
ancestral Turing-type mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4486416
PMID: 23239739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1219-29. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.10.015.

Hoxd13 contribution to the evolution of vertebrate appendages.

Freitas R(1), Gómez-Marín C, Wilson JM, Casares F, Gómez-Skarmeta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD), CSIC-Universidad Pablo de
Olavide-Junta de Andalucía Campus UPO, Ctra. de Utrera km1, E-41013 Seville,
Spain.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1121-2.

Fossil data suggest that limbs evolved from fish fins by sequential elaboration
of their distal endoskeleton, giving rise to the autopod close to the tetrapod
origin. This elaboration may have occurred by a simultaneous reduction of the
distal ectodermal fold of fish fins. Modulation of 5'Hoxd gene transcription,
through tetrapod-specific digit enhancers, has been suggested as a possible
evolutionary mechanism involved in these morphological transformations. Here, we 
overexpress hoxd13a in zebrafish to investigate the impact of increasing 5'Hoxd
expression during fin development. This overexpression causes increased
proliferation, distal expansion of chondrogenic tissue and finfold reduction. In 
addition, we also show that the tetrapod-specific 5'Hoxd enhancer CsC promotes
similar expression in zebrafish fins and mouse limbs. Our results support the
idea that modulation of 5'Hoxd gene expression, by acquisition of novel enhancer 
elements, offered the substrate for the evolution of fins and the origin of
tetrapod limbs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23237954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1121-2. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.11.011.

Making limbs from fins.

Schneider I(1), Shubin NH.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencias Biologicas, Universidade Federal do Para, 66075 Belem,
Brazil. ischneider@ufpa.br

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2012 Dec 11;23(6):1219-29.

Our limbs evolved from fish fins as vertebrates colonized aquatic shallows and
land. If we understood the genetics underlying this transition, could we build a 
limb on a fish? In this issue of Developmental Cell, Freitas et al. (2012) show
that boosting Hoxd13 expression can bring zebrafish one step closer to terra
firma.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23237946  [PubMed]


60. Leuk Res. 2013 Jan;37(1):112-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.10.012. Epub 2012 Nov
4.

Non-homologous end joining mediated DNA repair is impaired in the NUP98-HOXD13
mouse model for myelodysplastic syndrome.

Puthiyaveetil AG(1), Reilly CM, Pardee TS, Caudell DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Center for Molecular Medicine & Infectious 
Diseases, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Chromosomal translocations typically impair cell differentiation and often
require secondary mutations for malignant transformation. However, the role of a 
primary translocation in the development of collaborating mutations is debatable.
To delineate the role of leukemic translocation NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) in secondary
mutagenesis, DNA break and repair mechanisms in stimulated mouse B lymphocytes
expressing NHD13 were analyzed. Our results showed significantly reduced
expression of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ)-mediated DNA repair genes, DNA
Pkcs, DNA ligase4, and Xrcc4 leading to cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase. Our
results showed that expression of NHD13 fusion gene resulted in impaired
NHEJ-mediated DNA break repair.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23131583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Dyn. 2013 Jan;242(1):53-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23893. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Spatio-temporal expression of HOX genes in human hindgut development.

Illig R(1), Fritsch H, Schwarzer C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Division of Clinical and
Functional Anatomy, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes belong to a highly conserved subgroup of the homeobox gene 
superfamily. Studies of animal models have emphasized their role in defining the 
body plan by their coordinated expression along the body axis during ontogeny.
Although an important role of HOX genes in human development is assumed, little
is known about their expression during human ontogenesis. Therefore, we
investigated the expression of the nine most posterior members of the HOXA, HOXB,
HOXC, and HOXD clusters in embryonic hindgut between weeks 6 to 12 and in adult
rectal tissue.
RESULTS: Applying in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, we observed
expression of HOXA11, HOXA13, HOXD12, and HOXD13 in developmental week 6.
However, expression of HOXD12 faded during weeks 7 and 8, and then became
increasingly re-expressed during week 9 in humans. With the exception of HOXD13, 
all expressed HOX genes dropped below detection limits in week 11. Adult rectal
tissue displayed distinct HOXA11, HOXA13, HOXD12, and HOXD13 expression patterns 
within the rectal layers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a strict spatio-temporal regulation of HOX gene
expression during human development, supporting the idea of their role as key
regulators. Nonetheless, the expression pattern of distinct HOX genes differs
markedly from animal models.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23073994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;29(5):537-41. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2012.05.008.

[Mechanism of GLI3 gene transcription regulation in idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao DH(1), Lin CK, Jin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of transcription regulation of GLI3 gene 
in idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus.
METHODS: pGL3-Gli3 luciferase report vectors were constructed, and the activity
of Gli3 promoter was explored. A P-Match software was used to analyze the
sequence upstream of the transcription start site of rat Gli3 gene, which was
subsequently verified with chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (CHIP) and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Expression of the Gli3 gene was
analyzed in L6 cells transfected with Hoxd13 small interference RNA(siRNA) and
Hoxd13 expression vectors.
RESULTS: The 5' region of rat Gli3 gene contains two potential binding sites for 
the Hoxd13 protein. CHIP and EMSA assays both confirmed that Hoxd13 can directly 
bind with site 2. As shown in L6 cells, expression of Gli3 may be enhanced with
silencing of Hoxd13, whilst exogenous expression of Hoxd13 can down-regulate
transcription of Gli3.
CONCLUSION: Hoxd13 can directly regulate the expression of Gli3 gene through a
Hoxd13 binding site in the limb of rat embryo.

PMID: 23042389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Blood. 2012 Oct 11;120(15):3089-97. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-405332. Epub 2012 
Aug 27.

Loss of p53 accelerates the complications of myelodysplastic syndrome in a
NUP98-HOXD13-driven mouse model.

Xu H(1), Menendez S, Schlegelberger B, Bae N, Aplan PD, Göhring G, Deblasio TR,
Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY, USA.

The nucleoporin gene NUP98 is fused to several genes including HOXD13 in patients
with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), acute myeloid leukemia, and chronic myeloid
leukemia, blast crisis. Genetically engineered mice that express a NUP98-HOXD13
(NHD13) transgene (Tg) display the phenotypic features of MDS, including
cytopenias, bone marrow dysplasia, and transformation to acute leukemia. Here we 
show that short-term treatment with the p53 inhibitor Pifithrin-a partially and
transiently rescued the myeloid and lymphoid abnormalities found in NHD13(+) Tg
mice, with no improvement in the anemia, while the genetic deletion of 2 alleles 
of p53 rescued both the myeloid progenitor cell and long-term hematopoietic stem 
cell compartments. Nonetheless, loss of one or both alleles of p53 did not rescue
the MDS phenotype, but instead exacerbated the MDS phenotype and accelerated the 
development of acute myeloid leukemia. Our studies suggest that while targeting
p53 may transiently improve hematopoiesis in MDS, over the long-term, it has
detrimental effects, raising caution about abrogating its function to treat the
cytopenias that accompany this disease.

PMCID: PMC3471517
PMID: 22927245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Exp Hematol. 2012 Dec;40(12):1016-27. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.08.001. Epub
2012 Aug 8.

Gene expression profiling and candidate gene resequencing identifies pathways and
mutations important for malignant transformation caused by leukemogenic fusion
genes.

Novak RL(1), Harper DP, Caudell D, Slape C, Beachy SH, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) and CALM-AF10 (CA10) are oncogenic fusion proteins produced 
by recurrent chromosomal translocations in patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Transgenic mice that express these fusions develop AML with a long latency
and incomplete penetrance, suggesting that collaborating genetic events are
required for leukemic transformation. We employed genetic techniques to identify 
both preleukemic abnormalities in healthy transgenic mice as well as
collaborating events leading to leukemic transformation. Candidate gene
resequencing revealed that 6 of 27 (22%) CA10 AMLs spontaneously acquired a Ras
pathway mutation and 8 of 27 (30%) acquired an Flt3 mutation. Two CA10 AMLs
acquired an Flt3 internal-tandem duplication, demonstrating that these mutations 
can be acquired in murine as well as human AML. Gene expression profiles revealed
a marked upregulation of Hox genes, particularly Hoxa5, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in both
NHD13 and CA10 mice. Furthermore, mir196b, which is embedded within the Hoxa
locus, was overexpressed in both CA10 and NHD13 samples. In contrast, the Hox
cofactors Meis1 and Pbx3 were differentially expressed; Meis1 was increased in
CA10 AMLs but not NHD13 AMLs, whereas Pbx3 was consistently increased in NHD13
but not CA10 AMLs. Silencing of Pbx3 in NHD13 cells led to decreased
proliferation, increased apoptosis, and decreased colony formation in vitro,
suggesting a previously unexpected role for Pbx3 in leukemic transformation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3496069
PMID: 22885519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e40728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040728. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Functional dissection of HOXD cluster genes in regulation of neuroblastoma cell
proliferation and differentiation.

Zha Y(1), Ding E, Yang L, Mao L, Wang X, McCarthy BA, Huang S, Ding HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Retinoic acid (RA) can induce growth arrest and neuronal differentiation of
neuroblastoma cells and has been used in clinic for treatment of neuroblastoma.
It has been reported that RA induces the expression of several HOXD genes in
human neuroblastoma cell lines, but their roles in RA action are largely unknown.
The HOXD cluster contains nine genes (HOXD1, HOXD3, HOXD4, and HOXD8-13) that are
positioned sequentially from 3' to 5', with HOXD1 at the 3' end and HOXD13 the 5'
end. Here we show that all HOXD genes are induced by RA in the human
neuroblastoma BE(2)-C cells, with the genes located at the 3' end being activated
generally earlier than those positioned more 5' within the cluster. Individual
induction of HOXD8, HOXD9, HOXD10 or HOXD12 is sufficient to induce both growth
arrest and neuronal differentiation, which is associated with downregulation of
cell cycle-promoting genes and upregulation of neuronal differentiation genes.
However, induction of other HOXD genes either has no effect (HOXD1) or has
partial effects (HOXD3, HOXD4, HOXD11 and HOXD13) on BE(2)-C cell proliferation
or differentiation. We further show that knockdown of HOXD8 expression, but not
that of HOXD9 expression, significantly inhibits the differentiation-inducing
activity of RA. HOXD8 directly activates the transcription of HOXC9, a key
effector of RA action in neuroblastoma cells. These findings highlight the
distinct functions of HOXD genes in RA induction of neuroblastoma cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3413684
PMID: 22879880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Development. 2012 Sep;139(17):3157-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.081174.

Anterior-posterior differences in HoxD chromatin topology in limb development.

Williamson I(1), Eskeland R, Lettice LA, Hill AE, Boyle S, Grimes GR, Hill RE,
Bickmore WA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

A late phase of HoxD activation is crucial for the patterning and growth of
distal structures across the anterior-posterior (A-P) limb axis of mammals.
Polycomb complexes and chromatin compaction have been shown to regulate Hox loci 
along the main body axis in embryonic development, but the extent to which they
have a role in limb-specific HoxD expression, an evolutionary adaptation defined 
by the activity of distal enhancer elements that drive expression of 5' Hoxd
genes, has yet to be fully elucidated. We reveal two levels of chromatin topology
that differentiate distal limb A-P HoxD activity. Using both immortalised cell
lines derived from posterior and anterior regions of distal E10.5 mouse limb
buds, and analysis in E10.5 dissected limb buds themselves, we show that there is
a loss of polycomb-catalysed H3K27me3 histone modification and a chromatin
decompaction over HoxD in the distal posterior limb compared with anterior.
Moreover, we show that the global control region (GCR) long-range enhancer
spatially colocalises with the 5' HoxD genomic region specifically in the distal 
posterior limb. This is consistent with the formation of a chromatin loop between
5' HoxD and the GCR regulatory module at the time and place of distal limb bud
development when the GCR participates in initiating Hoxd gene quantitative
collinearity and Hoxd13 expression. This is the first example of A-P differences 
in chromatin compaction and chromatin looping in the development of the mammalian
secondary body axis (limb).

PMCID: PMC3413162
PMID: 22872084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 2012 Sep 20;120(12):2475-83. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Inhibition of apoptosis by BCL2 prevents leukemic transformation of a murine
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Slape CI(1), Saw J, Jowett JB, Aplan PD, Strasser A, Jane SM, Curtis DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Marrow Research Laboratories, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville,
Australia. christopher.slape@monash.edu

Programmed cell death or apoptosis is a prominent feature of low-risk
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), although the underlying mechanism remains
controversial. High-risk MDS have less apoptosis associated with increased
expression of the prosurvival BCL2-related proteins. To address the mechanism and
pathogenic role of apoptosis and BCL2 expression in MDS, we used a mouse model
resembling human MDS, in which the fusion protein NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) of the
chromosomal translocation t(2;11)(q31;p15) is expressed in hematopoietic cells.
Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from 3-month-old mice had increased rates
of apoptosis associated with increased cell cycling and DNA damage. Gene
expression profiling of these MDS progenitors revealed a specific reduction in
Bcl2. Restoration of Bcl2 expression by a BCL2 transgene blocked apoptosis of the
MDS progenitors, which corrected the macrocytic anemia. Blocking apoptosis also
restored cell-cycle quiescence and reduced DNA damage in the MDS progenitors. We 
expected that preventing apoptosis would accelerate malignant transformation to
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, contrary to expectations, preventing
apoptosis of premalignant cells abrogated transformation to AML. In contrast to
the current dogma that overcoming apoptosis is an important step toward cancer,
this work demonstrates that gaining a survival advantage of premalignant cells
may delay or prevent leukemic progression.

PMCID: PMC3448259
PMID: 22855610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(6):802-10. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4438. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Structural dynamics and epigenetic modifications of Hoxc loci along the
anteroposterior body axis in developing mouse embryos.

Min H(1), Lee JY, Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, Brain Korea 21 project for
Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.
mhkim1@yuhs.ac

Hox genes are organized as clusters and specify regional identity along the
anteroposterior body axis by sequential expression at a specific time and region 
during embryogenesis. However, the precise mechanisms underlying the sequential
spatio-temporal, collinear expression pattern of Hox genes are not fully
understood. Since epigenetic modifications such as chromatin architecture and
histone modifications have become crucial mechanisms for highly coordinated gene 
expressions, we examined such modifications. E14.5 mouse embryos were dissected
into three parts along the anteroposterior axis: brain, trunk-anterior, and
trunk-posterior. Then, structural changes and epigenetic modifications were
analyzed along the Hoxc cluster using chromosome conformation capture and
chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR methods. Hox non-expressing brain tissues had
more compact, heterochromatin-like structures together with the strong repressive
mark H3K27me3 than trunk tissues. In the trunk, however, a more loose
euchromatin-like topology with a reduced amount of H3K27me3 modifications were
observed along the whole cluster, regardless of their potency in gene activation.
The active mark H3K4me3 was rather closely associated with the collinear
expression of Hoxc genes; at trunk-anterior tissues, only 3' anterior Hoxc genes 
were marked by H3K4me3 upon gene activation, whereas whole Hoxc genes were marked
by H3K4me3 and showed expression in trunk-posterior tissues. Altogether, these
results indicated that loosening of the chromatin architecture and removing
H3K27me3 were not sufficient for, but rather the concomitant acquisition of
H3K4me3 drove the collinear expression of Hoxc genes.

PMCID: PMC3372884
PMID: 22719220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncotarget. 2012 May;3(5):576-80.

FLT3 in lineage specification and plasticity.

Greenblatt S(1), Small D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

FLT3 is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic stem/
progenitor cells (HSPCs) and is important for both normal myeloid and lymphoid
differentiation. FLT3 expression in Pax5 negative lymphoid precursors coincides
with a window of multilineage differentiation potential in mice and humans.
Recent work has shown that FLT3 activating mutations can collaborate with a
Nup98-HoxD13 mutation to induce an aggressive acute leukemia. The leukemic
initiating population in this model displayed properties of both lymphoid and
myeloid precursors, making it a useful tool to study the role of FLT3 in lineage 
plasticity. Through a variety of assays, the leukemic initiating population was
shown to be restricted to myeloid differentiation, suggesting that the B-lineage 
properties in these cells are due to the priming of lymphoid transcription
programs in multipotent progenitors rather than a true capacity for B-cell
maturation. The development of an undifferentiated myeloid leukemia in this
model, also has implications for the role of FLT3 in the inhibition of myeloid
differentiation. Here we discuss the insights gained from this model.

PMCID: PMC3388187
PMID: 22643831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Exp Hematol. 2012 Aug;40(8):622-33. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.05.002. Epub 2012 
May 18.

A NUP98-HOXD13 leukemic fusion gene leads to impaired class switch recombination 
and antibody production.

Puthiyaveetil AG(1), Heid B, Reilly CM, HogenEsch H, Caudell DL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.

Myelodysplastic syndrome is a clonal process characterized by ineffective
hematopoiesis and progression to acute leukemia. Although many myelodysplastic
syndrome and leukemic patients have compromised immunity, the role of underlying 
mutations in regulating immune function is poorly understood. Recent studies show
that NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene results in myelodysplastic syndrome and
impairs lymphocyte differentiation in transgenic mice. In our studies, we sought 
to elucidate the mechanism by which NHD13 affects B-lymphocyte development and
function. Based on our preliminary findings that transgenic mice had increased
levels of IgM and reduced IgG1 and IgE, we hypothesized that the fusion gene
might impair class switch recombination (CSR). Mice were immunologically
challenged with dinitrophenol. NHD13 mice showed a marked reduction in
B-lymphocyte differentiation in their bone marrow and spleen following
dinitrophenol stimulation and had reduced production of dinitrophenol-specific
antibodies. Spleen follicles from these mice were small and hypocellular,
indicating failure of clonal expansion. When isolated NHD13 B lymphocytes were
stimulated in vitro using Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide or
lipopolysaccharide + interleukin-4, they failed to undergo sufficient CSR and
proliferation. Taken together, our findings show that expression of NUP98-HOXD13 
impairs CSR and reduces the antibody-mediated immune response, in addition to its
role in leukemia. Further delineation of the NUP98-HOXD13 transgene may reveal
novel pathways involved in CSR.

Copyright © 2012 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36876. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036876. Epub 2012 May 11.

Depletion of cytotoxic T-cells does not protect NUP98-HOXD13 mice from
myelodysplastic syndrome but reveals a modest tumor immunosurveillance effect.

Gough SM(1), Chung YJ, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and aplastic anemia (AA) patients both present
with symptoms of bone marrow failure. In many AA patients, these features are
thought to result from an oligoclonal expansion of cytotoxic T-cells that destroy
haematopoietic stem or progenitor cells. This notion is supported by the
observation that AA patients respond to immunosuppressive therapy. A fraction of 
MDS patients also respond well to immunosuppressive therapy suggesting a similar 
role for cytotoxic T-cells in the etiology of MDS, however the role of cytotoxic 
T-cells in MDS remains unclear. Mice that express a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13)
transgene develop a MDS that closely mimics the human condition in terms of
dysplasia, ineffective hematopoiesis, and transformation to acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). We followed a cohort of NHD13 mice lacking the Rag1 protein
(NHD13/Rag1KO) to determine if the absence of lymphocytes might 1) delay the
onset and/or diminish the severity of the MDS, or 2) effect malignant
transformation and survival of the NHD13 mice. No difference was seen in the
onset or severity of MDS between the NHD13 and NHD13/Rag1KO mice. However,
NHD13/Rag1KO mice had decreased survival and showed a trend toward increased
incidence of transformation to AML compared to the NHD13 mice, suggesting
protection from AML transformation by a modest immuno-surveillance effect. In the
absence of functional Tcrb signaling in the NHD13/Rag1KO T-cell tumors, Pak7 was 
identified as a potential Tcrb surrogate survival signal.

PMCID: PMC3350481
PMID: 22606303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Clin Dysmorphol. 2012 Jul;21(3):141-3. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32835306f0.

Homozygous nonsense mutation in HOXD13 underlies synpolydactyly with a cleft.

Low KJ(1), Newbury-Ecob RA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Department, University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation
Trust, St Michael's Hospital, Southwell St., Bristol, UK. karen.low1@nhs.net

Erratum in
    Clin Dysmorphol. 2013 Jan;22(1):45. Nwbury-Ecob, Ruth A [corrected to
Newbury-Ecob, Ruth A].

PMID: 22473151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Gene. 2012 May 10;499(1):48-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.02.046. Epub 2012 Mar 3.

Eight-alanine duplication in homeobox D13 in a Chinese family with
synpolydactyly.

Xin Q(1), Li L, Li J, Qiu R, Guo C, Gong Y, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education and
Department of Medical Genetics, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan
250012, PR China.

Human synpolydactyly (SPD), belonging to syndactyly (SD) II, is an inherited
autosomal-dominant limb malformation characterized by SD of finger 3 or 4 or toe 
4 or 5, usually with digit duplication. Previous studies have demonstrated that
homeobox protein D13 (HOXD13) is responsible for this Mendelian disorder. In this
paper, we report on a family with SPD - 7 members show typical SPD malformations.
We used PCR and Sanger sequencing of DNA from peripheral blood samples and found 
an 8-Ala expansion in exon 1 of HOXD13 by mutation detection; this variant was
absent in unaffected members and in 50 unaffected non-related subjects. This
study further confirmed the correlation between SPD and alanine expansion in
HOXD13.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22406499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Dev Dyn. 2012 Apr;241(4):792-802. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23756. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

A function for all posterior Hoxd genes during digit development?

Delpretti S(1), Zakany J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre Frontiers in Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Four posterior Hoxd genes, from Hoxd13 to Hoxd10, are collectively
regulated during the development of tetrapod digits. Besides the well-documented 
role of Hoxd13, the function of the neighboring genes has been difficult to
evaluate due to the close genetic linkage and potential regulatory interferences.
We used a combination of five small nested deletions in cis, involving from two
to four consecutive genes of the Hoxd13 to Hoxd9 loci, in mice, to evaluate their
combined functional importance.
RESULTS: We show that deletions leading to a gain of function of Hoxd13, via
regulatory re-allocation, generate abnormal phenotypes, in agreement with the
dominant negative role of this gene. We also show that Hoxd10, Hoxd11, and Hoxd12
all seem to play a genuine role in digit development, though less compelling than
that of Hoxd13. In contrast, the nearby Hoxd9 contributed no measurable function 
in digits.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that a slight and transient deregulation of Hoxd13
expression can readily affect the relative lengths of limb segments and that all 
posterior Hoxd genes likely contribute to the final limb morphology. We discuss
the difficulty to clearly assess the functional share of individual genes within 
such a gene family, where closely located neighbors, coding for homologous
proteins, are regulated by a unique circuitry and all contribute to shape the
distal parts of our appendages.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22374744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Jul 11;413(13-14):1049-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.02.015.
Epub 2012 Feb 22.

A novel non-synonymous mutation in the homeodomain of HOXD13 causes
synpolydactyly in a Chinese family.

Wang B(1), Xu B, Cheng Z, Zhou X, Wang J, Yang G, Cheng L, Yang J, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

PURPOSE: The 5' HoxD genes and their paralogs in the HoxD cluster are crucial for
normal vertebrate limb development. Mutations in HOXD13 and HOXD13 have been
found to cause human limb malformation. Here we describe a two-generation Chinese
family with a variant form of mild synpolydactyly.
METHODS: Sequence analysis of HOXD13 gene in a two-generation Chinese family with
six individuals.
RESULTS: Gene scan and linkage analysis suggested that HOXD13 might be
responsible for the disease of this family. An LOD around 1.8 was observed at
three markers (P=2E(-3)). We identified a novel c.893G>A (p.Arg298Gln) mutation
in the HOXD13 homeodomain. And the mutation affected the transcriptional
activation ability of HOXD13.
CONCLUSION: This finding expands the phenotypic spectrum associated with HOXD13
mutations and advances our understanding of human limb development.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22374128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 1;21(11):2464-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds060. Epub 2012 Feb 
27.

An N-terminal G11A mutation in HOXD13 causes synpolydactyly and interferes with
Gli3R function during limb pre-patterning.

Brison N(1), Debeer P, Fantini S, Oley C, Zappavigna V, Luyten FP, Tylzanowski P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skeletal Development and Joint Disorders, University of Leuven, 
Herestraat 49, O&N1 Box 813, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a distal limb anomaly characterized by incomplete digit
separation and the presence of supernumerary digits in the syndactylous web. This
phenotype has been associated with mutations in the homeodomain or polyalanine
tract of the HOXD13 gene. We identified a novel mutation (G11A) in HOXD13 that is
located outside the previously known domains and affects the intracellular half
life of the protein. Misexpression of HOXD13(G11A) in the developing chick limb
phenocopied the human SPD phenotype. Finally, we demonstrated through in vitro
studies that this mutation has a destabilizing effect on GLI3R uncovering an
unappreciated mechanism by which HOXD13 determines the patterning of the limb.

PMID: 22373878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood. 2012 Mar 22;119(12):2883-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-382283. Epub 2012 
Feb 8.

Knock-in of a FLT3/ITD mutation cooperates with a NUP98-HOXD13 fusion to generate
acute myeloid leukemia in a mouse model.

Greenblatt S(1), Li L, Slape C, Nguyen B, Novak R, Duffield A, Huso D, Desiderio 
S, Borowitz MJ, Aplan P, Small D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Constitutive activation of FLT3 by internal tandem duplication (ITD) is one of
the most common molecular alterations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). FLT3/ITD
mutations have also been observed in myelodysplastic syndrome patients both
before and during progression to AML. Previous work has shown that insertion of
an FLT3/ITD mutation into the murine Flt3 gene induces a myeloproliferative
neoplasm, but not progression to acute leukemia, suggesting that additional
cooperating events are required. We therefore combined the FLT3/ITD mutation with
a model of myelodysplastic syndrome involving transgenic expression of the
Nup98-HoxD13 (NHD13) fusion gene. Mice expressing both the FLT3/ITD and NHD13
transgene developed AML with 100% penetrance and short latency. These leukemias
were driven by mutant FLT3 expression and were susceptible to treatment with FLT3
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We also observed a spontaneous loss of the wild-type 
Flt3 allele in these AMLs, further modeling the loss of the heterozygosity
phenomenon that is seen in human AML with FLT3-activating mutations. Because
resistance to FLT3 inhibitors remains an important clinical issue, this model may
help identify new molecular targets in collaborative signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3327463
PMID: 22323452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 11;12:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-2.

HOXA13 and HOXD13 expression during development of the syndactylous digits in the
marsupial Macropus eugenii.

Chew KY(1), Yu H, Pask AJ, Shaw G, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Kangaroo Genomics, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, 3010, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Kangaroos and wallabies have specialised limbs that allow for their
hopping mode of locomotion. The hindlimbs differentiate much later in development
but become much larger than the forelimbs. The hindlimb autopod has only four
digits, the fourth of which is greatly elongated, while digits two and three are 
syndactylous. We investigated the expression of two genes, HOXA13 and HOXD13,
that are crucial for digit patterning in mice during formation of the limbs of
the tammar wallaby.
RESULTS: We describe the development of the tammar limbs at key stages before
birth. There was marked heterochrony and the hindlimb developed more slowly than 
the forelimb. Both tammar HOXA13 and HOXD13 have two exons as in humans, mice and
chickens. HOXA13 had an early and distal mRNA distribution in the tammar limb bud
as in the mouse, but forelimb expression preceded that in the hindlimb. HOXD13
mRNA was expressed earlier in the forelimb than the hindlimb and was
predominantly detected in the interdigital tissues of the forelimb. In contrast, 
the hindlimb had a more restricted expression pattern that appeared to be
expressed at discrete points at both posterior and anterior margins of the limb
bud, and was unlike expression seen in the mouse and the chicken.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first examination of HOXA and HOXD gene expression in a 
marsupial. The gene structure and predicted proteins were highly conserved with
their eutherian orthologues. Interestingly, despite the morphological differences
in hindlimb patterning, there were no modifications to the polyalanine tract of
either HOXA13 or HOXD13 when compared to those of the mouse and bat but there was
a marked difference between the tammar and the other mammals in the region of the
first polyserine tract of HOXD13. There were also altered expression domains for 
both genes in the developing tammar limbs compared to the chicken and mouse.
Together these findings suggest that the timing of HOX gene expression may
contribute to the heterochrony of the forelimb and hindlimb and that alteration
to HOX domains may influence phenotypic differences that lead to the development 
of marsupial syndactylous digits.

© 2012 Chew et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3268106
PMID: 22235805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Jan 10;13:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-4.

Isolated brachydactyly type E caused by a HOXD13 nonsense mutation: a case
report.

Jamsheer A(1), Sowinska A, Kaczmarek L, Latos-Bielenska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences in Poznan,
Poland, ul. Grunwaldzka 55 paw. 15, 60-352 Poznan, Poland. jamsheer@wp.pl

BACKGROUND: Brachydactyly type E (BDE; MIM#113300) is characterized by shortening
of the metacarpal, metatarsal, and often phalangeal bones, and predominantly
affects postaxial ray(s) of the limb. BDE may occur as an isolated trait or as
part of a syndrome. Isolated BDE is rare and in the majority of cases the
molecular pathogenesis has so far not been resolved. Originally, the molecular
cause of isolated BDE has been unravelled in 2 families and shown to result from 
heterozygous missense mutations in the homeodomain of the HOXD13 gene. Since the 
initial manuscript, one further HOXD13 mutation has been reported only in a
single family manifesting isolated BDE.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this paper, we report on a Polish family exhibiting
isolated BDE caused by a novel nonsense heterozygous HOXD13 mutation. We
investigated a Polish female proband and her father, both affected by isolated
BDE, in whom we identified a nonsense heterozygous mutation c.820C > T(p.R274X)
in the HOXD13 gene. So far, only two missense HOXD13 substitutions (p.S308C and
p.I314L), localized within the homeodomain of the HOXD13 transcription factor, as
well as a single nonsense mutation (p.E181X) were associated with BDE. Both
missense changes were supposed to alter DNA binding affinity of the protein.
CONCLUSION: The variant p.R274X identified in our proband is the fourth HOXD13
mutation, and the second truncating (nonsense) mutation, reported to result in
typical isolated BDE. We refer our clinical and molecular findings to the
previously described HOXD13 associated phenotypes and mutations.

PMCID: PMC3278352
PMID: 22233338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;28(6):601-5. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2011.06.001.

[Synpolydactyly in a Chinese kindred: mutation detection, prenatal
ultrasonographic and molecular diagnosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin H(1), Lin PF, Wang QM, Mao F, Cai Y, Gong YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify potential mutation responsible for synpolydactyly (SPD) in
a large Chinese kindred and to offer genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis
for the members of the family.
METHODS: All family members were examined clinically, and blood samples were
obtained for linkage analysis and mutation screening. Ultrasound examinations
were conducted at 16-21 weeks. Amniotic fluid sample was obtained by
ultrasound-guided amniocentesis at 18 weeks of gestation.
RESULTS: A large kindred affected with SPD was identified and characterized. With
two short tandem repeat (STR) markers (D2S1238 and D2S1245) flanking the HOXD13
gene, the disease was mapped to 2q31. A heterozygous 27 bp expansion within the
imperfect GCN triplet-repeat of exon 1, c. 184_210dup, was identified. The
mutation resulted in a gain of 9 alanine residues between the 14th and 15th
alanine of the normal 15-amino-acid-long polyalanine tract. On ultrasound
examination, all fingers and toes of the fetus appeared to be normal. Linkage
analysis and mutation detection confirmed that the fetus did not inherit the
mutant allele from his affected mother.
CONCLUSION: HOXD13 gene mutation was responsible for the SPD phenotype in this
family. Accurate prenatal diagnosis of SPD was achieved with combined ultrasound 
and molecular analysis.

PMID: 22161087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Blood. 2011 Dec 8;118(24):6247-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-328880. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

NUP98 gene fusions and hematopoietic malignancies: common themes and new biologic
insights.

Gough SM(1), Slape CI, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Structural chromosomal rearrangements of the Nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98),
primarily balanced translocations and inversions, are associated with a wide
array of hematopoietic malignancies. NUP98 is known to be fused to at least 28
different partner genes in patients with hematopoietic malignancies, including
acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis, myelodysplastic
syndrome, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and bilineage/biphenotypic leukemia.
NUP98 gene fusions typically encode a fusion protein that retains the amino
terminus of NUP98; in this context, it is important to note that several recent
studies have demonstrated that the amino-terminal portion of NUP98 exhibits
transcription activation potential. Approximately half of the NUP98 fusion
partners encode homeodomain proteins, and at least 5 NUP98 fusions involve known 
histone-modifying genes. Several of the NUP98 fusions, including NUP98-homeobox
(HOX)A9, NUP98-HOXD13, and NUP98-JARID1A, have been used to generate animal
models of both lymphoid and myeloid malignancy; these models typically
up-regulate HOXA cluster genes, including HOXA5, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10. In
addition, several of the NUP98 fusion proteins have been shown to inhibit
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors and to increase self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells, providing a potential mechanism for
malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC3236115
PMID: 21948299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Aug 7;17(29):3407-19. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i29.3407.

Identification of methylation profile of HOX genes in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma.

Shu Y(1), Wang B, Wang J, Wang JM, Zou SQ.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Department of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
Hubei Province, China.

AIM: To identify methylation profile and novel tumor marker of extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) with high throughout microarray.
METHODS: Differential methylation profile was compared between normal bile duct
epithelial cell lines and CCA cell lines by methyl-DNA immunoprecipitation
(MeDIP) microarray. Bisulfite-polymerase chain reaction (BSP) was performed to
identify the methylated allels of target genes. Expression of target genes was
investigated before and after the treatment with DNA demethylating agent.
Expression of candidate genes was also evaluated by immunofluorescence in 30
specimens of CCA tissues and 9 normal bile duct tissues.
RESULTS: Methylation profile of CCA was identified with MeDIP microarray in the
respects of different gene functions and signaling pathways. Interestingly, 97
genes with hypermethylated CpG islands in the promoter region were homeobox
genes. The top 5 hypermethylated homeobox genes validated by BSP were HOXA2
(94.29%), HOXA5 (95.38%), HOXA11 (91.67%), HOXB4 (90.56%) and HOXD13 (94.38%).
Expression of these genes was reactivated with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
Significant expression differences were found between normal bile duct and
extrahepatic CCA tissues (66.67%-100% vs 3.33%-10%).
CONCLUSION: HOXA2, HOXA5, HOXA11, HOXB4 and HOXD13 may work as differential
epigenetic biomarkers between malignant and benign biliary tissues.

PMCID: PMC3160567
PMID: 21876633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):701-6. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.84. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

A nonsense mutation in the HOXD13 gene underlies synpolydactyly with incomplete
penetrance.

Kurban M(1), Wajid M, Petukhova L, Shimomura Y, Christiano AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Synpolydactyly 1 (SPD1; OMIM 186000), also known as type II syndactyly, is a
dominantly inherited limb malformation that is characterized by an increased
number of digits. SPD1 is most commonly caused by polyalanine repeat expansions
in the coding region of the HOXD13 gene, which are believed to show a
dominant-negative effect. In addition, missense and out-of-frame deletion
mutations in the HOXD13 gene are also known to cause SPD, and the mechanism
responsible for the phenotype appears to be haploinsufficiency. Here, we analyzed
a large consanguineous family from Pakistan with SPD showing a wide variation in 
phenotype among affected individuals. We performed genetic linkage analysis,
which identified a region on chromosome 2 containing the HOXD13 gene. Haplotype
analysis with microsatellite markers suggested segregation of the phenotype with 
HOXD13 gene with incomplete penetrance. Direct sequencing analysis of HOXD13 gene
revealed a nonsense mutation, designated as Q248X. All affected individuals with 
the severe SPD phenotype are homozygous for the mutation, whereas those with the 
mild SPD phenotype are heterozygous for the mutation. Furthermore, some
unaffected individuals also carry the mutation in the heterozygous state, showing
incomplete penetrance. Our results show the first nonsense mutation in the HOXD13
gene underlying a severe form of SPD in the homozygous state, and a milder form
of SPD with ~50% penetrance in the heterozygous state, most likely because of the
production of 50% of protein compared with normal individuals.

PMCID: PMC4296310
PMID: 21814222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;28(4):379-82. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2011.04.004.

[Genotype-phenotype analysis of a Chinese family with split hand/split foot and
syndactyly].

[Article in Chinese]

Dai L(1), Li NN, Deng Y, Mao M, Wang H, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Birth Defects Monitoring, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P. R. China.
Daili_diamondlaser@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the causative gene mutation in a Chinese family with
split hand/split foot malformation (SHFM) and explore the genotype-phenotype
relationship.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples of the patients 
and their family members. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to
amplify all the exons of P63 gene and HOXD13 gene. Then the PCR products were
sequenced bidirectionally to screen mutations.
RESULTS: A heterozygous 956G>A transversion in exon 7 of P63 gene was identified 
in all patients, which resulted in the substitution of histidine residue for
arginine at position 280 of P63 protein (R280H). This mutation was not found in
the unaffected family members.
CONCLUSION: Patients in this pedigree are characterized by symmetrical split hand
and split foot with syndactyly. This condition is caused by the R280H mutation in
P63 gene.

PMID: 21811974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Jan;55(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2011.06.003. Epub 2011
Jul 2.

Limb skeletal malformations - what the HOX is going on?

Brison N(1), Tylzanowski P, Debeer P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skeletal Development and Joint Disorders, University of Leuven, 
Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a rare congenital limb disorder caused by mutations in
the HOXD13 gene, a homeobox transcription factor crucial for autopod development.
The hallmarks of SPD are the webbing between the third and the fourth finger and 
the fourth and the fifth toe, with a partial or complete digit duplication in the
syndactylous web. Different classes of HOXD13 mutations are involved in the
pathogenesis of synpolydactyly, but an unequivocal genotype-phenotype correlation
cannot always be achieved due to the lack of structure-function data of HOXD13.
Mutations in DNA binding or polyalanine tract domains of HOXD13 result in
predictable clinical outcomes. However, mutations outside of these domains cause 
a broad variety of clinical features that complicate the differential diagnosis. 
In this review, we summarize the different classes of HOXD13 mutations causing
synpolydactyly phenotypes with respect to their underlying pathogenic mechanism
of action. In addition, we emphasize the importance of the chicken embryo as an
animal model system for the study of (limb) development and potential
genotype-phenotype correlations in SPD or other human malformation syndromes.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 21782042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):12782-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109993108. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

Appendage expression driven by the Hoxd Global Control Region is an ancient
gnathostome feature.

Schneider I(1), Aneas I, Gehrke AR, Dahn RD, Nobrega MA, Shubin NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA.

The evolutionary transition of the fins of fish into tetrapod limbs involved
genetic changes to developmental systems that resulted in novel skeletal patterns
and functions. Approaches to understanding this issue have entailed the search
for antecedents of limb structure in fossils, genes, and embryos. Comparative
genetic analyses have produced ambiguous results: although studies of posterior
Hox genes from homology group 13 (Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13) reveal similarities in
gene expression between the distal segments of fins and limbs, this functional
homology has not been supported by genomic comparisons of the activity of their
cis-regulatory elements, namely the Hoxd Global Control Region. Here, we show
that cis-regulatory elements driving Hoxd gene expression in distal limbs are
present in fish. Using an interspecies transgenesis approach, we find functional 
conservation between gnathostome Hoxd enhancers, demonstrating that orthologous
sequences from tetrapods, zebrafish and skate can drive reporter gene expression 
in mouse limbs and zebrafish fins. Our results support the notion that some of
the novelties associated with tetrapod limbs arose by modification of deeply
conserved cis- and trans-acting mechanisms of Hox regulation in gnathostomes.

PMCID: PMC3150877
PMID: 21765002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Nov;19(11):1198-201. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.95. Epub 2011
Jun 8.

Duplication at chromosome 2q31.1-q31.2 in a family presenting syndactyly and
nystagmus.

Ghoumid J(1), Andrieux J, Sablonnière B, Odent S, Philippe N, Zanlonghi X,
Saugier-Veber P, Bardyn T, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Holder-Espinasse M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, Lille, France.

HOXD genes encode transcription factors involved in the antero-posterior
patterning of the limb bud and in the specification of fingers. During the embryo
development, HOXD genes are expressed, following a spatio-temporal colinearity
that involves at least three regions, centrometric and telomeric to this cluster.
Here, we describe a father and a daughter presenting a 3-4 hand bilateral
syndactyly associated with a nystagmus. Array-comparative genomic hybridisation
showed a 3.8<U+2009>Mb duplication at 2q31.1-q31.2, comprising 27 genes including the
entire HOXD cluster. We performed expression studies in lymphoblasts by reverse
transcription-PCR and observed an HOXD13 and HOXD10 overexpression, whereas the
HOXD12 expression was decreased. HOXD13 and HOXD10 overexpression, associated
with a misregulation of at least HOXD12, may therefore induce the syndactyly.
Deletions of the HOXD cluster and its regulatory sequences induce hand
malformations and, particularly, finger anomalies. Recently, smaller duplications
of the same region have been reported in association with a mesomelic dysplasia, 
type Kantaputra. We discuss the variable phenotypes associated with such 2q
duplications.

PMCID: PMC3198150
PMID: 21654727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 22;6(4):e18661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018661.

Comparative analysis of 3D expression patterns of transcription factor genes and 
digit fate maps in the developing chick wing.

Fisher M(1), Downie H, Welten MC, Delgado I, Bain A, Planzer T, Sherman A, Sang
H, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Dundee, Dundee,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Hoxd13, Tbx2, Tbx3, Sall1 and Sall3 genes are candidates for encoding
antero-posterior positional values in the developing chick wing and specifying
digit identity. In order to build up a detailed profile of gene expression
patterns in cell lineages that give rise to each of the digits over time, we
compared 3 dimensional (3D) expression patterns of these genes during wing
development and related them to digit fate maps. 3D gene expression data at
stages 21, 24 and 27 spanning early bud to digital plate formation, captured from
in situ hybridisation whole mounts using Optical Projection Tomography (OPT) were
mapped to reference wing bud models. Grafts of wing bud tissue from GFP chicken
embryos were used to fate map regions of the wing bud giving rise to each digit; 
3D images of the grafts were captured using OPT and mapped on to the same models.
Computational analysis of the combined computerised data revealed that Tbx2 and
Tbx3 are expressed in digit 3 and 4 progenitors at all stages, consistent with
encoding stable antero-posterior positional values established in the early bud; 
Hoxd13 and Sall1 expression is more dynamic, being associated with posterior
digit 3 and 4 progenitors in the early bud but later becoming associated with
anterior digit 2 progenitors in the digital plate. Sox9 expression in digit
condensations lies within domains of digit progenitors defined by fate mapping;
digit 3 condensations express Hoxd13 and Sall1, digit 4 condensations Hoxd13,
Tbx3 and to a lesser extent Tbx2. Sall3 is only transiently expressed in digit 3 
progenitors at stage 24 together with Sall1 and Hoxd13; then becomes excluded
from the digital plate. These dynamic patterns of expression suggest that these
genes may play different roles in digit identity either together or in
combination at different stages including the digit condensation stage.

PMCID: PMC3081307
PMID: 21526123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Dyn. 2011 May;240(5):1278-88. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22633.

3D expression patterns of cell cycle genes in the developing chick wing and
comparison with expression patterns of genes implicated in digit specification.

Welten M(1), Pavlovska G, Chen Y, Teruoka Y, Fisher M, Bangs F, Towers M, Tickle 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down,
Bath, UK.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signalling controls integrated specification of digit
pattern and growth in the chick wing but downstream gene networks remain to be
unravelled. We analysed 3D expression patterns of genes encoding cell cycle
regulators using Optical Projection Tomography. Hierarchical clustering of
spatial matrices of gene expression revealed a dorsal layer of the wing bud, in
which almost all genes were expressed, and that genes encoding positive cell
cycle regulators had similar expression patterns while those of N-myc and
CyclinD2 were distinct but closely related. We compared these patterns
computationally with those of genes implicated in digit specification and Ptch1, 
50 genes in total. Nineteen genes have similar posterior expression to Ptch1,
including Hoxd13, Sall1, Hoxd11, and Bmp2, all likely Gli targets in mouse limb, 
and cell cycle genes, N-myc, CyclinD2. We suggest that these genes contribute to 
a network integrating digit specification and growth in response to Shh.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21509900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Leukemia. 2011 Jul;25(7):1192-4. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.51. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Backtracking to birth of the NUP98-HOXD13 gene fusion in an infant acute myeloid 
leukemia.

Emerenciano M, Meyer C, Macedo-Silva ML, de Meis E, Dobbin JA, Marschalek R,
Pombo-de-Oliveira MS.

PMID: 21494261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Apr;155A(4):880-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33879. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

How many entities exist for the spectrum of disorders associated with
brachydactyly, syndactyly, short stature, microcephaly, and intellectual
disability?

Ravel A(1), Chouery E, Stora S, Jalkh N, Villard L, Temtamy S, Mégarbané A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France.

We describe a French young man with digital anomalies consisting of
brachydactyly, F1-5 bilateral camptodactyly, interdigital webbing, F5 bilateral
radial clinodactyly, and partial syndactyly of some fingers and toes. He had
psychomotor retardation, short stature, umbilical hernia, a secundum atrial
septal defect, seizures, hearing impairment, and dysmorphic features consisting
of microcephaly, a prominent metopic ridge, upslanting palpebral fissures,
synophrys, enophthalmia, large ears, a bulbous nose, a high palate, a smooth and 
short philtrum, a low hanging columella, a thin upper vermillion, an everted
lower lip, prognathism, pectum excavatum, and supernumerary nipples.
Osteotendinous reflexes were brisk. Mild nystagmus, myopia, and astigmatia were
also noted. Total body X-rays showed short terminal phalanges of the hands, short
middle phalanges of the index and little fingers, clinodactyly of the little
fingers, short and fused proximal 4th and 5th metacarpals of the right hand, a
short 5th metacarpal of the left hand, a fused left lunate-triquetrum, fused
capitate-hamates, a prominent mandibula, and partial sacral agenesis. A thin
posterior corpus callosum was apparent by MRI. Differential diagnoses for mainly 
the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, the Tsukahara syndrome, the Filippi syndrome, the 
Feingold syndrome, and the Tonoki syndrome are discussed, and the possibility
that we might be reporting a novel entity is raised. © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21416592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Feb 10;7(2):e1001071. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001071.

A computational clonal analysis of the developing mouse limb bud.

Marcon L(1), Arqués CG, Torres MS, Sharpe J.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL-CRG Systems Biology Research Unit, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. luciano.marcon@crg.es

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2011 Apr;12(4):230.

A comprehensive spatio-temporal description of the tissue movements underlying
organogenesis would be an extremely useful resource to developmental biology.
Clonal analysis and fate mappings are popular experiments to study tissue
movement during morphogenesis. Such experiments allow cell populations to be
labeled at an early stage of development and to follow their spatial evolution
over time. However, disentangling the cumulative effects of the multiple events
responsible for the expansion of the labeled cell population is not always
straightforward. To overcome this problem, we develop a novel computational
method that combines accurate quantification of 2D limb bud morphologies and
growth modeling to analyze mouse clonal data of early limb development. Firstly, 
we explore various tissue movements that match experimental limb bud shape
changes. Secondly, by comparing computational clones with newly generated mouse
clonal data we are able to choose and characterize the tissue movement map that
better matches experimental data. Our computational analysis produces for the
first time a two dimensional model of limb growth based on experimental data that
can be used to better characterize limb tissue movement in space and time. The
model shows that the distribution and shapes of clones can be described as a
combination of anisotropic growth with isotropic cell mixing, without the need
for lineage compartmentalization along the AP and PD axis. Lastly, we show that
this comprehensive description can be used to reassess spatio-temporal gene
regulations taking tissue movement into account and to investigate PD patterning 
hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC3037386
PMID: 21347315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):288-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.034. Epub 2010 
Dec 30.

A regulatory 'landscape effect' over the HoxD cluster.

Tschopp P(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre-Frontiers in Genetics, Department of Zoology and
Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest-Ansermet 30,
Geneva, Switzerland.

Faithful expression of Hox genes in both time and space is essential for proper
patterning of the primary body axis. Transgenic approaches in vertebrates have
suggested that this collinear activation process is regulated in a largely gene
cluster-autonomous manner. In contrast, more recently co-opted expression
specificities, required in other embryonic structures, depend upon long-range
enhancer sequences acting from outside the gene clusters. This regulatory
dichotomy was recently questioned, since gene activation along the trunk seems to
be partially regulated by signals located outside of the cluster. We investigated
these alternative regulatory strategies by engineering a large inversion that
precisely separates the murine HoxD complex from its centromeric neighborhood.
Mutant animals displayed posterior transformations along with subtle
deregulations of Hoxd genes, indicating an impact of the centromeric landscape on
the fine-tuning of Hoxd gene expression. Proximal limbs were also affected,
suggesting that this 'landscape effect' is generic and impacts upon regulatory
mechanisms of various qualities and evolutionary origins.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Development. 2010 Dec;137(24):4239-47. doi: 10.1242/dev.058701.

A functionally conserved boundary element from the mouse HoxD locus requires GAGA
factor in Drosophila.

Vasanthi D(1), Anant M, Srivastava S, Mishra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500 007, India.

Hox genes are necessary for proper morphogenesis and organization of various body
structures along the anterior-posterior body axis. These genes exist in clusters 
and their expression pattern follows spatial and temporal co-linearity with
respect to their genomic organization. This colinearity is conserved during
evolution and is thought to be constrained by the regulatory mechanisms that
involve higher order chromatin structure. Earlier studies, primarily in
Drosophila, have illustrated the role of chromatin-mediated regulatory processes,
which include chromatin domain boundaries that separate the domains of distinct
regulatory features. In the mouse HoxD complex, Evx2 and Hoxd13 are located ~ 9
kb apart but have clearly distinguishable temporal and spatial expression
patterns. Here, we report the characterization of a chromatin domain boundary
element from the Evx2-Hoxd13 region that functions in Drosophila as well as in
mammalian cells. We show that the Evx2-Hoxd13 region has sequences conserved
across vertebrate species including a GA repeat motif and that the Evx2-Hoxd13
boundary activity in Drosophila is dependent on GAGA factor that binds to the GA 
repeat motif. These results show that Hox genes are regulated by chromatin
mediated mechanisms and highlight the early origin and functional conservation of
such chromatin elements.

PMID: 21098566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Med Genet. 2011 Feb;48(2):98-104. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.079491. Epub 2010 Nov
10.

2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome: redefining the associated clinical phenotype.

Dimitrov B(1), Balikova I, de Ravel T, Van Esch H, De Smedt M, Baten E, Vermeesch
JR, Bradinova I, Simeonov E, Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Debeer P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: The clinical phenotype of the chromosome 2q31 deletion syndrome
consists of limb anomalies ranging from monodactylous ectrodactyly, brachydactyly
and syndactyly to camptodactyly. Additional internal organ anomalies-for example,
heart defects, ocular anomalies-may be present. Hemizygosity for HOXD13 and EVX2 
genes was thought to cause the observed skeletal defects. Recently, based on the 
phenotype of patients with overlapping 2q31 interstitial deletions, a new SHFM5
locus was proposed, proximal to the HOXD cluster, between EVX2 and marker D2S294.
DLX1 and DLX2 haploinsufficiency was suggested as the most plausible explanation 
for the observed SHFM-like limb anomalies in these cases.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Five unique, interstitial 2q31 deletion patients were
selected to further characterise the 2q31 region and to establish a
genotype/phenotype correlation map. The size of the deletions was delineated with
a chromosome 2 specific tiling path bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array. 
The clinical and molecular data for this group of patients were compared to
others in the literature. A common locus for the observed skeletal anomalies,
including the HOXD genes and surrounding regulatory sequences, was delineated.
These results correlate with recently published studies in animal models. In
addition, a critical region for the facial gestalt of the 2q31.1 microdeletion
syndrome was delineated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results reinforce the hypothesis that the variable skeletal
phenotype in 2q31 deletion patients is a result of hemizygosity for the HOXD
genes and that the 2q31.1 microdeletion syndrome is a well defined and clinically
recognisable phenotype.

PMID: 21068127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Mar-Apr;54(2):108-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.10.007. Epub
2010 Oct 23.

Polyalanine repeat expansion mutation of the HOXD13 gene in a Chinese family with
unusual clinical manifestations of synpolydactyly.

Gong L(1), Wang B, Wang J, Yu H, Ma X, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital of Ji Lin University,
Changchun 130033, China.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is an autosomal dominant limb malformation caused by
mutations in the gene HOXD13. We investigated a Chinese family in which three
individuals across three generations were affected with distinctive limb
malformations. We extracted genomic DNA from the affected and three unaffected
individuals from this family as well as 100 unrelated controls, for mutation
detection by DNA sequencing. The family was characterized by camptodactyly and
symphalangism of fingers two to five, transverse phalanx and osseous fusion of
the third metacarpal with the proximal phalanx, as well as the coexistence of
mild and more severe bilateral phenotypes. We identified a duplication mutation, 
c. 186-212dup, in exon 1 of the HOXD13 gene in the affected individuals from this
family; it was not present in the unaffected individuals or the 100 unrelated
individuals. And we also did not find polymorphism among the controls. This study
has expanded the phenotypic spectrum of known HOXD13 polyalanine repeat mutations
and provided more information about the polymorphic nature of the polyalanine
repeat. In addition, new clinical manifestations have been added to the spectrum 
of possible synpolydactyly phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 20974300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Leukemia. 2010 Oct;24(10):1788-91. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.161. Epub 2010 Aug 26.

Meis1 disrupts the genomic imprint of Dlk1 in a NUP98-HOXD13 leukemia model.

Argiropoulos B, Palmqvist L, Imren S, Miller M, Rouhi A, Mager DL, Humphries RK.

PMID: 20739957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mech Dev. 2010 Sep-Dec;127(9-12):428-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.08.001. Epub
2010 Aug 12.

Identification of genes downstream of the Shh signalling in the developing chick 
wing and syn-expressed with Hoxd13 using microarray and 3D computational
analysis.

Bangs F(1), Welten M, Davey MG, Fisher M, Yin Y, Downie H, Paton B, Baldock R,
Burt DW, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signalling by the polarizing region at the posterior margin 
of the chick wing bud is pivotal in patterning the digits but apart from a few
key downstream genes, such as Hoxd13, which is expressed in the posterior region 
of the wing that gives rise to the digits, the genes that mediate the response to
Shh signalling are not known. To find genes that are co-expressed with Hoxd13 in 
the posterior of chick wing buds and regulated in the same way, we used
microarrays to compare gene expression between anterior and posterior thirds of
wing buds from normal chick embryos and from polydactylous talpid³ mutant chick
embryos, which have defective Shh signalling due to lack of primary cilia. We
identified 1070 differentially expressed gene transcripts, which were then
clustered. Two clusters contained genes predominantly expressed in posterior
thirds of normal wing buds; in one cluster, genes including Hoxd13, were
expressed at high levels in anterior and posterior thirds in talpid³ wing buds,
in the other cluster, genes including Ptc1, were expressed at low levels in
anterior and posterior thirds in talpid³ wing buds. Expression patterns of genes 
in these two clusters were validated in normal and talpid³ mutant wing buds by in
situ hybridisation and demonstrated to be responsive to application of Shh.
Expression of several genes in the Hoxd13 cluster was also shown to be responsive
to manipulation of protein kinase A (PKA) activity, thus demonstrating regulation
by Gli repression. Genes in the Hoxd13 cluster were then sub-clustered by
computational comparison of 3D expression patterns in normal wing buds to produce
syn-expression groups. Hoxd13 and Sall1 are syn-expressed in the posterior region
of early chick wing buds together with 6 novel genes which are likely to be
functionally related and represent secondary targets of Shh signalling. Other
groups of syn-expressed genes were also identified, including a group of genes
involved in vascularisation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20708683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cas Lek Cesk. 2010;149(1):4-9.

[HOX genes and the limb development in the clinical praxis and in the
experiment].

[Article in Czech]

Snajdr P(1), Grim M, Liska F.

Author information: 
(1)Univerzita Karlova v Praze, 1. lékarská fakulta, Anatomický ústav.
pavel.snajdr@lf1.cuni.cz

In human, congenital malformations of the limbs are ranked among the most
prevalent of all congenital birth defects. Substantial portion of these defects
has genetic origin. Increasing knowledge about the particular mutations
responsible for limb malformations in human results in the increasing
availability of DNA diagnostic procedures for confirmation of clinical diagnosis 
and family counselling. Increasing understanding of the underlying developmental 
processes revealed by studying limb defects both in human and animal models may
offer better therapeutic options in the future. This review concentrates on the
role of Hox genes in limb development. Man, as well as other mammals, has 39 HOX 
genes, divided into 4 complexes (clusters). HOX genes play a major role in body
plan layout and development of many organ systems. Experimental data show that
during the limb development, HOX genes influence patterning along the
proximodistal and anteroposterior (thumb-little finger) axis of the limb bud. In 
human, limb malformation was described in patients with mutations in HOXA11,
HOXA13, HOXD10, and HOXD13 genes. Most frequent among these malformations are
hand-foot-genital syndrome caused by HOXA13 gene mutation, and synpolydactyly
caused by HOXD13 mutation. Severity of the phenotype manifestation of these
diseases is variable, and depends on the particular mutation type, where point
mutations, polyalanine expansions and deletions can take part.

PMID: 20662453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Clin Invest. 2010 Jun;120(6):1994-2004. doi: 10.1172/JCI41554. Epub 2010 May
10.

Homeobox genes d11-d13 and a13 control mouse autopod cortical bone and joint
formation.

Villavicencio-Lorini P(1), Kuss P, Friedrich J, Haupt J, Farooq M, Türkmen S,
Duboule D, Hecht J, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The molecular mechanisms that govern bone and joint formation are complex,
involving an integrated network of signaling pathways and gene regulators. We
investigated the role of Hox genes, which are known to specify individual
segments of the skeleton, in the formation of autopod limb bones (i.e., the hands
and feet) using the mouse mutant synpolydactyly homolog (spdh), which encodes a
polyalanine expansion in Hoxd13. We found that no cortical bone was formed in the
autopod in spdh/spdh mice; instead, these bones underwent trabecular ossification
after birth. Spdh/spdh metacarpals acquired an ovoid shape and developed ectopic 
joints, indicating a loss of long bone characteristics and thus a transformation 
of metacarpals into carpal bones. The perichondrium of spdh/spdh mice showed
abnormal morphology and decreased expression of Runt-related transcription factor
2 (Runx2), which was identified as a direct Hoxd13 transcriptional target.
Hoxd11-/-Hoxd12-/-Hoxd13-/- triple-knockout mice and Hoxd13-/-Hoxa13+/- mice
exhibited similar but less severe defects, suggesting that these Hox genes have
similar and complementary functions and that the spdh allele acts as a dominant
negative. This effect was shown to be due to sequestration of other
polyalanine-containing transcription factors by the mutant Hoxd13 in the
cytoplasm, leading to their degradation. These data indicate that Hox genes not
only regulate patterning but also directly influence bone formation and the
ossification pattern of bones, in part via Runx2.

PMCID: PMC2877951
PMID: 20458143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. PLoS Genet. 2010 Apr 8;6(4):e1000901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000901.

Distinct roles of Hand2 in initiating polarity and posterior Shh expression
during the onset of mouse limb bud development.

Galli A(1), Robay D, Osterwalder M, Bao X, Bénazet JD, Tariq M, Paro R, Mackem S,
Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. ag2994@columbia.edu

The polarization of nascent embryonic fields and the endowment of cells with
organizer properties are key to initiation of vertebrate organogenesis. One such 
event is antero-posterior (AP) polarization of early limb buds and activation of 
morphogenetic Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) signaling in the posterior mesenchyme, which
in turn promotes outgrowth and specifies the pentadactylous autopod. Inactivation
of the Hand2 transcriptional regulator from the onset of mouse forelimb bud
development disrupts establishment of posterior identity and Shh expression,
which results in a skeletal phenotype identical to Shh deficient limb buds. In
wild-type limb buds, Hand2 is part of the protein complexes containing Hoxd13,
another essential regulator of Shh activation in limb buds. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation shows that Hand2-containing chromatin complexes are bound to 
the far upstream cis-regulatory region (ZRS), which is specifically required for 
Shh expression in the limb bud. Cell-biochemical studies indicate that Hand2 and 
Hoxd13 can efficiently transactivate gene expression via the ZRS, while the Gli3 
repressor isoform interferes with this positive transcriptional regulation.
Indeed, analysis of mouse forelimb buds lacking both Hand2 and Gli3 reveals the
complete absence of antero-posterior (AP) polarity along the entire
proximo-distal axis and extreme digit polydactyly without AP identities. Our
study uncovers essential components of the transcriptional machinery and key
interactions that set-up limb bud asymmetry upstream of establishing the SHH
signaling limb bud organizer.

PMCID: PMC2851570
PMID: 20386744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2009 Nov 19;10:142. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-10-142.

The expression of Gli3, regulated by HOXD13, may play a role in idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus.

Cao D(1), Jin C, Ren M, Lin C, Zhang X, Zhao N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, PR 
China.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus (ICTEV) is a congenital
limb deformity. Based on extended transmission disequilibrium testing,
Gli-Kruppel family member 3 (Gli3) has been identified as a candidate gene for
ICTEV. Here, we verify the role of Gli3 in ICTEV development.
METHODS: Using the rat ICTEV model, we analyzed the differences in Gli3
expression levels between model rats and normal control rats. We used luciferase 
reporter gene assays and ChIP/EMSA assays to analyze the regulatory elements of
Gli3.
RESULTS: Gli3 showed higher expression levels in ICTEV model rats compared to
controls (P < 0.05). We identified repressor and activator regions in the rat
Gli3 promoter. The Gli3 promoter also contains two putative Hoxd13 binding sites.
Using EMSA, the Hoxd13 binding site 2 was found to directly interact with Hoxd13 
in vitro. ChIP assays of the Hoxd13-Gli3 promoter complex from a developing limb 
confirmed that endogenous Hoxd13 interacts with this region in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HoxD13 directly interacts with the promoter
of Gli3. The increase of Gli3 expression in ICTEV model animal might result from 
the low expression of HoxD13.

PMCID: PMC2784749
PMID: 19925654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Development. 2009 Dec;136(23):3959-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.039768.

Temporal and spatial dissection of Shh signaling in genital tubercle development.

Lin C(1), Yin Y, Veith GM, Fisher AV, Long F, Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S.
Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Genital tubercle (GT) initiation and outgrowth involve coordinated morphogenesis 
of surface ectoderm, cloacal mesoderm and hindgut endoderm. GT development
appears to mirror that of the limb. Although Shh is essential for the development
of both appendages, its role in GT development is much less clear than in the
limb. Here, by removing Shh at different stages during GT development in mice, we
demonstrate a continuous requirement for Shh in GT initiation and subsequent
androgen-independent GT growth. Moreover, we investigated the Hh responsiveness
of different tissue layers by removing or activating its signal transducer Smo
with tissue-specific Cre lines, and established GT mesenchyme as the primary
target tissue of Shh signaling. Lastly, we showed that Shh is required for the
maintenance of the GT signaling center distal urethral epithelium (dUE). By
restoring Wnt-Fgf8 signaling in Shh(-/-) cloacal endoderm genetically, we
revealed that Shh relays its signal partly through the dUE, but regulates Hoxa13 
and Hoxd13 expression independently of dUE signaling. Altogether, we propose that
Shh plays a central role in GT development by simultaneously regulating
patterning of the cloacal field and supporting an outgrowth signal.

PMCID: PMC2778743
PMID: 19906863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6227-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901121. Epub 2009 
Oct 19.

A NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene impairs differentiation of B and T lymphocytes and
leads to expansion of thymocytes with partial TCRB gene rearrangement.

Choi CW(1), Chung YJ, Slape C, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

Expression of a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene leads to myelodysplastic
syndrome in mice. In addition to ineffective hematopoiesis, we observed that
NHD13 mice were lymphopenic; the lymphopenia was due to a decrease in both T and 
B lymphocytes. Although the pro-B cell (B220(+)/CD43(+)) populations from the
NHD13 and wild-type mice were similar, the NHD13 mice showed decreased pre-B
cells (B220(+)/CD43(-)), indicating impaired differentiation at the pro-B to
pre-B stage. Thymi from NHD13 mice were smaller and overexpressed Hoxa cluster
genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10. In addition, the NHD13 thymi contained
fewer thymocytes, with an increased percentage of CD4(-)/CD8(-) (double-negative 
(DN)) cells and a decreased percentage of CD4(+)/CD8(+) (double-positive) cells; 
the DN1/DN2 population was increased and the DN3/DN4 population was decreased,
suggesting a partial block at the DN2 to DN3 transition. To determine clonality
of the thymocytes, we used degenerate RT-PCR to identify clonal Tcrb gene
rearrangements. Five of six NHD13 thymi showed an unusual Tcrb gene rearrangement
pattern with common, clonal DJ rearrangements, but distinct V-D junctions,
suggesting a marked clonal expansion of thymocytes that had undergone a DJ
rearrangement, but not completed a VDJ rearrangement. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that expression of the NHD13 transgene inhibits lymphoid as 
well as myeloid and erythroid differentiation, results in overexpression of Hoxa 
cluster genes, and leads to a precursor T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3422874
PMID: 19841179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Nov;29(21):5775-88. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00509-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
24.

HOXD13 binds DNA replication origins to promote origin licensing and is inhibited
by geminin.

Salsi V(1), Ferrari S, Ferraresi R, Cossarizza A, Grande A, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41100, Italy.

HOX DNA-binding proteins control patterning during development by regulating
processes such as cell aggregation and proliferation. Recently, a possible
involvement of HOX proteins in replication origin activity was suggested by
results showing that a number of HOX proteins interact with the DNA replication
licensing regulator geminin and bind a characterized human origin of replication.
The functional significance of these observations, however, remained unclear. We 
show that HOXD13, HOXD11, and HOXA13 bind in vivo all characterized human
replication origins tested. We furthermore show that HOXD13 interacts with the
CDC6 loading factor, promotes pre-replication complex (pre-RC) proteins assembly 
at origins, and stimulates DNA synthesis in an in vivo replication assay. HOXD13 
expression in cultured cells accelerates DNA synthesis initiation in correlation 
with the earlier pre-RC recruitment onto origins during G(1) phase. Geminin,
which interacts with HOXD13 as well, blocks HOXD13-mediated assembly of pre-RC
proteins and inhibits HOXD13-induced DNA replication. Our results uncover a
function for Hox proteins in the regulation of replication origin activity and
reveal an unforeseen role for the inhibition of HOX protein activity by geminin
in the context of replication origin licensing.

PMCID: PMC2772751
PMID: 19703996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Clin Genet. 2009 Sep;76(3):300-2. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01213.x. Epub
2009 Aug 17.

Polyalanine repeat expansion mutations in the HOXD13 gene in Pakistani families
with synpolydactyly.

Wajid M, Ishii Y, Kurban M, Dua-Awereh MB, Shimomura Y, Christiano AM.

PMID: 19686284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2009 Aug;136(15):2643-51. doi: 10.1242/dev.036830.

Functional and phylogenetic analysis shows that Fgf8 is a marker of genital
induction in mammals but is not required for external genital development.

Seifert AW(1), Yamaguchi T, Cohn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, UF Genetics Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

In mammalian embryos, male and female external genitalia develop from the genital
tubercle. Outgrowth of the genital tubercle is maintained by the urethral
epithelium, and it has been reported that Fgf8 mediates this activity. To test
directly whether Fgf8 is required for external genital development, we
conditionally removed Fgf8 from the cloacal/urethral epithelium. Surprisingly,
Fgf8 is not necessary for initiation, outgrowth or normal patterning of the
external genitalia. In early genital tubercles, we found no redundant Fgf
expression in the urethral epithelium, which contrasts with the situation in the 
apical ectodermal ridge (AER) of the limb. Analysis of Fgf8 pathway activity
showed that four putative targets are either absent from early genital tubercles 
or are not regulated by Fgf8. We therefore examined the distribution of Fgf8
protein and report that, although it is present in the AER, Fgf8 is undetectable 
in the genital tubercle. Thus, Fgf8 is transcribed, but the signaling pathway is 
not activated during normal genital development. A phylogenetic survey of
amniotes revealed Fgf8 expression in genital tubercles of eutherian and
metatherian mammals, but not turtles or alligators, indicating that Fgf8
expression is neither a required nor a conserved feature of amniote external
genital development. The results indicate that Fgf8 expression is an early
readout of the genital initiation signal rather than the signal itself. We
propose that induction of external genitalia involves an epithelial-epithelial
interaction at the cloacal membrane, and suggest that the cloacal ectoderm may be
the source of the genital initiation signal.

PMCID: PMC2709070
PMID: 19592577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. RNA. 2009 Aug;15(8):1588-96. doi: 10.1261/rna.1278109. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Breaking the seals: efficient mRNA detection from human archival
paraffin-embedded tissue.

Illig R(1), Fritsch H, Schwarzer C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Functional Anatomy, Innsbruck Medical University,
6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

During our study on HOXA13, HOXD12, and HOXD13 mRNA expression in human adult and
embryonic tissues, we were confronted with the fact that, within our specimen
collection, as in other University Departments in Europe, <20% of all samples
yielded reliable labeling, while most samples were resistant to hybridization by 
standard protocols due to over-fixation. Fixation is essential for specimen
stability, especially when samples are stored at room temperature and used for
histology, and people tend to be more worried about under- than over-fixation. On
the other hand fixation inhibits penetration by the probe and may also trap mRNA 
within ribosomes. Therefore, we developed a nonradioactive in situ hybridization 
technique, which allows detection of mRNA expressed on low levels from a variety 
of differentially fixed tissues while maintaining tissue integrity. This was
achieved by improving target retrieval and probe detection. In contrast with
others, our method allows reliable staining from tissues that are fixed in
paraformaldehyde from four hours to over one week, and archived samples that were
stored at room temperature for several years (17-19 yr in some cases) and exceeds
detection limits of purely fluorescent methods. Our protocol is highly suitable
for detecting CDX-2 mRNA in carcinoma specimens, but especially designed to
investigate mRNAs in nonpathological adult and embryonic tissues. Due to the use 
of standardized probes, we do not expect problems in detecting other mRNAs
expressed in suitable amounts.

PMCID: PMC2714753
PMID: 19549718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Genetics. 2009 Sep;183(1):23-30. doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.104695. Epub 2009 Jun 
22.

Fork stalling and template switching as a mechanism for polyalanine tract
expansion affecting the DYC mutant of HOXD13, a new murine model of
synpolydactyly.

Cocquempot O(1), Brault V, Babinet C, Herault Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université d'Orléans, UMR6218, Molecular Immunology and Embryology, 45071
Orléans, France.

Polyalanine expansion diseases are proposed to result from unequal crossover of
sister chromatids that increases the number of repeats. In this report we suggest
an alternative mechanism we put forward while we investigated a new spontaneous
mutant that we named "Dyc" for "Digit in Y and Carpe" phenotype. Phenotypic
analysis revealed an abnormal limb patterning similar to that of the human
inherited congenital disease synpolydactyly (SPD) and to the mouse mutant model
Spdh. Both human SPD and mouse Spdh mutations affect the Hoxd13 gene within a
15-residue polyalanine-encoding repeat in the first exon of the gene, leading to 
a dominant negative HOXD13. Genetic analysis of the Dyc mutant revealed a
trinucleotide expansion in the polyalanine-encoding region of the Hoxd13 gene
resulting in a 7-alanine expansion. However, unlike the Spdh mutation, this
expansion cannot result from a simple duplication of a short segment. Instead, we
propose the fork stalling and template switching (FosTeS) described for
generation of nonrecurrent genomic rearrangements as a possible mechanism for the
Dyc polyalanine extension, as well as for other polyalanine expansions described 
in the literature and that could not be explained by unequal crossing over.

PMCID: PMC2746147
PMID: 19546318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Brain Dev. 2010 May;32(5):356-61. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2009.05.005. Epub 2009 
Jun 18.

Study of HOXD genes in autism particularly regarding the ratio of second to
fourth digit length.

Sugie Y(1), Sugie H, Fukuda T, Osawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Shizuoka, Japan. y-sugie@umin.ac.jp

Multiple genes are involved in the pathogenesis of autism. To study the causative
gene, the relationship between autism endophenotypes and their closely related
genes has been analyzed. There is a subgroup of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in
which the ratio of second digit length to fourth digit length (2D/4D) is low
(short digit group, SDG). We studied the relationship between ASD and HOXD genes,
which are located in the candidate locus for ASD and are associated with digit
morphogenesis, with a particular focus on SDG. We analyzed 25 SNPs of HOXD11,
HOXD12, and HOXD13 in the subject of 98 ASD, 89 healthy controls, and 16
non-autistic patients (non-ASD). There was no significant difference in the
genotype frequencies between the ASD and the healthy controls. However, the
G-112T heterozygote in the promoter region of HOXD11 was observed in only four
patients with ASD and in none of the healthy controls or non-ASD subjects.
Moreover, this HOXD11 G-112T was observed in three of 11 SDG with ASD but in none
of the 15 non-SDG patients with ASD. There were eight SDG patients among the
non-ASD ones, but this polymorphism was observed in none of them. Considering the
above results, it is expected that candidate genes will be further identified,
using HOXD11 G-112T polymorphism as a marker, by analyzing genes located near 2q 
in a larger number of ASD subjects with clinical signs of SDG.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19540081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 1;125(7):1532-41. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24438.

HOX D13 expression across 79 tumor tissue types.

Cantile M(1), Franco R, Tschan A, Baumhoer D, Zlobec I, Schiavo G, Forte I, Bihl 
M, Liguori G, Botti G, Tornillo L, Karamitopoulou-Diamantis E, Terracciano L,
Cillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical & Experimental Medicine, Federico II University Medical
School, Naples, Italy.

HOX genes control normal development, primary cellular processes and are
characterized by a unique genomic network organization. Locus D HOX genes play an
important role in limb generation and mesenchymal condensation. Dysregulated
HOXD13 expression has been detected in breast cancer, melanoma, cervical cancer
and astrocytomas. We have investigated the epidemiology of HOXD13 expression in
human tissues and its potential deregulation in the carcinogenesis of specific
tumors. HOXD13 homeoprotein expression has been detected using microarray
technology comprising more than 4,000 normal and neoplastic tissue samples
including 79 different tumor categories. Validation of HOXD13 expression has been
performed, at mRNA level, for selected tumor types. Significant differences are
detectable between specific normal tissues and corresponding tumor types with the
majority of cancers showing an increase in HOXD13 expression (16.1% normal vs.
57.7% cancers). In contrast, pancreas and stomach tumor subtypes display the
opposite trend. Interestingly, detection of the HOXD13 homeoprotein in
pancreas-tissue microarrays shows that its negative expression has a significant 
and adverse effect on the prognosis of patients with pancreatic cancer
independent of the T or N stage at the time of diagnosis. Our study provides, for
the first time, an overview of a HOX protein expression in a large series of
normal and neoplastic tissue types, identifies pancreatic cancer as one of the
most affected by the HOXD13 hoemoprotein and underlines the way homeoproteins can
be associated to human cancerogenesis.

PMID: 19488988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Clin Genet. 2009 May;75(5):449-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01147.x.

A novel microdeletion at chromosome 2q31.1-31.2 in a three-generation family
presenting duplication of great toes with clinodactyly.

Tsai LP(1), Liao HM, Chen YJ, Fang JS, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tzu Chi General Hospital, Xindian, Taipei, Taiwan.

HOXD gene cluster maps to chromosome 2q31 and plays a key role in embryonic limb 
morphogenesis. Mutations of the HOXD13 and HOXD10 genes have been found to be
associated with digital and limb malformations. In addition, dysregulation of
HOXD gene cluster has been proposed to account for the limb abnormalities in
patients with chromosome 2q rearrangements. In this report, we investigated a
three-generation family presenting clinical phenotypes of duplication of great
toes, tapering fingers, and clinodactyly of the fifth finger in both hands, which
were transmitted in a dominant fashion in this family. We identified and
validated an interstitial microdeletion of approximately 3.4 Mb at chromosome
2q31.1-31.2 by array-based comparative genomic hybridization, fluorescence in
situ hybridization, and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction that
cosegregates with the clinical phenotypes in this family. The microdeletion
removes 30 labeled genes including the entire HOXD gene cluster, suggesting that 
the digital abnormalities of this family may be attributed to the
haploinsufficiency of the HOXD gene cluster. The delineation of the microdeletion
region may contribute to the genotype-phenotype correlation study in patients
with genomic rearrangements of the long arm of chromosome 2 and helps to
understand the pathogenesis of haploinsufficiency of the HOXD gene cluster.

PMID: 19459884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Med Genet. 2009 Nov;46(11):730-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.066027. Epub 2009 May
7.

Genetic screening of 202 individuals with congenital limb malformations and
requiring reconstructive surgery.

Furniss D(1), Kan SH, Taylor IB, Johnson D, Critchley PS, Giele HP, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital limb malformations (CLMs) are common and present to a
variety of specialties, notably plastic and orthopaedic surgeons, and clinical
geneticists. The authors aimed to characterise causative mutations in an
unselected cohort of patients with CLMs requiring reconstructive surgery.
METHODS: 202 patients presenting with CLM were recruited. The authors obtained
G-banded karyotypes and screened EN1, GLI3, HAND2, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4,
ZRS of SHH, SPRY4, TBX5, TWIST1 and WNT7A for point mutations using denaturing
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and direct sequencing. Multiplex
ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits were developed and used to
measure copy number in GLI3, HOXD13, ROR2, SALL1, SALL4, TBX5 and the ZRS of SHH.
RESULTS: Within the cohort, causative genetic alterations were identified in 23
patients (11%): mutations in GLI3 (n = 5), HOXD13 (n = 5), the ZRS of SHH (n =
4), and chromosome abnormalities (n = 4) were the most common lesions found.
Clinical features that predicted the discovery of a genetic cause included a
bilateral malformation, positive family history, and having increasing numbers of
limbs affected (all p<0.01). Additionally, specific patterns of malformation
predicted mutations in specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on higher mutation prevalence the authors propose that GLI3,
HOXD13 and the ZRS of SHH should be prioritised for introduction into molecular
genetic testing programmes for CLM. The authors have developed simple criteria
that can refine the selection of patients by surgeons for referral to clinical
geneticists. The cohort also represents an excellent resource to test for
mutations in novel candidate genes.

PMCID: PMC2764122
PMID: 19429598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005121. Epub 2009 Apr 13.

Heterochronic shift in Hox-mediated activation of sonic hedgehog leads to
morphological changes during fin development.

Sakamoto K(1), Onimaru K, Munakata K, Suda N, Tamura M, Ochi H, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Nagatsuta-cho, Yokohama, Japan.

We explored the molecular mechanisms of morphological transformations of
vertebrate paired fin/limb evolution by comparative gene expression profiling and
functional analyses. In this study, we focused on the temporal differences of the
onset of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression in paired appendages among different
vertebrates. In limb buds of chick and mouse, Shh expression is activated as soon
as there is a morphological bud, concomitant with Hoxd10 expression. In dogfish
(Scyliorhinus canicula), however, we found that Shh was transcribed late in fin
development, concomitant with Hoxd13 expression. We utilized zebrafish as a model
to determine whether quantitative changes in hox expression alter the timing of
shh expression in pectoral fins of zebrafish embryos. We found that the temporal 
shift of Shh activity altered the size of endoskeletal elements in paired fins of
zebrafish and dogfish. Thus, a threshold level of hox expression determines the
onset of shh expression, and the subsequent heterochronic shift of Shh activity
can affect the size of the fin endoskeleton. This process may have facilitated
major morphological changes in paired appendages during vertebrate limb
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2664896
PMID: 19365553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):585-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.027748.

Sall genes regulate region-specific morphogenesis in the mouse limb by modulating
Hox activities.

Kawakami Y(1), Uchiyama Y, Rodriguez Esteban C, Inenaga T, Koyano-Nakagawa N,
Kawakami H, Marti M, Kmita M, Monaghan-Nichols P, Nishinakamura R, Izpisua
Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The genetic mechanisms that regulate the complex morphogenesis of generating
cartilage elements in correct positions with precise shapes during organogenesis,
fundamental issues in developmental biology, are still not well understood. By
focusing on the developing mouse limb, we confirm the importance of transcription
factors encoded by the Sall gene family in proper limb morphogenesis, and further
show that they have overlapping activities in regulating regional morphogenesis
in the autopod. Sall1/Sall3 double null mutants exhibit a loss of digit1 as well 
as a loss or fusion of digit2 and digit3, metacarpals and carpals in the autopod.
We show that Sall activity affects different pathways, including the Shh
signaling pathway, as well as the Hox network. Shh signaling in the mesenchyme is
partially impaired in the Sall mutant limbs. Additionally, our data suggest an
antagonism between Sall1-Sall3 and Hoxa13-Hoxd13. We demonstrate that expression 
of Epha3 and Epha4 is downregulated in the Sall1/Sall3 double null mutants, and, 
conversely, is upregulated in Hoxa13 and Hoxd13 mutants. Moreover, the expression
of Sall1 and Sall3 is upregulated in Hoxa13 and Hoxd13 mutants. Furthermore, by
using DNA-binding assays, we show that Sall and Hox compete for a target sequence
in the Epha4 upstream region. In conjunction with the Shh pathway, the
antagonistic interaction between Hoxa13-Hoxd13 and Sall1-Sall3 in the developing 
limb may contribute to the fine-tuning of local Hox activity that leads to proper
morphogenesis of each cartilage element of the vertebrate autopod.

PMCID: PMC3266482
PMID: 19168674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jan;119(1):146-56. doi: 10.1172/JCI36851. Epub 2008 Dec 15.

Mutant Hoxd13 induces extra digits in a mouse model of synpolydactyly directly
and by decreasing retinoic acid synthesis.

Kuss P(1), Villavicencio-Lorini P, Witte F, Klose J, Albrecht AN, Seemann P,
Hecht J, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Individuals with the birth defect synpolydactyly (SPD) have 1 or more digit
duplicated and 2 or more digits fused together. One form of SPD is caused by
polyalanine expansions in homeobox d13 (Hoxd13). Here we have used the naturally 
occurring mouse mutant that has the same mutation, the SPD homolog (Spdh) allele,
and a similar phenotype, to investigate the molecular pathogenesis of SPD. A
transgenic approach and crossing experiments showed that the Spdh allele is a
combination of loss and gain of function. Here we identify retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (Raldh2), the rate-limiting enzyme for retinoic acid (RA)
synthesis in the limb, as a direct Hoxd13 target and show decreased RA production
in limbs from Spdh/Spdh mice. Intrauterine treatment with RA restored
pentadactyly in Spdh/Spdh mice. We further show that RA and WT Hoxd13 suppress
chondrogenesis in mesenchymal progenitor cells, whereas Hoxd13 encoded by Spdh
promotes cartilage formation in primary cells isolated from Spdh/Spdh limbs, and 
that this was associated with increased expression of Sox6/9. Increased Sox9
expression and ectopic cartilage formation in the interdigital mesenchyme of
limbs from Spdh/Spdh mice suggest uncontrolled differentiation of these cells
into the chondrocytic lineage. Thus, we propose that mutated Hoxd13 causes
polydactyly in SPD by inducing extraneous interdigital chondrogenesis, both
directly and indirectly, via a reduction in RA levels.

PMCID: PMC2613457
PMID: 19075394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Biol Evol. 2009 Mar;26(3):613-22. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msn282. Epub 2008 Dec
10.

Adaptive evolution of 5'HoxD genes in the origin and diversification of the
cetacean flipper.

Wang Z(1), Yuan L, Rossiter SJ, Zuo X, Ru B, Zhong H, Han N, Jones G, Jepson PD, 
Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.

The homeobox (Hox) genes Hoxd12 and Hoxd13 control digit patterning and limb
formation in tetrapods. Both show strong expression in the limb bud during
embryonic development, are highly conserved across vertebrates, and show
mutations that are associated with carpal, metacarpal, and phalangeal
deformities. The most dramatic evolutionary reorganization of the mammalian limb 
has occurred in cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises), in which the hind
limbs have been lost and the forelimbs have evolved into paddle-shaped flippers. 
We reconstructed the phylogeny of digit patterning in mammals and inferred that
digit number has changed twice in the evolution of the cetacean forelimb. First, 
the divergence of the early cetaceans from their even-toed relatives coincided
with the reacquisition of the pentadactyl forelimb, whereas the ancestors of
tetradactyl baleen whales (Mysticeti) later lost a digit again. To test whether
the evolution of the cetacean forelimb is associated with positive selection or
relaxation of Hoxd12 and Hoxd13, we sequenced these genes in a wide range of
mammals. In Hoxd12, we found evidence of Darwinian selection associated with both
episodes of cetacean forelimb reorganization. In Hoxd13, we found a novel
expansion of a polyalanine tract in cetaceans compared with other mammals (17/18 
residues vs. 14/15 residues, respectively), lengthening of which has previously
been shown to be linked to synpolydactyly in humans and mice. Both genes also
show much greater sequence variation among cetaceans than across other mammalian 
lineages. Our results strongly implicate 5'HoxD genes in the modulation of digit 
number, web forming, and the high morphological diversity of the cetacean manus.

PMID: 19074008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Mar 1;18(5):847-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn410. Epub 2008 Dec 5.

A G220V substitution within the N-terminal transcription regulating domain of
HOXD13 causes a variant synpolydactyly phenotype.

Fantini S(1), Vaccari G, Brison N, Debeer P, Tylzanowski P, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via
Campi 213/D, 41100 Modena, Italy.

The 5' members of the HoxD gene cluster (paralogous groups 9-13) are crucial for 
correct vertebrate limb patterning. Mutations in the HOXD13 gene have been found 
to cause synpolydactyly (SPD) and other limb malformations in human. We report
the identification in a Greek family of a variant form of SPD caused by a novel
missense mutation that substitutes glycine for valine in position 220 (G220V) of 
HOXD13. This mutation represents the first substitution of an amino acid located 
outside of the HOXD13 homeodomain that causes autopodal limb malformations. We
have characterized this mutation at the molecular level and found that the G220V 
substitution causes a significant impairment of the capacity of HOXD13 to bind
DNA and regulate transcription. HOXD13(G220V) was found to be deficient in both
activating and repressing transcription through HOXD13-responsive regulatory
elements. In accordance with these results, a comparison of the activities of
HOXD13 and HOXD13(G220V) in vivo, using retrovirus-mediated misexpression in
developing chick limbs, showed that the G220V mutation impairs the capacity of
HOXD13 to perturb the development of proximal limb skeletal elements and to
ectopically activate the transcription of the Hand2 target gene. We moreover show
that the G220V mutation compromises the stability of the HOXD13 protein within
cells and causes its partial accumulation in the cytosol in the form of subtle
aggregates. Taken together, our results establish that the G220V substitution
does not produce a dominant-negative effect or a gain-of-function, but represents
a dominant loss-of-function mutation revealing haploinsufficiency of HOXD13 in
human.

PMID: 19060004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Evol Dev. 2008 Nov-Dec;10(6):657-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-142X.2008.00279.x.

An examination of the Chiropteran HoxD locus from an evolutionary perspective.

Ray R(1), Capecchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 North 2030 East rm. 5440,
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5331, USA.

Duplications of Hox gene clusters have been suggested as a mechanism whereby new 
Hox functions can be developed while preserving critical ancestral roles.
However, in tetrapods, particularly in mammals, there is great variability in
limb structure morphologies that are known to be affected by Hox genes without
further Hox cluster duplications. The lack of further duplications suggests that 
if Hox genes have played a direct role in the morphological elaboration of
tetrapod limbs, the changes must have come about from Hox protein sequence
changes or from changes regarding the amount, time, and place of Hox gene
expression. To investigate whether such changes to Hox genes could play a role in
limb elaboration, we examined the HoxD locus in bats, which have both highly
elaborated fore- and hindlimbs. We found that while the Chiropteran HoxD13
protein was highly conserved, there was an expansion of HoxD13 expression in the 
posterior portion of the Chiropteran forelimb and into the leading edge of the
wing membrane. We were also able to uncover a number of unique lineage-specific
sequence changes to a known HoxD limb enhancer, the Global Control Region (GCR). 
Further, mouse transgenic assays showed that the Chiropteran GCR has new limb
enhancer activity domains beyond that reported for the Human GCR. These results
suggest that modulation of Hox gene expression may be a mechanism for effecting
morphological change in lineage-specific manner while maintaining ancestral
constraints and cluster integrity.

PMID: 19021736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Dec 15;146A(24):3181-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32426.

Identification of a HOXD13 mutation in a VACTERL patient.

Garcia-Barceló MM(1), Wong KK, Lui VC, Yuan ZW, So MT, Ngan ES, Miao XP, Chung
PH, Khong PL, Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

VACTERL acronym is assigned to a non-random association of malformations in
humans with poorly known etiology. It is comprised of vertebral defects (V), anal
atresia (A), cardiac anomaly (C), tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal
atresia (TE), renal dysplasia (R) and limb lesions (L). Here, we report on, for
the first time, a female patient with VACTERL association with a 21 base-pair
deletion in the exon 1 triplet repeats of HOXD13, a sonic hedgehog (SHH)
downstream target. Our data provide the first piece of clinical evidence of the
implication of the SHH pathway in VACTERL. Moreover, HOXD13 may not only be
implicated in limb malformations but also in the development of gut and
genitourinary structures, as predicted from the mouse models.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19006232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Genome Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1787-97. doi: 10.1101/gr.077578.108. Epub 2008 Oct
10.

In-depth characterization of the microRNA transcriptome in a leukemia progression
model.

Kuchenbauer F(1), Morin RD, Argiropoulos B, Petriv OI, Griffith M, Heuser M, Yung
E, Piper J, Delaney A, Prabhu AL, Zhao Y, McDonald H, Zeng T, Hirst M, Hansen CL,
Marra MA, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3,
Canada.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to play important roles in physiological as
well as multiple malignant processes, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In 
an effort to gain further insight into the role of miRNAs in AML, we have applied
the Illumina massively parallel sequencing platform to carry out an in-depth
analysis of the miRNA transcriptome in a murine leukemia progression model. This 
model simulates the stepwise conversion of a myeloid progenitor cell by an
engineered overexpression of the nucleoporin 98 (NUP98)-homeobox HOXD13 fusion
gene (ND13), to aggressive AML inducing cells upon transduction with the
oncogenic collaborator Meis1. From this data set, we identified 307 miRNA/miRNA
species in the ND13 cells and 306 miRNA/miRNA species in ND13+Meis1 cells,
corresponding to 223 and 219 miRNA genes. Sequence counts varied between two and 
136,558, indicating a remarkable expression range between the detected miRNA
species. The large number of miRNAs expressed and the nature of differential
expression suggest that leukemic progression as modeled here is dictated by the
repertoire of shared, but differentially expressed miRNAs. Our finding of
extensive sequence variations (isomiRs) for almost all miRNA and miRNA species
adds additional complexity to the miRNA transcriptome. A stringent target
prediction analysis coupled with in vitro target validation revealed the
potential for miRNA-mediated release of oncogenes that facilitates leukemic
progression from the preleukemic to leukemia inducing state. Finally, 55 novel
miRNAs species were identified in our data set, adding further complexity to the 
emerging world of small RNAs.

PMCID: PMC2577858
PMID: 18849523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 16;105(37):14088-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804507105. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

Transplantation of a myelodysplastic syndrome by a long-term repopulating
hematopoietic cell.

Chung YJ(1), Choi CW, Slape C, Fry T, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Building 8, Room 5101, 8901 Wisconsin Avenue,
Bethesda, MD 20889, USA.

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) comprise a group of premalignant hematologic 
disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis, dysplasia, and
transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Although it is well established
that many malignancies can be transplanted, there is little evidence to
demonstrate that a premalignant disease entity, such as MDS or colonic polyps,
can be transplanted and subsequently undergo malignant transformation in vivo.
Using mice that express a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) transgene in hematopoietic
tissues, we show that a MDS can be transplanted to WT recipients. Recipients of
the MDS bone marrow displayed all of the critical features of MDS, including
peripheral blood cytopenias, dysplasia, and transformation to AML. Even when
transplanted with a 10-fold excess of WT cells, the NHD13 cells outcompeted the
WT cells over a 38-week period. Limiting-dilution experiments demonstrated that
the frequency of the cell that could transmit the disease was approximately
1/6,000-1/16,000 and that the MDS was also transferable to secondary recipients
as a premalignant condition. Transformation to AML in primary transplant
recipients was generally delayed (46-49 weeks after transplant); however, 6 of 10
secondary transplant recipients developed AML. These findings demonstrate that
MDS originates in a transplantable, premalignant, long-term repopulating,
MDS-initiating cell.

PMCID: PMC2544583
PMID: 18768819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2008;121(3-4):189-95. doi: 10.1159/000138884. Epub 2008 Aug
28.

HOXD13 may play a role in idiopathic congenital clubfoot by regulating the
expression of FHL1.

Wang LL(1), Fu WN, Li-Ling J, Li ZG, Li LY, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Idiopathic congenital clubfoot (CCF) is a type of congenital foot malformation,
and previous studies using the extended transmission disequilibrium testing
(ETDT) analysis have confirmed the HOXD13 gene as the susceptible gene of CCF.
This study aimed to verify whether Hoxd13 directly regulates skeletal muscle LIM 
protein 1 (Fhl1) expression during limb development in rat embryo, which will
serve as a basis for comprehending etiological research of idiopathic CCF.
Immunofluorescence staining was utilized to detect Hoxd13 and Fhl1 expression in 
12.5d rat embryo, while luciferase assay, electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA), and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay were used to confirm the
interaction between the two genes. Both Hoxd13 and Fhl1 were expressed in the
interdigital tissues of E12.5 rat embryo. Luciferase assay and EMSA identified a 
novel promoter region of Fhl1 that directly interacts with Hoxd13. ChIP of the
Hoxd13-Fhl1 promoter complex from the developing limb confirmed that endogenous
Hoxd13 interacts with this region. Thus, Hoxd13 directly regulates Fhl1
expression in rat embryo. These findings suggest that HOXD13 may regulate the
expression of FHL1 in the development of idiopathic CCF.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18758158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Haematologica. 2008 Sep;93(9):1288-92. doi: 10.3324/haematol.13563.

Apoptotic pathways to death in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Fontenay M, Gyan E.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2008 Sep;93(9):1394-7.

PMID: 18757848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2008;(39):64-8. doi: 10.1093/jncimonographs/lgn014.

NUP98-HOX translocations lead to myelodysplastic syndrome in mice and men.

Slape C(1), Lin YW, Hartung H, Zhang Z, Wolff L, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for CAncer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD
20889-5105, USA.

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal hematopoietic stem cell
disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis, peripheral blood
cytopenias, dysplasia, and a propensity for transformation to acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). A wide spectrum of genetic aberrations has been associated with
MDS, including chromosomal translocations involving the NUP98 gene, most commonly
leading to fusions of NUP98 with abd-b group HOX genes, including HOXD13. We used
vav regulatory elements to direct expression of a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion
gene in hematopoietic tissues. NHD13 transgenic mice faithfully recapitulate all 
the key features of MDS, including peripheral blood cytopenias, bone marrow
dysplasia and apoptosis, and transformation to acute leukemia. The MDS that
develops in NHD13 transgenic mice is highly lethal; within 14 months, 90% of the 
mice died of either leukemic transformation or severe anemia and leukopenia due
to progressive MDS. These mice provide a preclinical model that can be used for
the evaluation of MDS therapy and biology.

PMCID: PMC2518060
PMID: 18648006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Haematologica. 2008 Sep;93(9):1394-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.13042. Epub 2008 Jul 
4.

Impaired differentiation and apoptosis of hematopoietic precursors in a mouse
model of myelodysplastic syndrome.

Choi CW(1), Chung YJ, Slape C, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2008 Sep;93(9):1288-92.

Expression of a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene, initially identified in a
patient with myelodysplastic syndrome, leads to a highly penetrant
myelodysplastic syndrome in mice that recapitulates all of the key features of
the human disease. Expansion of undifferentiated lineage negative (lin(neg))
hematopoietic precursors that express NHD13 was markedly inhibited (30-fold) in
vitro. Decreased expansion was accompanied by decreased production of terminally 
differentiated cells, indicating impaired differentiation of NHD13 precursors.
Rather than differentiate, the majority (80%) of NHD13 lin(neg) precursors
underwent apoptotic cell death when induced to differentiate. These findings
demonstrate that NHD13 lin(neg) cells provide a tractable in vitro system for
studies of myelodysplastic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2575012
PMID: 18603548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Blood. 2008 Sep 1;112(5):2017-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-135186. Epub 2008 Jun
19.

Leukemic transformation in mice expressing a NUP98-HOXD13 transgene is
accompanied by spontaneous mutations in Nras, Kras, and Cbl.

Slape C(1), Liu LY, Beachy S, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute (NCI), 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

The NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene occurs in patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) and acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL). We reported that
transgenic mice expressing NHD13 develop MDS, and that more than half of these
mice eventually progress to acute leukemia. The latency period suggests a
requirement for at least 1 complementary event before leukemic transformation. We
conducted a candidate gene search for complementary events focused on genes that 
are frequently mutated in human myeloid leukemia. We investigated 22 ANLL samples
and found a high frequency of Nras and Kras mutations, an absence of Npm1, p53,
Runx1, Kit and Flt3 mutations, and a single Cbl mutation. Our findings support a 
working hypothesis that predicts that ANLL cases have one mutation which inhibits
differentiation, and a complementary mutation which enhances proliferation or
inhibit apoptosis. In addition, we provide the first evidence for spontaneous
collaborating mutations in a genetically engineered mouse model of ANLL.

PMCID: PMC2518902
PMID: 18566322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):497-507. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.048. Epub 2008
Mar 8.

Hoxd13 binds in vivo and regulates the expression of genes acting in key pathways
for early limb and skeletal patterning.

Salsi V(1), Vigano MA, Cocchiarella F, Mantovani R, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41100, Italy.

5' HoxD genes are required for the correct formation of limb skeletal elements.
Hoxd13, the most 5'-located HoxD gene, is important for patterning the most
distal limb region, and its mutation causes human limb malformation syndromes.
The mechanisms underlying the control of developmental processes by Hoxd13, and
by Hox genes in general, are still elusive, due to the limited knowledge on their
direct downstream target genes. We identified by ChIP-on-chip 248 known gene loci
bound invivo by Hoxd13. Genes relevant to limb patterning and skeletogenesis were
further analysed. We found that Hoxd13 binds invivo, in developing limbs, the
loci of Hand2, a gene crucial to limb AP axis patterning, of Meis1 and Meis2,
involved in PD patterning, of the Sfrp1, Barx1, and Fbn1 genes, involved in
skeletogenesis, and of the Dach1, Bmp2, Bmp4, andEmx2 genes. We show that Hoxd13 
misexpression in developing chick limbs alters the expression of the majority of 
these genes, supporting the conclusion that Hoxd13 directly regulates their
transcription. Our results indicate that 5' Hox proteins regulate directly both
key genes for early limb AP and PD axis patterning and genes involved, at later
stages, in skeletal patterning.

PMID: 18407260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Int Surg. 2007 Sep-Oct;92(5):287-95.

Novel mutations of the HOXD13 gene in hand and foot malformations.

Nakano K(1), Sakai N, Yamazaki Y, Watanabe H, Yamada N, Sezaki K, Susami T,
Tokunaga K, Takato T, Uchinuma E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Aesthetic Surgery, Kitasato University School of
Medicine, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Homeobox genes encode a set of transcription factors of fundamental importance
for body patterning during embryogenesis. Hoxa9-a13 and Hoxd9-d13 play an
especially important part in vertebrate limb development. Synpolydactyly (SPD) is
characterized by various malformations of the limbs. The expansion of the
polyalanine tract in 1OXD13 is one of its major causes. Recently, there have been
many analysis studies of HOXD13 in patients with SPD and limb malformations. We
analyzed HOXD13 in 100 patients with limb malformations, which affects the limbs 
in the distal parts of the metacarpal and/or metatarsal bones. Seven mutations in
the coding region and two mutations in the 5'-untranslated region were
identified. All were novel mutations. In this study, the mutations were located
upstream in the homeobox. Thus, translation of the homeobox was affected by
upstream mutations. Consequently, this suggested the possibility that
abnormalities in the hands and feet could be caused by novel HOXD13 gene
mutations.

PMID: 18399101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Exp Hematol. 2008 Jul;36(7):845-59. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.02.011. Epub 2008 
Apr 2.

Linkage of Meis1 leukemogenic activity to multiple downstream effectors including
Trib2 and Ccl3.

Argiropoulos B(1), Palmqvist L, Yung E, Kuchenbauer F, Heuser M, Sly LM, Wan A,
Krystal G, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: MEIS1, a HOX cofactor, collaborates with multiple HOX and NUP98-HOX
fusion proteins to accelerate the onset of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) through
largely unknown molecular mechanisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To further resolve these mechanisms, we conducted a
structure-function analysis of MEIS1 and gene-expression profiling, in the
context of NUP98-HOXD13 (ND13) leukemogenesis.
RESULTS: We show, in a murine bone marrow transplantation model, that the
PBX-interaction domain, the homeodomain, and the C-terminal domain of MEIS1, are 
all required for leukemogenic collaboration with ND13. In contrast, the
N-terminal domain of MEIS1 is dispensable for collaboration with ND13, but is
required for Flt3 upregulation, indicating additional roles for MEIS1 in
induction of leukemia independent of alterations in Flt3 expression.
Gene-expression profiling of a cloned ND13 preleukemic cell line transduced with 
wild-type or Meis1 mutant forms revealed deregulation of multiple genes,
including a set not previously implicated as MEIS1 targets. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed the in vivo occupancy of MEIS1 on regulatory
sequences of Trib2, Flt3, Dlk1, Ccl3, Ccl4, Pf4, and Rgs1. Furthermore,
engineered overexpression of Trib2 complements ND13 to induce AML while Ccl3
potentiates the repopulating ability of ND13.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that Meis1-induced leukemogenesis with ND13 can
occur in the absence of Flt3 upregulation and reveals the existence of other
pathways activated by MEIS1 to promote leukemia.

PMID: 18375036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Yi Chuan. 2008 Jan;30(1):46-50.

[Research of HOXD13 and FHL1 in idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LL(1), Fu WN, Li ZG, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, 110001,
China. wll_1977_21@163.com

To investigate the relationship of HOXD13 and FHL1 in idiopathic congenital
talipes equinovarus(ICTEV), 84 samples from patients with ICTEV were used in the 
study. Mutation in the coding region of HOXD13 was detected by denaturing
gradinent electrophoresis. The mRNA and protein levels of HOXD13 and FHL1 were
evaluated by RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, respectively. The binding site of
FHL1 to HOXD13 predicted by PMATCH software was validated by EMSA(
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay,EMSA).No mutation was found in the coding
region of HOXD13 in 84 samples from patients with ICTEV. Both HOXD13(33.3%) and
FHL1(46.6%) were down-regulated in ICTEV muscle tissue. The result of EMSA showed
that the special binding band appeared when HOXD13 existed. The results shows
that HOXD13 gene mutation was not involved in outbreak in idiopathic congenital
talipes equinovarus, but changes of HOXD13 and FHL1 gene expression related to
the development of talipes equinovarus malformation. HOXD13 might play an role in
ICTEV through regulating FHL1 expression.

PMID: 18244901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Clin Genet. 2008 Feb;73(2):113-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2007.00935.x. Epub
2007 Dec 19.

Synpolydactyly: clinical and molecular advances.

Malik S(1), Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Bahnhofstr. 7,
Marburg, Germany. malik@staff.uni-marburg.de

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a rare limb deformity showing a distinctive combination
of syndactyly and polydactyly. Of the nine non-syndromic syndactylies, it is
clinically and genetically one of the most heterogeneous malformation. SPD
families may show clinical features consistent with the Temtamy and McKusick
criteria as well as additional phenotypic variants, which vary from case to case.
In certain instances, these variants predominate in a given family, while the
typical SPD features remain less explicit. We have reviewed all the clinical
variants occurring in well-documented SPD families. We conclude that typical SPD 
features can be delineated from minor clinical variants. Then, we propose to lump
all the phenotypic variants, manifesting themselves in SPD families into three
categories: (i) typical SPD features, (ii) minor variants, and (iii) unusual
phenotypes. Next, we discuss the likely reasons for the occurrence of minor
variants and the obvious lack of penetrance in SPD families. Finally, we show
that for the SPD phenotype associated with HOXD13 mutations, a straightforward
genotype-phenotype correlation is weak. Our lumping and splitting scheme for SPD 
phenotypic variants could be useful for the understanding of this interesting
malformation.

PMID: 18177473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Dec 11;8:78.

Synpolydactyly and HOXD13 polyalanine repeat: addition of 2 alanine residues is
without clinical consequences.

Malik S(1), Girisha KM, Wajid M, Roy AK, Phadke SR, Haque S, Ahmad W, Koch MC,
Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Bahnhofstr, 7, 35037
Marburg, Germany. malik@staff.uni-marburg.de

BACKGROUND: Type II syndactyly or synpolydactyly (SPD) is clinically very
heterogeneous, and genetically three distinct SPD conditions are known and have
been designated as SPD1, SPD2 and SPD3, respectively. SPD1 type is associated
with expansion mutations in HOXD13, resulting in an addition of > or = 7 alanine 
residues to the polyalanine repeat. It has been suggested that expansions < or = 
6 alanine residues go without medical attention, as no such expansion has ever
been reported with the SPD1 phenotype.
METHODS: We describe a large Pakistani and an Indian family with SPD. We perform 
detailed clinical and molecular analyses to identify the genetic basis of this
malformation.
RESULTS: We have identified four distinct clinical categories for the SPD1
phenotype observed in the affected subjects in both families. Next, we show that 
a milder foot phenotype, previously described as a separate entity, is in fact a 
part of the SPD1 phenotypic spectrum. Then, we demonstrate that the phenotype in 
both families segregates with an identical expansion mutation of 21 bp in HOXD13.
Finally, we show that the HOXD13 polyalanine repeat is polymorphic, and the
expansion of 2 alanine residues, evident in unaffected subjects of both families,
is without clinical consequences.
CONCLUSION: It is the first molecular evidence supporting the hypothesis that
expansion of < or = 6 alanine residues in the HOXD13 polyalanine repeat is not
associated with the SPD1 phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2222244
PMID: 18072967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Development. 2007 Nov;134(22):3967-73. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Hox gene function in vertebrate gut morphogenesis: the case of the caecum.

Zacchetti G(1), Duboule D, Zakany J.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre 'Frontiers in Genetics', Department of Zoology and
Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The digestive tract is made of different subdivisions with various functions.
During embryonic development, the developing intestine expresses combinations of 
Hox genes along its anterior to posterior axis, suggesting a role for these genes
in this regionalization process. In particular, the transition from small to
large intestine is labelled by the transcription of all Hoxd genes except Hoxd12 
and Hoxd13, the latter two genes being transcribed only near the anus. Here, we
describe two lines of mice that express Hoxd12 ectopically within this
morphological transition. As a consequence, budding of the caecum is impeded,
leading to complete agenesis in homozygous individuals. This effect is concurrent
with a dramatic reduction of both Fgf10 and Pitx1 expression. Furthermore, the
interactions between ;anterior' Hox genes and ectopic Hoxd12 suggest a model
whereby anterior and posterior Hox products compete in controlling Fgf10
signalling, which is required for the growth of this organ in mice. These results
illuminate components of the genetic cascade necessary for the emergence of this 
gut segment, crucial for many vertebrates.

PMID: 17942481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Dec 15;143A(24):3161-8.

Molecular characterization of HOXA13 polyalanine expansion proteins in
hand-foot-genital syndrome.

Utsch B(1), McCabe CD, Galbraith K, Gonzalez R, Born M, Dötsch J, Ludwig M,
Reutter H, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Children Hospital, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

We report on a father and daughter with hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS) with
typical skeletal and genitourinary anomalies due to a 14-residue polyalanine
expansion in HOXA13. This is the largest (32 residues) polyalanine tract so far
described for any polyalanine mutant protein. Polyalanine expansion results in
protein misfolding, cytoplasmic aggregation and degradation; however, HOXA13
polyalanine expansions appear to act as loss of function mutations in contrast to
gain of function for HOXD13 polyalanine expansions. To address this paradox we
examined the cellular consequences of polyalanine expansions on HOXA13 protein
using COS cell transfection and immunocytochemistry. HOXA13 polyalanine expansion
proteins form cytoplasmic aggregates, and distribution between cytoplasmic
aggregates or the nucleus is polyalanine tract size-dependent. Geldanamycin, an
Hsp90 inhibitor, reduces the steady-state abundance of all polyalanine-expanded
proteins in transfected cells. We also found that wild-type HOXA13 or HOXD13
proteins are sequestered in HOXA13 polyalanine expansion cytoplasmic aggregates. 
Thus, the difference between HOXA13 polyalanine expansion loss-of-function and
HOXD13 polyalanine expansion dominant-negative effect is not the ability to
aggregate wild-type group 13 paralogs but perhaps to variation in activities
associated with refolding, aggregation or degradation of the proteins.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17935235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2007 Nov;290(11):1449-58.

Epithelial and muscular regionalization of the human developing anorectum.

Fritsch H(1), Aigner F, Ludwikowski B, Reinstadler-Zankl S, Illig R, Urbas D,
Schwarzer C, Longato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology, and Embryology, Division of Clinical and
Functional Anatomy, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
helga.fritsch@i-med.ac.at

Comment in
    Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2009 Jul;292(7):951-4.

In the past, interpretations of anorectal development were mainly based on
analysis of serially sectioned embryos of various nonhuman species as well as
some human specimens. A four-dimensional view of the developmental situation in
the human has never been established nor connected to recent findings obtained
from newer molecular techniques. We, therefore, investigated human embryonic and 
fetal pelves by means of immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization to
elucidate differentiation and interaction of epithelial and mesenchymal layers of
the anorectum. To emphasize spatial as well as sequential morphological
development, we produced three-dimensional reconstructions of the specimens at
hand. Research conducted proved that the decisive steps of epithelial and
muscular differentiation occur between the 7th and 9th week after conception.
This study elucidates a biphasic epithelial "closure" in the anal canal and
interactions between epithelium, smooth musculature, and skeletal musculature.
Based on the results presented here, it is possible to describe the pathogenesis 
of two anorectal malformations: the imperforate anal membrane and the anal
membrane stenosis. This study will now provide the basis for further research
into developmental processes occurring before the ones examined.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17853405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2007 Dec 15;308(6):757-68.

Fish fingers: digit homologues in sarcopterygian fish fins.

Johanson Z(1), Joss J, Boisvert CA, Ericsson R, Sutija M, Ahlberg PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Palaeontology, Natural History Museum, London UK SW7 5BD.
z.johanson@nhm.ac.uk

A defining feature of tetrapod evolutionary origins is the transition from fish
fins to tetrapod limbs. A major change during this transition is the appearance
of the autopod (hands, feet), which comprises two distinct regions, the
wrist/ankle and the digits. When the autopod first appeared in Late Devonian
fossil tetrapods, it was incomplete: digits evolved before the full complement of
wrist/ankle bones. Early tetrapod wrists/ankles, including those with a full
complement of bones, also show a sharp pattern discontinuity between proximal
elements and distal elements. This suggests the presence of a discontinuity in
the proximal-distal sequence of development. Such a discontinuity occurs in
living urodeles, where digits form before completion of the wrist/ankle, implying
developmental independence of the digits from wrist/ankle elements. We have
observed comparable independent development of pectoral fin radials in the
lungfish Neoceratodus (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii), relative to homologues of
the tetrapod limb and proximal wrist elements in the main fin axis. Moreover, in 
the Neoceratodus fin, expression of Hoxd13 closely matches late expression
patterns observed in the tetrapod autopod. This evidence suggests that
Neoceratodus fin radials and tetrapod digits may be patterned by shared
mechanisms distinct from those patterning the proximal fin/limb elements, and in 
that sense are homologous. The presence of independently developing radials in
the distal part of the pectoral (and pelvic) fin may be a general feature of the 
Sarcopterygii.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 17849442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS One. 2007 Aug 22;2(8):e768.

Candidate genes for expansion and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells by
NUP98-HOX fusion genes.

Palmqvist L(1), Pineault N, Wasslavik C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes are implicated in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) regulation 
as well as in leukemia development through translocation with the nucleoporin
gene NUP98. Interestingly, an engineered NUP98-HOXA10 (NA10) fusion can induce a 
several hundred-fold expansion of HSCs in vitro and NA10 and the AML-associated
fusion gene NUP98-HOXD13 (ND13) have a virtually indistinguishable ability to
transform myeloid progenitor cells in vitro and to induce leukemia in
collaboration with MEIS1 in vivo.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: These findings provided a potentially powerful
approach to identify key pathways mediating Hox-induced expansion and
transformation of HSCs by identifying gene expression changes commonly induced by
ND13 and NA10 but not by a NUP98-Hox fusion with a non-DNA binding homedomain
mutation (N51S). The gene expression repertoire of purified murine bone marrow
Sca-1+Lin- cells transduced with retroviral vectors encoding for these genes was 
established using the Affymetrix GeneChip MOE430A. Approximately seventy genes
were differentially expressed in ND13 and NA10 cells that were significantly
changed by both compared to the ND13(N51S) mutant. Intriguingly, several of these
potential Hox target genes have been implicated in HSC expansion and
self-renewal, including the tyrosine kinase receptor Flt3, the prion protein,
Prnp, hepatic leukemia factor, Hlf and Jagged-2, Jag2. Consistent with these
results, FLT3, HLF and JAG2 expression correlated with HOX A cluster gene
expression in human leukemia samples.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion this study has identified several novel Hox downstream
target genes and provides important new leads to key regulators of the expansion 
and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells by Hox.

PMCID: PMC1942085
PMID: 17712416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2007 Aug 15;2(8):e754.

Biphasic Hoxd gene expression in shark paired fins reveals an ancient origin of
the distal limb domain.

Freitas R(1), Zhang G, Cohn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Cancer/Genetics Research Complex, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United Sates of America.

The evolutionary transition of fins to limbs involved development of a new suite 
of distal skeletal structures, the digits. During tetrapod limb development,
genes at the 5' end of the HoxD cluster are expressed in two spatiotemporally
distinct phases. In the first phase, Hoxd9-13 are activated sequentially and form
nested domains along the anteroposterior axis of the limb. This initial phase
patterns the limb from its proximal limit to the middle of the forearm. Later in 
development, a second wave of transcription results in 5' HoxD gene expression
along the distal end of the limb bud, which regulates formation of digits.
Studies of zebrafish fins showed that the second phase of Hox expression does not
occur, leading to the idea that the origin of digits was driven by addition of
the distal Hox expression domain in the earliest tetrapods. Here we test this
hypothesis by investigating Hoxd gene expression during paired fin development in
the shark Scyliorhinus canicula, a member of the most basal lineage of jawed
vertebrates. We report that at early stages, 5'Hoxd genes are expressed in
anteroposteriorly nested patterns, consistent with the initial wave of Hoxd
transcription in teleost and tetrapod paired appendages. Unexpectedly, a second
phase of expression occurs at later stages of shark fin development, in which
Hoxd12 and Hoxd13 are re-expressed along the distal margin of the fin buds. This 
second phase is similar to that observed in tetrapod limbs. The results indicate 
that a second, distal phase of Hoxd gene expression is not uniquely associated
with tetrapod digit development, but is more likely a plesiomorphic condition
present the common ancestor of chondrichthyans and osteichthyans. We propose that
a temporal extension, rather than de novo activation, of Hoxd expression in the
distal part of the fin may have led to the evolution of digits.

PMCID: PMC1937022
PMID: 17710153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Jul 15;176(2):137-43.

A complex karyotype, including a three-way translocation generating a
NUP98-HOXD13 transcript, in an infant with acute myeloid leukemia.

Hidaka E(1), Tanaka M, Matsuda K, Ishikawa-Matsumura M, Yamauchi K, Sano K, Honda
T, Wakui K, Yanagisawa R, Nakazawa Y, Sakashita K, Shiohara M, Ishii E, Koike K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto,
Japan.

We report the case of an infant with acute myeloblastic leukemia who had the
abnormal karyotype
46,XX,t(2;11;9)(q31;p15;q22),t(6;11;15)(q21;q23;q22),t(8;10)(q13;q22). At
relapse, a different three-way translocation emerged. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization and a reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay
detected the NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene in bone marrow cells of the patient at
diagnosis and at relapse. Sequence analysis showed that exon 12 of NUP98 was
fused in-frame with exon 2 of HOXD13. The patient had neither a rearrangement of 
the MLL gene nor aberrations for FLT3, KIT, NRAS, KRAS, or PTPN11. The
NUP98-HOXD13 fusion transcript created by t(2;11;9)(q31;p15;q22) may play an
important role in the leukemogenesis in this case.

PMID: 17656257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Urology. 2007 Jul;70(1):161-4.

Association of hypospadias with hypoplastic synpolydactyly and role of HOXD13
gene mutations.

Tüzel E(1), Samli H, Kuru I, Türkmen S, Demir Y, Maralcan G, Güler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Afyon Kocatepe University School of Medicine, Afyon,
Turkey. emretuzel@aku.edu.tr

OBJECTIVES: To present the association of hypospadias with hypoplastic
synpolydactyly and discuss the molecular genetic basis of these conditions.
METHODS: A large synpolydactyly kindred first described in 1995 was
reinvestigated. Affected and unaffected subjects were interviewed, and pedigrees 
of the most recent generations were constructed. The marriages of two affected
individuals were identified. The siblings who were homozygous for the deformity
were asked to attend our institution and underwent a detailed clinical
evaluation. Genetic studies and mutation screening were performed using
polymerase chain reaction on genomic DNA extracted from venous blood.
RESULTS: Of the 245 members of the kindred, 125 individuals were affected. Of
these 125 individuals, 12 were homozygotes (6 females and 6 males) with a mean
age of 12 years. The remaining 113 individuals (57 females and 56 males) were
heterozygotes showing milder limb deformities. No sex-related phenotypic
difference was found in the extremity findings, but all the males with a
homozygote pattern had hypospadias. Three had distal penile, two had mid-shaft,
and one had penoscrotal hypospadias. Of the affected 56 heterozygote males, 22
were also noted to have distal hypospadias in various forms. Neither the
heterozygote nor the homozygote females had any genital anomalies. The laboratory
tests and karyotype profiles of these individuals were normal. Mutation screening
of the homozygote subjects revealed a polyalanine duplication band of nine
additional alanine residues at the human HOXD13 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings strongly suggest that specific mutations in HOXD13
gene may cause both hypoplastic synpolydactyly and hypospadias.

PMID: 17656229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Genes Immun. 2007 Sep;8(6):480-91. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Distinctive gene expression signatures in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue
fibroblast cells: correlates with disease activity.

Galligan CL(1), Baig E, Bykerk V, Keystone EC, Fish EN.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Gene expression profiling of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA)
joint tissue samples provides a unique insight into the gene signatures involved 
in disease development and progression. Fibroblast-like synovial (FLS) cells were
obtained from RA, OA and control trauma joint tissues (non-RA, non-OA) and RNA
was analyzed by Affymetrix microarray. Thirty-four genes specific to RA and OA
FLS cells were identified (P<0.05). HOXD10, HOXD11, HOXD13, CCL8 and LIM homeobox
2 were highly and exclusively expressed in RA and CLU, sarcoglycan-gamma, GPR64, 
POU3F3, peroxisome proliferative activated receptor-gamma and tripartite
motif-containing 2 were expressed only in OA. The data also revealed expression
heterogeneity for patients with the same disease. To address disease
heterogeneity in RA FLS cells, we examined the effects of clinical disease
parameters (Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) score, C-reactive protein
(CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor (RF)) and drug
therapies (methotrexate/prednisone) on RA FLS cell gene expression. Eight
specific and unique correlations were identified: human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-DQA2 with HAQ score; Clec12A with RF; MAB21L2, SIAT7E, HAPLN1 and BAIAP2L1 
with CRP level; RGMB and OSAP with ESR. Signature RA FLS cell gene expression
profiles may provide insights into disease pathogenesis and have utility in
diagnosis, prognosis and drug responsiveness.

PMID: 17568789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 1;67(11):5148-55.

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis identifies genes that collaborate with
NUP98-HOXD13 during leukemic transformation.

Slape C(1), Hartung H, Lin YW, Bies J, Wolff L, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20889-5105, USA.

The t(2;11)(q31;p15) chromosomal translocation results in a fusion between the
NUP98 and HOXD13 genes and has been observed in patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) or acute myelogenous leukemia. We previously showed that
expression of the NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene in transgenic mice results in 
an invariably fatal MDS; approximately one third of mice die due to complications
of severe pancytopenia, and about two thirds progress to a fatal acute leukemia. 
In the present study, we used retroviral insertional mutagenesis to identify
genes that might collaborate with NHD13 as the MDS transformed to an acute
leukemia. Newborn NHD13 transgenic mice and littermate controls were infected
with the MOL4070LTR retrovirus. The onset of leukemia was accelerated, suggesting
a synergistic effect between the NHD13 transgene and the genes neighboring
retroviral insertion events. We identified numerous common insertion sites
located near protein-coding genes and confirmed dysregulation of a subset of
these by expression analyses. Among these genes were Meis1, a known collaborator 
of HOX and NUP98-HOX fusion genes, and Mn1, a transcriptional coactivator
involved in human leukemia through fusion with the TEL gene. Other putative
collaborators included Gata2, Erg, and Epor. Of note, we identified a common
insertion site that was >100 kb from the nearest coding gene, but within 20 kb of
the miR29a/miR29b1 microRNA locus. Both of these miRNA were up-regulated,
demonstrating that retroviral insertional mutagenesis can target miRNA loci as
well as protein-coding loci. Our data provide new insights into NHD13-mediated
leukemogenesis as well as retroviral insertional mutagenesis mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC1950322
PMID: 17545593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2007 Jul 15;308(4):442-53.

Comparison of acid mucin goblet cell distribution and Hox13 expression patterns
in the developing vertebrate digestive tract.

Theodosiou NA(1), Hall DA, Jowdry AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Bowdoin College, 6500 College Station, Brunswick, Maine
04011, USA. theodosn@union.edu

The digestive tract of vertebrates is a complex organ system required for the
digestion of food and the absorption of nutrients. The colon evolved as a water
absorption organ essential for vertebrates to survive on land. In contrast to
land vertebrates, the Chondrichthyes (sharks, skates and rays) are nearly
iso-osmotic with their ocean environment and do not reabsorb water from food
waste. To understand the origin of the vertebrate colon, we examined the
distribution of sulfated and sialyated mucus-producing cells in the little skate,
Raja erinacea, as an indication of water absorption function in the
chondrichthian digestive tract. The percentage of acid mucin producing goblet
cells was analyzed in the spiral valve and hindgut of little skate and the small 
intestine and colon of mouse embryos. Levels of acid mucins in the hindgut of the
little skate was comparable to that of the small intestines of terrestrial
vertebrates, whereas the distal region of the spiral valve contained high levels 
of acid mucin producing cells similar to the colon of mouse and chick. The low
numbers of acid mucins in the little skate hindgut confirms that a functional
colon for water absorption is absent in the Chondrichthyes. Interestingly, the
presence of high levels of acid mucins in the posterior spiral valve provides
evidence for a possible primordial water-absorbing organ in the elasmobranchs.
Hoxd13 patterns acid mucins in the colons of terrestrial vertebrates. Expression 
of Hoxd13 and Hoxa13 in R. erinacea suggests conserved roles for Hox genes in
patterning the early hindgut.

PMID: 17538949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Leukemia. 2007 Jun;21(6):1276-84. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

Gene expression profiling of precursor T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
identifies oncogenic pathways that are potential therapeutic targets.

Lin YW(1), Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Navy8/Rm5105, 8901 Wisconsin Avenue, Bethesda, MD 
20889-5105, USA.

We compared the gene expression pattern of thymic tumors from precursor T-cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia (pre-T LBL) that arose in transgenic mice that
overexpressed SCL, LMO1 or NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) with that of thymocytes from
normal littermates. Only two genes, Ccl8 and Mrpl38, were consistently more than 
fourfold overexpressed in pre-T LBL from all three genotypes analyzed, and a
single gene, Prss16 was consistently underexpressed. However, we identified a
number of genes, such as Cfl1, Tcra, Tcrb, Pbx3, Eif4a, Eif4b and Cox8b that were
over or under-expressed in pre-T LBL that arose in specific transgenic lines.
Similar to the situation seen with human pre-T LBL, the SCL/LMO1 leukemias
displayed an expression profile consistent with mature, late cortical thymocytes,
whereas the NHD13 leukemias displayed an expression profile more consistent with 
immature thymocytes. We evaluated two of the most differentially regulated genes 
as potential therapeutic targets. Cfl1 was specifically overexpressed in SCL-LMO1
tumors; inactivation of Cfl1 using okadaic acid resulted in suppression of
leukemic cell growth. Overexpression of Ccl8 was a consistent finding in all
three transgenic lines, and an antagonist for the Ccl8 receptor-induced death of 
leukemic cell lines, suggesting a novel therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC2063467
PMID: 17429429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Leukemia. 2007 Jun;21(6):1239-48. Epub 2007 Mar 22.

Mouse embryonic stem cells that express a NUP98-HOXD13 fusion protein are
impaired in their ability to differentiate and can be complemented by BCR-ABL.

Slape C(1), Chung YJ, Soloway PD, Tessarollo L, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20889, USA.

NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusions have been identified in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome, acute myelogenous leukemia and chronic myeloid leukemia
blast crisis. We generated 'knock-in' mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells that
express a NHD13 fusion gene from the endogenous murine NUP98 promoter, and used
an in vitro differentiation system to differentiate the ES cells to hematopoietic
colonies. Replating assays demonstrated that the partially differentiated NHD13
ES cells were immortal, and two of these cultures were transferred to liquid
culture. These cell lines are partially differentiated immature hematopoietic
cells, as determined by morphology, immunophenotype and gene expression profile. 
Despite these characteristics, they were unable to differentiate when exposed to 
high concentrations of erythropoietin (Epo), granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor or macrophage colony-stimulating factor. The cell lines are incompletely
transformed, as evidenced by their dependence on interleukin 3 (IL-3), and their 
failure to initiate tumors when injected into immunodeficient mice. We attempted 
genetic complementation of the NHD13 gene using IL-3 independence and
tumorigenicity in immunodeficient mice as markers of transformation, and found
that BCR-ABL successfully transformed the cell lines. These findings support the 
hypothesis that expression of a NHD13 fusion gene impairs hematopoietic
differentiation, and that these cell lines present a model system to study the
nature of this impaired differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2063470
PMID: 17377591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Jun;79(6):465-82.

Altered localization of gene expression in both ectoderm and mesoderm is
associated with a murine strain difference in retinoic acid-induced forelimb
ectrodactyly.

Shimizu H(1), Lee GS, Beedanagari SR, Collins MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA School of Public Health, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

BACKGROUND: Defects in digit number or fusion as a teratogenic response are well 
documented in humans and intensively studied in various mouse models. Maternal
exposure to excess levels of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) at gestational day 9.5 
induces postaxial ectrodactyly (digit loss) in the murine C57BL/6N strain but not
in the SWV/Fnn strain.
METHODS: Whole-mount in situ hybridization was used to examine the differential
expression of limb patterning genes at the transcriptional level between the two 
mouse strains following the maternal exposure to a teratogenic level of RA. The
detection of a gene with altered expression was followed by either the evaluation
of other genes that were synexpressed or with an assessment of downstream genes.
RESULTS: In the C57BL/6N limb bud following maternal RA administration,
gene-specific perturbations were observed within hours of the RA injection in the
posterior pre-AER (apical ectodermal ridge) (Fgf8, Dlx3, Bmp4, Sp8, but not Dlx2 
or p63), whereas these genes were normally expressed in the SWV/Fnn limb bud.
Furthermore, although RA caused comparable reductions of Shh expression between
the strains in the 12 h after administration, some Shh downstream genes were
differentially expressed (e.g., Gli1, Ptc, and Hoxd13), whereas others were not
(e.g., Fgf4, Bmp4, and Gremlin).
CONCLUSIONS: It is proposed that altered gene expression in both pre-AER and
mesoderm is involved in the pathogenesis of postaxial digit loss, and that
because the alterations in the pre-AER occur relatively early in the temporal
sequence of events, those changes are candidates for an initiating factor in the 
malformation.

PMID: 17335046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):769-76.

A hypermorphic mouse Gli3 allele results in a polydactylous limb phenotype.

Wang C(1), Pan Y, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, NY, USA.

Gli3 protein processing to generate the Gli3 repressor is mediated by proteasome 
and inhibited by Hedgehog signaling. The Gli3 repressor concentration is graded
along the anterior-posterior axis of the developing vertebrate limb due to
posteriorly restricted Sonic hedgehog expression. In this study, we created a
small deletion at the Gli3 locus (Gli3(Delta68)), which causes a half reduction
in the Gli3 repressor levels and a slightly increased activity of full-length
mutant protein in the limb. Mice homozygous for Gli3(Delta68) develop one to two 
extra partial digits in the anterior of the limb, while mice carrying one copy of
the Gli3(Delta68) allele die soon after birth and display seven digits. These
phenotypes are more severe than those found in mice lacking one wild-type Gli3
allele. The expression of dHand, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 is anteriorly expanded in the
limb, even though no up-regulation of Gli1 and Ptc RNA expression is detected.
These findings suggest that a decrease in the Gli3 repressor level in combination
with an increase in Gli3 full-length activity results in more severe digit
patterning abnormalities than those caused by a loss of one wild-type Gli3
allele.

PMID: 17266131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2007 Jan 24;2(1):e175.

Evx2-Hoxd13 intergenic region restricts enhancer association to Hoxd13 promoter.

Yamagishi T(1), Ozawa M, Ohtsuka C, Ohyama-Goto R, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Kondo Research Unit, Brain Development Research Group, Brain Science
Institute, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Wako, Japan.

Expression of Hox genes is tightly regulated in spatial and temporal domains.
Evx2 is located next to Hoxd13 within 8 kb on the opposite DNA strand. Early in
development, the pattern of Hoxd13 expression resembles that of Evx2 in limb and 
genital buds. After 10 dpc, however, Evx2 begins to be expressed in CNS as well. 
We analyzed the region responsible for these differences using ES cell
techniques, and found that the intergenic region between Evx2 and Hoxd13 behaves 
as a boundary element that functions differentially in space and time,
specifically in the development of limbs, genital bud, and brain. This boundary
element comprises a large sequence spanning several kilobases that can be divided
into at least two units: a constitutive boundary element, which blocks
transcription regulatory influences from the chromosomal environment, and a
regulatory element, which controls the function of the constitutive boundary
element in time and space.

PMCID: PMC1766471
PMID: 17245451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Feb;80(2):361-71. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Mutations in HOXD13 underlie syndactyly type V and a novel
brachydactyly-syndactyly syndrome.

Zhao X(1), Sun M, Zhao J, Leyva JA, Zhu H, Yang W, Zeng X, Ao Y, Liu Q, Liu G, Lo
WH, Jabs EW, Amzel LM, Shan X, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and National Key Laboratory of Medical
Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing China.

HOXD13, the homeobox-containing gene located at the most 5' end of the HOXD
cluster, plays a critical role in limb development. It has been shown that
mutations in human HOXD13 can give rise to limb malformations, with variable
expressivity and a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations. Polyalanine
expansions in HOXD13 cause synpolydactyly, whereas amino acid substitutions in
the homeodomain are associated with brachydactyly types D and E. We describe two 
large Han Chinese families with different limb malformations, one with syndactyly
type V and the other with limb features overlapping brachydactyly types A4, D,
and E and mild syndactyly of toes 2 and 3. Two-point linkage analysis showed LOD 
scores >3 (theta =0) for markers within and/or flanking the HOXD13 locus in both 
families. In the family with syndactyly type V, we identified a missense mutation
in the HOXD13 homeodomain, c.950A-->G (p.Q317R), which leads to substitution of
the highly conserved glutamine that is important for DNA-binding specificity and 
affinity. In the family with complex brachydactyly and syndactyly, we detected a 
deletion of 21 bp in the imperfect GCN (where N denotes A, C, G, or T)
triplet-containing exon 1 of HOXD13, which results in a polyalanine contraction
of seven residues. Moreover, we found that the mutant HOXD13 with the p.Q317R
substitution was unable to transactivate the human EPHA7 promoter. Molecular
modeling data supported these experimental results. The calculated interactions
energies were in agreement with the measured changes of the activity. Our data
established the link between HOXD13 and two additional limb
phenotypes--syndactyly type V and brachydactyly type A4--and demonstrated that a 
polyalanine contraction in HOXD13, most likely, led to other digital anomalies
but not to synpolydactyly. We suggest the term "HOXD13 limb morphopathies" for
the spectrum of limb disorders caused by HOXD13 mutations.

PMCID: PMC1785357
PMID: 17236141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2007 Apr;79(4):269-75.

Allelic variants in HOX genes in cryptorchidism.

Wang Y(1), Barthold J, Kanetsky PA, Casalunovo T, Pearson E, Manson J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. wangy@email.chop.edu

BACKGROUND: Cryptorchidism is one of the most common congenital anomalies and is 
associated with increased risk for infertility and testicular cancer later in
life. Findings from animal models and small clinical studies suggest that the
posterior HOX genes (paralogs 9-13) could be potential candidate genes for
cryptorchidism and that the HOX genes are functionally redundant within
paralogous groups.
METHODS: The coding regions and exon-intron boundaries of the 16 posterior HOX
genes were sequenced and analyzed in group 1 (44 nonsyndromic cryptorchidism
cases and 46 healthy controls). Those specific variants found to be significantly
different between cases and controls in group 1 were examined in DNA from group 2
(108 cases and 114 controls).
RESULTS: A total of 57 variants was found in group 1, among which the allele
frequency of 180A>G (A60A) in HOXD13 alone was significantly elevated in cases
versus controls (P = 0.02). In the combined 1 + 2 group, cases were also more
likely than controls to have the G allele (P = 0.002). As predicted by an exonic 
splicing enhancer finder program, the 180A>G (A60A) variant is expected to have
an influence on the splicing of transcripts from HOXD13. In group 1, case
subjects were more likely to carry multiple variants in HOXA13 and HOXD13 (P =
0.02) than controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The variant 180A>G (A60A) in HOXD13 is a risk factor for
cryptorchidism, and a dynamic equilibrium of genes in HOX paralog 13 is involved 
in the pathogenesis of cryptorchidism.

PMID: 17216618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Dec;41(12):2041-5.

Sonic hedgehog, BMP4, and Hox genes in the development of anorectal malformations
in Ethylenethiourea-exposed fetal rats.

Mandhan P(1), Quan QB, Beasley S, Sullivan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric and Surgery, Children's Cancer and Developmental
Genetic Research Group, Christchurch School of Medicine & Health Sciences,
Christchurch, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: shh signaling pathway has been shown to be involved in the
morphogenesis of many organ systems. In this study, we investigated the
expression of shh and its targets, BMP4 and Hox genes, in the development of
anorectal malformations in Ethylenethiourea (ETU)-exposed embryos.
METHODS: We used ETU murine model of the vertebral, anal, cardiac,
tracheoesophageal, renal, and limb association. Ethylenethiourea 1% (125 mg/kg)
was given to the pregnant females via gavage feeding on gestational day (gD) 10
and saline to control animals. Embryos were collected at gD12 to gD16 and gD21;
hindguts were dissected and snap frozen. Highly purified RNA was isolated, and
expression of shh, BMP4, Hoxa13, and Hoxd13 genes was confirmed with RT-PCR.
Relative quantitative expression of shh and target genes at each time point was
done with SYBR Green I qPCR. Normalized gene of interest expression was
calculated by geNorm, and data analysis was done with 2-tail Student t test.
RESULTS: shh, BMP4, Hoxa13, and Hoxd13 transcripts were detected in all samples, 
confirming that shh cascade is active during the process of hindgut development
in fetal rats. Relative quantitation demonstrated that shh cascade expression
shows time-dependent changes in the developing hindgut.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that ETU disturbs the expression of shh signaling
pathway during the development of hindgut. We provide evidence that shh plays a
pivotal role in the hindgut morphogenesis, and its misexpression affect the
expression of targets, BMP4 and Hox genes.

PMID: 17161201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1235-45. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Posterior Hox gene expression and differential androgen regulation in the
developing and adult rat prostate lobes.

Huang L(1), Pu Y, Hepps D, Danielpour D, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 820 South Wood
Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Axis positioning and tissue determination during development involve coordinated 
expression of Hox genes throughout the body. The most posterior Hox gene clusters
are involved in prostate organogenesis. In the present study, we characterized
and compared the expression profiles of posterior (5') Hox genes in the separate 
lobes of the adult rat prostate gland, the coagulating gland, seminal vesicles,
and epididymis using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. These genes include Hoxa9-11,
Hoxa13, Hoxd13, and Hoxb13. We identified a unique Hox code for each of these
organs and propose that this contributes to the organ-specific and prostate
lobe-specific identities in the adult rat. Using the ventral prostate (VP) as a
model, we characterized the Hox genes expression patterns over time from birth
through adulthood. Expression levels of the three Hox13 genes and Hoxa10 were
significantly higher in the adult VP compared with the neonatal developing VP
suggesting an important role during adult homeostasis. In contrast, Hoxa9 and
Hoxa11 levels declined after morphogenesis suggesting a specific developmental
role. Overall, the Hoxb13 gene exhibited the most striking temporal and
organ-specific differences. Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry,
a distinct Hoxb13 anterior-to-posterior expression gradient was observed with the
highest expression levels in the VP luminal epithelial cells, moderate levels in 
the lateral prostate, and low expression in the dorsal prostate. An expression
gradient was also observed along the ductal length in all three prostate lobes
with strongest expression at the distal tips and limited expression in the
proximal ducts. After infection with a lentivirus expressing the Hoxb13 gene,
NRP-152 cells cultured under nondifferentiating conditions exhibited robust
cytokeratin 8 immunostain indicating that Hoxb13 expression drives luminal cell
differentiation in the rat epithelium. Androgen regulation of prostatic Hox gene 
expression was examined during development in vitro and after castration in the
adult rat. In the neonatal VP, all six Hox genes were significantly up-regulated 
by androgens, whereas none of the genes were affected by testosterone in the
lateral prostate. In the adult rat, castration resulted in up-regulation of Hoxa9
and Hoxa13 in the VP and down-regulation of Hoxb13 in the dorsal prostate and
lateral prostate. Taken together, we conclude that the prostatic Hox genes reach 
a destined expression level at specific developmental time points in the prostate
gland and possess differential androgenic regulation in a temporal and
lobe-specific manner. We suggest that this timely Hox code participates in
determining lobe-specific prostatic identity and cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2276874
PMID: 17138648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Anat. 2002 Nov;201(5):418.

6 Clinical genetics of syn- and brachydactyly: mutations in FGFR2 and HOXD13.

Wilkie A, Kan SH, Johnson D, Giele H.

PMCID: PMC1570926
PMID: 17103748  [PubMed]


156. Dev Dyn. 2006 Dec;235(12):3316-26.

Characterization of Xenopus digits and regenerated limbs of the froglet.

Satoh A(1), Endo T, Abe M, Yakushiji N, Ohgo S, Tamura K, Ide H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Xenopus has 4 and 5 digits in a forelimb and hindlimb, respectively. It is
thought that their limbs and digits develop in Xenopus by mechanisms that are
almost conserved from amphibians to higher vertebrates. This is supported by some
molecular evidence. The 5'hoxd genes are convenient marker genes for
characterizing digits in the chick and mouse. The anteriormost digit is
characterized by being hoxd13-positive and hoxd12 (hoxd11)-negative in the chick 
and mouse. In this study, we revealed that the anteriormost digit of the Xenopus 
forelimb is hoxd13-positive and hoxd11-positive, that is, a more posterior
character than digit I. The order of formation of digit cartilages also suggested
that Xenopus forelimb digit identity is II to V, not I to IV. We have also been
interested in the relationship between digit identity and shh. The anteriormost
digit develops in a shh-independent way. A limb treated with cyclopamine (a shh
inhibitor) has a gene expression pattern (hoxd11-negative) similar to that in
shh-deficient mice, suggesting that a hindlimb treated with cyclopamine has a
digit I character. However, a Xenopus froglet regenerate (spike), which lacks shh
expression during its regeneration process, does not have such an expression
pattern, being hoxd11-positive. We investigated hoxd11 transcriptions in
blastemas that formed in the anteriormost and posteriormost digits, and we found 
that the blastemas have different hoxd11 expression levels. These findings
suggest that the froglet limb blastema does not have a mere digit I character in 
spite of shh defectiveness and that the froglet limb blastema recognizes its
positional differences along the anterior-posterior axis.

Copyright (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17075873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Biol Evol. 2007 Jan;24(1):281-7. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Morphological change caused by loss of the taxon-specific polyalanine tract in
Hoxd-13.

Anan K(1), Yoshida N, Kataoka Y, Sato M, Ichise H, Nasu M, Ueda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Sequence comparison of Hoxd-13 among vertebrates revealed the presence of
taxon-specific polyalanine tracts in amniotes. To investigate their function at
the organismal level, we replaced the wild-type Hoxd-13 gene with one lacking the
15-residue polyalanine tract by using homologous recombination. Sesamoid bone
formation in knock-in mice was different from that in the wild type; this was
observed not only in the homozygotes but also in the heterozygotes. The present
study provides the first direct evidence that taxon-specific homopolymeric amino 
acid repeats are involved in phenotypic diversification at the organismal level.

PMID: 17065594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Syst Biol. 2006;2:57. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Cell lineage transport: a mechanism for molecular gradient formation.

Ibañes M(1), Kawakami Y, Rasskin-Gutman D, Izpisúa Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA.

Gradient formation is a fundamental patterning mechanism during embryo
development, commonly related to secreted proteins that move along an existing
field of cells. Here, we mathematically address the feasibility of gradients of
mRNAs and non-secreted proteins. We show that these gradients can arise in
growing tissues whereby cells dilute and transport their molecular content as
they divide and grow, a mechanism we termed 'cell lineage transport.' We provide 
an experimental test by unveiling a distal-to-proximal gradient of Hoxd13 in the 
vertebrate developing limb bud driven by cell lineage transport, corroborating
our model. Our study indicates that gradients of non-secreted molecules exhibit a
power-law profile and can arise for a wide range of biologically relevant
parameter values. Dilution and nonlinear growth confer robustness to the spatial 
gradient under changes in the cell cycle period, but at the expense of
sensitivity in the timing of gradient formation. We expect that gradient
formation driven by cell lineage transport will provide future insights into
understanding the coordination between growth and patterning during embryonic
development.

PMCID: PMC1682021
PMID: 17047664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Development. 2006 Sep;133(17):3419-28.

Differential regulation of gene expression in the digit forming area of the mouse
limb bud by SHH and gremlin 1/FGF-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal signalling.

Panman L(1), Galli A, Lagarde N, Michos O, Soete G, Zuniga A, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics, DKBW Centre for Biomedicine, University of Basel
Medical School, Mattenstrasse 28, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Spatially and temporally coordinated changes in gene expression are crucial to
orderly progression of embryogenesis. We combine mouse genetics with experimental
manipulation of signalling to analyze the kinetics by which the SHH morphogen and
the BMP antagonist gremlin 1 (GREM1) control gene expression in the digit-forming
mesenchyme of mouse limb buds. Although most mesenchymal cells respond rapidly to
SHH signalling, the transcriptional upregulation of specific SHH target signals
in the mesenchyme occurs with differential temporal kinetics and in a spatially
restricted fashion. In particular, the expression of the BMP antagonist Grem1 is 
always upregulated in mesenchymal cells located distal to the SHH source and acts
upstream of FGF signalling by the apical ectodermal ridge. GREM1/FGF-mediated
feedback signalling is, in turn, required to propagate SHH and establish the
presumptive digit expression domains of the Notch ligand jagged 1 (Jag1) and
5'Hoxd genes in the distal limb bud mesenchyme. Their establishment is
significantly delayed in Grem1-deficient limb buds and cannot be rescued by
specific restoration of SHH signalling in mutant limb buds. This shows that
GREM1/FGF feedback signalling is required for regulation of the temporal kinetics
of the mesenchymal response to SHH signalling. Finally, inhibition of SHH signal 
transduction at distinct time points reveals the differential temporal dependence
of Grem1, Jag1 and 5'Hoxd gene expression on SHH signalling. In particular, the
expression of Hoxd13 depends on SHH signal transduction significantly longer than
does Hoxd11 expression, revealing that the reverse co-linear establishment, but
not maintenance of their presumptive digit expression domains, depends on SHH
signalling.

PMID: 16908629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Am Podiatr Med Assoc. 2006 Jul-Aug;96(4):297-304.

Synpolydactyly of the foot in homozygotes.

Kuru I(1), Maralcan G, Yucel A, Aktepe F, Turkmen S, Solak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Afyon Kocatepe University School
of Medicine, Afyon, Turkey.

In 2002, we reinvestigated a large synpolydactyly kindred first described in
1995. It was found to have expanded with an increase in number of homozygous
offspring. These homozygotes had severe hypoplasia, with synpolydactyly of their 
hands and feet. We present the clinical, genetic, and surgical findings of this
deformity and the histologic findings of the removed bones of the heterozygous
and homozygous members. There were 125 affected individuals (113 heterozygotes
and 12 homozygotes) of 245 members of the past five generations. We identified
seven marriages in which both spouses were affected. Twelve offspring from these 
marriages had homozygote genetic patterns, hypoplastic synpolydactyly of the
hands, and a distinctive foot deformity, with a prominent great toe and
syndactylized hypoplastic minor toes. From clinical and surgical perspectives,
their hand and foot deformities were different from those of their parents. We
surgically treated both feet of four individuals with this deformity, which we
called "homozygote foot synpolydactyly." Clinically, the deformity consisted of a
supinated prominent great toe, hypoplastic and severely synpolydactylized minor
toes, and secondary problems. Radiographically, the bones were underdeveloped,
unshaped, and largely fused. Abundant cartilage covering the bones was observed
surgically and histologically. Genetically, analysis of HOXD13 identified a
27-base pair duplication with a homozygote pattern. The foot deformity of the
homozygotes was so distinctive and complicated that it should be considered a
separate foot synpolydactyly type--homozygote foot synpolydactyly.

PMID: 16868322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Blood. 2006 Aug 1;108(3):1030-6.

The Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase collaborates with NUP98-HOX fusions in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Palmqvist L(1), Argiropoulos B, Pineault N, Abramovich C, Sly LM, Krystal G, Wan 
A, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, 11th Floor, 675 West
10th Ave, Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 1L3.

In leukemogenesis, several genetic changes conferring a proliferative and/or
survival advantage to hematopoietic progenitor cells in addition to a block in
differentiation are required. Here, we demonstrate that overexpression of the
wild-type (wt) Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase collaborates with NUP98-HOX fusions 
(NUP98-HOXA10 and NUP98-HOXD13) to induce aggressive acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). We used a mouse transplantation model to show their synergism in
cotransduced bone marrow cells as well as in a cellular model of leukemic
progression. Furthermore, our data support the finding that Meis1 overexpression 
leads to marked elevation in Flt3 transcription and extend it to the context of
NUP98-HOX-induced leukemia. Together, these results support a multistep model
where the synergism between NUP98-HOX and wt-Flt3 is the result of the ability of
Flt3 to increase proliferation of myeloid progenitors blocked in differentiation 
by NUP98-HOX fusions and reveal a direct role for wt-Flt3 in the pathobiology of 
AML. Given the similarities in the leukemogenic role of native HOX and
NUP98-fused HOX genes, our results underscore the clinical significance of the
recurrent co-overexpression of wt-FLT3 and HOX in human leukemia and suggest that
specific FLT3 inhibitors could be useful in treatment of HOX-induced AML or acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).

PMID: 16861351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006 Jul;65(7):675-84.

Microarray analysis reveals differential gene expression patterns in tumors of
the pineal region.

Fèvre-Montange M(1), Champier J, Szathmari A, Wierinckx A, Mottolese C, Guyotat
J, Figarella-Branger D, Jouvet A, Lachuer J.

Author information: 
(1)University Claude-Bernard Lyon 1, Hôpital Neurologique, BP Lyon Montchat,
Lyon, France. montange@lyon.inserm.fr

Several types of tumors are known to originate from the pineal region, among them
pineal parenchymal tumors (PPTs) and papillary tumors of the pineal region
(PTPRs), probably derived from the subcommissural organ. As a result of their
rarity, their histologic diagnosis remains difficult. To identify molecular
markers, using CodeLink oligonucleotide arrays, gene expression was studied in 3 
PPTs (2 pineocytomas and one pineoblastoma), 2 PTPRs, and one chordoid glioma,
another rare tumor of the third ventricle. Because PTPR and chordoid glioma may
present ependymal differentiation, gene expression was also analyzed in 4
ependymomas. The gene patterns of the 3 PPTs fell in the same cluster. The
pineocytomas showed high expression of TPH, HIOMT, and genes related to
phototransduction in the retina (OPN4, RGS16, and CRB3), whereas the
pineoblastoma showed high expression of UBEC2, SOX4, TERT, TEP1, PRAME, CD24,
POU4F2, and HOXD13. Using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction on 13
PPTs, we demonstrated that PRAME, CD24, POU4F2, and HOXD13 might be candidates
for grading PPT with intermediate differentiation. PTPRs, classified with
chordoid glioma and separately from ependymomas, showed high expression of SPEDF,
KRT18, and genes encoding proteins reported to be expressed in the subcommissural
organ, namely ZFH4, RFX3, TTR, and CGRP. Our results highlight the usefulness of 
gene expression profiling for classify tumors of the pineal region and identify
genes with potential use as diagnostic markers.

PMID: 16825954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jun 28;Suppl 2:647-8.

[Hand-foot-genital syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Mitsubuchi H(1), Endo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kumamoto University.

PMID: 16817484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 15;297(2):493-507. Epub 2006 May 26.

A group 13 homeodomain is neither necessary nor sufficient for posterior
prevalence in the mouse limb.

Williams ME(1), Lehoczky JA, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

Posterior prevalence is the general property attributed to HOX proteins
describing the dominant effect of more posterior HOX proteins over the function
of anterior orthologs in common areas of expression. To explore the HOX group 13 
protein domains required for this property, we used the mouse Prx-1 promoter to
drive transgenic expression of Hox constructs throughout the entire limb bud
during development. This system allowed us to conclusively demonstrate a
hierarchy of Hox function in developing limbs. Furthermore, by substituting the
HOXD11 or HOXA9 homeodomain for that of HOXD13, we show that a HOXD13 homeodomain
is not necessary for posterior prevalence. Proximal expression of these chimeric 
proteins unexpectedly caused defects consistent with wild-type HOXD13 mediated
posterior prevalence. Moreover, group 13 non-homeodomain residues appear to
confer the property as proximal expression of HOXA9 containing the HOXD13
homeodomain did not result in limb reductions characteristic of HOXD13. These
data are most compatible with models of posterior prevalence based on
protein-protein interactions and support examination of the N-terminal
non-homeodomain regions of Hox group 13 proteins as necessary agents for
posterior prevalence.

PMID: 16806154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6080-6.

Silencing of Peroxiredoxin 2 and aberrant methylation of 33 CpG islands in
putative promoter regions in human malignant melanomas.

Furuta J(1), Nobeyama Y, Umebayashi Y, Otsuka F, Kikuchi K, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Tokyo, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands (CGI) is involved in silencing of
tumor suppressor genes and is also a potential cancer biomarker. Here, to
identify CGIs aberrantly methylated in human melanomas, we did a genome-wide
search using methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis. CGIs in 
putative promoter regions of 34 genes (ABHD9, BARHL1, CLIC5, CNNM1, COL2A1,
CPT1C, DDIT4L, DERL3, DHRS3, DPYS, EFEMP2, FAM62C, FAM78A, FLJ33790, GBX2, GPR10,
GPRASP1, HOXA9, HOXD11, HOXD12, HOXD13, p14ARF, PAX6, PRDX2, PTPRG, RASD1, RAX,
REC8L1, SLC27A3, TGFB2, TLX2, TMEM22, TMEM30B, and UNC5C) were found to be
methylated in at least 1 of 13 melanoma cell lines but not in two cultured normal
melanocytes. Among these genes, Peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2) was expressed in normal
melanocytes, and its expression was lost in melanomas with methylation. The loss 
of expression was restored by treatment of melanomas with a demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In surgical melanoma specimens, methylation of PRDX2 was 
detected in 3 of 36 (8%). Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis of PRDX2
showed that disappearance of immunoreactivity tends to associate with its
methylation. PRDX2 was recently reported to be a negative regulator of
platelet-derived growth factor signaling, and its silencing was suggested to be
involved in melanomas. On the other hand, 12 CGIs were methylated in >or=9 of the
13 melanoma cell lines and are considered as candidate melanoma biomarkers.

PMID: 16778180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Clin Genet. 2006 Jun;69(6):518-24.

Genetic heterogeneity of synpolydactyly: a novel locus SPD3 maps to chromosome
14q11.2-q12.

Malik S(1), Abbasi AA, Ansar M, Ahmad W, Koch MC, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany.

Syndactyly type II or synpolydactyly (SPD) is the second most frequent syndactyly
type and is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. The cardinal features of 
this malformation are the cutaneous or bony fusion of third and fourth fingers,
and fourth and fifth toes associated with additional digital elements within the 
web. It shows incomplete penetrance and high inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic 
variability. Two loci are known for SPD (MIM 186000, MIM 608180) associated with 
mutations in HOXD13 and FBLN1, respectively. Here, we report further genetic
heterogeneity for SDP. Employing a whole genomic screen, we demonstrate, in a
large Pakistani kindred, that the classical phenotype of SPD maps on a new locus 
at chromosome 14q11.2-q12. The highest LOD score (Z(max) = 4.06) was obtained
with microsatellite marker D14S264, and the multipoint LOD score reached a
maximum of 5.01. Haplotype analysis revealed that the disease interval is flanked
by microsatellite markers D14S283 and D14S1060, encompassing a physical distance 
of 10.72 Mb. We propose to allocate to this locus the symbol SPD3 (synpolydactyly
3), and to name the loci associated with HOXD13 or FBLN1 mutations SPD1 and SPD2,
respectively.

PMID: 16712704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Eur J Med Genet. 2006 Sep-Oct;49(5):396-401. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Clinical phenotype associated with homozygosity for a HOXD13 7-residue
polyalanine tract expansion.

Horsnell K(1), Ali M, Malik S, Wilson L, Hall C, Debeer P, Crow Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is an autosomal dominant malformation of the distal limbs
caused by mutations in the homeobox gene HOXD13 located on chromosome 2q31. We
detail the clinical findings in a consanguineous Pakistani family segregating a
HOXD13 7-residue polyalanine tract expansion. Three members of this pedigree were
heterozygotes with features typical of SPD. Two further members demonstrate a
more severe phenotype consistent with homozygosity for the familial mutation. We 
also report a child from a consanguineous Somali family homozygous for the same
molecular lesion. Characteristic changes include a complex central polydactyly in
the hands, abnormal modelling of the metacarpals and metatarsals, an increased
number of carpal bones with abnormal shapes, hypoplasia or absence of the fifth
digital rays in the feet, hypoplasia of the middle phalanges and abnormally long 
proximal phalanges in hands and feet. These cases illustrate the distinct
phenotype associated with homozygosity for a HOXD13 mutation and also highlight
the importance of considering homozygosity for a dominant mutation in
consanguineous pedigrees.

PMID: 16497573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Ulster Med J. 2006 Jan;75(1):23-31.

HOX genes: seductive science, mysterious mechanisms.

Lappin TR(1), Grier DG, Thompson A, Halliday HL.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology Research Group, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology,
Queen's University Belfast, Belfast City Hospital. t.lappin@qub.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Ulster Med J. 2006 May;75(2):135.

HOX genes are evolutionarily highly conserved. The HOX proteins which they encode
are master regulators of embryonic development and continue to be expressed
throughout postnatal life. The 39 human HOX genes are located in four clusters
(A-D) on different chromosomes at 7p15, 17q21 [corrected] 12q13, and 2q31
respectively and are assumed to have arisen by duplication and divergence from a 
primordial homeobox gene. Disorders of limb formation, such as hand-foot-genital 
syndrome, have been traced to mutations in HOXA13 and HOXD13. Evolutionary
conservation provides unlimited scope for experimental investigation of the
functional control of the Hox gene network which is providing important insights 
into human disease. Chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene, the human 
homologue of the Drosophila gene trithorax, create fusion genes which exhibit
gain of function and are associated with aggressive leukaemias in both adults and
children. To date 39 partner genes for MLL have been cloned from patients with
leukaemia. Models based on specific translocations of MLL and individual HOX
genes are now the subject of intense research aimed at understanding the
molecular programs involved, and ultimately the design of chemotherapeutic agents
for leukaemia. Investigation of the role of HOX genes in cancer has led to the
concept that oncology may recapitulate ontology, a challenging postulate for
experimentalists in view of the functional redundancy implicit in the HOX gene
network.

PMCID: PMC1891803
PMID: 16457401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Clin Genet. 2006 Jan;69(1):86-92.

Adams-Oliver syndrome: clinical description of a four-generation family and
exclusion of five candidate genes.

Verdyck P(1), Blaumeiser B, Holder-Espinasse M, Van Hul W, Wuyts W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University and University Hospital of Antwerp,
Antwerp, Belgium.

We present a Belgian Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) family with 10 affected
individuals over four generations, of which six were available for this study.
Clinical symptoms observed in these patients were very variable as previously
reported in other families and included large areas of alopecia on the vertex of 
the skull and serious limb reduction defects with agenesis of all toes of one
foot. To identify the disease-causing gene, we sequenced the MSX1, CART1, P63
(P73L), RUNX2, and HOXD13 genes in this family and nine previously reported
families, but no disease-causing mutations were found. Further investigation is
ongoing in these families in order to identify the genetic cause of AOS.

PMID: 16451141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Dec;22(6):653-6.

[Analysis of association between 5' HOXD gene and idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LL(1), Jin CL, Liu LY, Zhang X, Ji SJ, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in HOXD10, HOXD12 and
HOXD13 genes were chosen to investigate SNP and haplotypes distribution in
idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus nuclear pedigrees.
METHODS: Genotypes of 4 SNPs in 84 idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus
nuclear pedigrees were analyzed by restriction fragment length polymorphism and
DNA sequencing. Analysis of association between SNP locus and idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus was performed using ETDT software. Haplotypes and 
their frequencies in 84 nuclear pedigrees were established and analyzed by
TRANSMIT software.
RESULTS: rs847151 polymorphism was not detected; the rs847154 located in 5'
flanking sequence of HOXD12 gene and the rs13392701 located in exon 1 of HOXD13
gene were noted to have transmission disequilibrium in 84 nuclear pedigrees (P < 
0.05).
CONCLUSION: rs847154 located in 5' flanking sequence of HOXD12 gene and
rs13392701 located in exon 1 of HOXD13 gene are associated with idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus; HOXD12 andHOXD13 are important susceptible genes 
of idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus.

PMID: 16331564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 27;281(4):1992-9. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Hoxd13 and Hoxa13 directly control the expression of the EphA7 Ephrin tyrosine
kinase receptor in developing limbs.

Salsi V(1), Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41100, Italy.

Hoxa and Hoxd genes, related to the Drosophila Abd-B gene, display regionally
restricted expression patterns and are necessary for the formation of the limb
skeletal elements. Hox genes encode transcription factors, which are supposed to 
control the expression of a series of downstream target genes, whose nature has
remained largely elusive. Several genes were identified that are differentially
expressed in relation to Hox gene activity; few studies, however, explored their 
direct regulation by Hox proteins. Ephrin tyrosine kinase receptors and ephrins
have been proposed as Hox targets, and recently, evidence was gained for their
role in limb development. The expression of the EphA7 gene in developing limbs
was shown to correlate with the expression of Hoxa13 and Hoxd13; however, its
direct regulation by these genes has never been assessed. We have characterized
the EphA7 promoter region and show that it contains multiple binding sites for
paralog group 13 Hox proteins. We found that one of these sites is bound in vivo 
by HOXA13 and HOXD13 and by endogenous Hoxd13 in developing mouse limbs.
Moreover, we show that HOXD13 and HOXA13 activate transcription from the EphA7
promoter and that a mutation of the HOXA13/HOXD13 binding site was sufficient to 
abolish activation. Conversely, the HOXD13(147L) mutation, identified in patients
displaying a novel brachydactyly-polydactyly syndrome, does not bind to in vivo, 
and fails to transactivate the EphA7 promoter. These results establish that EphA7
is a direct downstream target of Hoxd13 and Hoxa13 during limb development, thus 
providing further insight into the regulatory networks that control limb
patterning.

PMID: 16314414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Blood. 2006 Mar 15;107(6):2540-3. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Notch1 mutations are important for leukemic transformation in murine models of
precursor-T leukemia/lymphoma.

Lin YW(1), Nichols RA, Letterio JJ, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 8901 Wisconsin Ave, Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

NOTCH1 is frequently mutated in human precursor T-cell lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma (pre-T LBL). In the current study, we found that 13 of 19 cell 
lines and 29 of 49 primary tumors from SCL/LMO1, OLIG2/LMO1, OLIG2, LMO1,
NUP98/HOXD13, and p27(-/-)/SMAD3(+/-) mice had Notch1 mutations in either the
heterodimerization (HD) or the glutamic acid/serine/threonine (PEST) domain but
not both. Thymocytes from clinically healthy SCL/LMO1 mice aged 5 weeks did not
have Notch1 mutations, whereas thymocytes from clinically healthy SCL/LMO1 mice
aged 8 to 12 weeks did have Notch1 mutations and formed tumors upon
transplantation into nude mice. Remarkably, all of the HD domain mutations that
we identified were single-base substitutions, whereas all of the PEST domain
mutations were insertions or deletions, half of which mapped to 1 of 2 mutational
"hot spots." Taken together, these findings indicate that Notch1 mutations are
very frequent events that are acquired relatively early in the process of
leukemic transformation and are important for leukemic cell growth.

PMCID: PMC1414627
PMID: 16282337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Genet Couns. 2005;16(3):229-38.

A simple method for characterising syndactyly in clinical practice.

Malik S(1), Ahmad W, Grzeschik KH, Koch MC.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Humangenetik, Klinikum der Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany. 
malik@staff.uni-marburg.de

Non-syndromic syndactyly is a heterogeneous group of limb malformations involving
webbing of fingers and/or toes. There are at least nine non-syndromic types
described in the literature. For the clinician and the genetic counsellor not
having gathered experience with this malformation, it is rather tedious to
identify the correct subtype for the patient's phenotype. We therefore present a 
protocol for clinical use, which visualises the malformation in a graphical way
and thereby simplifies typing. In addition, this protocol provides a simple
documentation system for reporting clinical data for new syndactyly families. It 
might encourage clinicians to report families that are still unclassifed and
thus, helping to extend and improve the existing classification system.

PMID: 16261692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Nov 1;138(4):328-39.

A 72-year-old Danish puzzle resolved--comparative analysis of phenotypes in
families with different-sized HOXD13 polyalanine expansions.

Kjaer KW(1), Hansen L, Eiberg H, Utkus A, Skovgaard LT, Leicht P, Opitz JM,
Tommerup N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for 
Functional Genome Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
klaus.kjaer@medgen.ku.dk

A phenotype-genotype correlation was previously described for carriers of
different sized of polyalanine expansions in HOXD13. We report on a detailed
comparison of 55 members (approximately 220 limbs) from 4 Danish families with
duplications of 21 or 27 bp, expanding the polyalanine repeat from 15 to 22 and
24 residues, respectively. Two of these were previously described by Danish
pioneers of human genetics, Tage Kemp and Oluf Thomsen. A clinical score was
assigned to each limb based on manifestations assumed to represent different
degrees of a duplication defect in hand rays 3-4 and foot rays 4-5. The length of
metacarpals and phalangeal bones in rays 1, 2, and 5 was measured on hand
radiographs and converted to Z-scores. The relative difference between
corresponding right and left bones and directional, total, and fluctuating
asymmetry was calculated for each individual. All of these parameters were
compared between carriers of the +9 alanine expansion, the +7 alanine expansion, 
and non-mutation carriers with affected parents from the two families. Upper limb
scores and the rate of abnormal bones (>2SD) were significantly higher in the
first group than in the others. The first metacarpal and the middle phalanx of
the little finger were significantly shorter, and the proximal phalanx of the
index finger was significantly longer in this group than in the others. An
increased level of total and fluctuating asymmetry was observed in long expansion
carriers. Thus, our data have added evidence to the phenotype-genotype
correlation previously reported, which was further extended to include lesser
involvement of bones in ray 1, 2, and 5.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 16222680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 8;33(14):4475-84. Print 2005.

Group 13 HOX proteins interact with the MH2 domain of R-Smads and modulate Smad
transcriptional activation functions independent of HOX DNA-binding capability.

Williams TM(1), Williams ME, Heaton JH, Gelehrter TD, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Interactions with co-factors provide a means by which HOX proteins exert
specificity. To identify candidate protein interactors of HOXA13, we created and 
screened an E11.5-E12.5, distal limb bud yeast two-hybrid prey library. Among the
interactors, we isolated the BMP-signaling effector Smad5, which interacted with 
the paralogous HOXD13 but not with HOXA11 or HOXA9, revealing unique interaction 
capabilities of the AbdB-like HOX proteins. Using deletion mutants, we determined
that the MH2 domain of Smad5 is necessary for HOXA13 interaction. This is the
first report demonstrating an interaction between HOX proteins and the MH2 domain
of Smad proteins. HOXA13 and HOXD13 also bind to other BMP and
TGF-beta/Activin-regulated Smad proteins including Smad1 and Smad2, but not
Smad4. Furthermore, HOXD13 could be co-immunoprecipitated with Smad1 from cells. 
Expression of HOXA13, HOXD13 or a HOXD13 homeodomain mutant (HOXD13(IQN>AAA))
antagonized TGF-beta-stimulated transcriptional activation of the
pAdtrack-3TP-Lux reporter vector in Mv1Lu cells as well as the
Smad3/Smad4-activated pTRS6-E1b promoter in Hep3B cells. Finally, using mammalian
one-hybrid assay, we show that transcriptional activation by a
GAL4/Smad3-C-terminus fusion protein is specifically inhibited by HOXA13. Our
results identify a new co-factor for HOX group 13 proteins and suggest that HOX
proteins may modulate Smad-mediated transcriptional activity through
protein-protein interactions without the requirement for HOX monomeric
DNA-binding capability.

PMCID: PMC1183491
PMID: 16087734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):533-44. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Function and regulation of Alx4 in limb development: complex genetic interactions
with Gli3 and Shh.

Kuijper S(1), Feitsma H, Sheth R, Korving J, Reijnen M, Meijlink F.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The role of the aristaless-related homeobox gene Alx4 in antero-posterior (AP-)
patterning of the developing vertebrate limb has remained somewhat elusive.
Polydactyly of Alx4 mutant mice is known to be accompanied by ectopic anterior
expression of genes like Shh, Fgf4 and 5'Hoxd. We reported previously that
polydactyly in Alx4 mutant mice requires SHH signaling, but we now show that in
early Alx4-/- limb buds the anterior ectopic expression of Fgf4 and Hoxd13, and
therefore disruption of AP-patterning, occurs independently of SHH signaling. To 
better understand how Alx4 functions in the pathways that regulate AP-patterning,
we also studied genomic regulatory sequences that are capable of directing
expression of a reporter gene in a pattern corresponding to endogenous Alx4
expression in anterior limb bud mesenchyme. We observed, as expected for
authentic Alx4 expression, expansion of reporter construct expression in a Shh-/-
background. Total lack of reporter expression in a Gli3-/- background confirms
the existence of Gli3-dependent and -independent Alx4 expression in the limb bud.
Apparently, these two modules of Alx4 expression are linked to dissimilar
functions.

PMID: 16039644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biochem. 2005 Jun;137(6):671-6.

Genitourinary functions of Hoxa13 and Hoxd13.

Scott V(1), Morgan EA, Stadler HS.

Author information: 
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, 3101 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR
97239, USA.

In the United States, Japan, United Kingdom, and Sweden, birth defects affecting 
the growth and development of the genitourinary (GU) regions are becoming
increasingly prevalent, with incidences ranging as high as 1 in 125 live births. 
To understand the basis for these malformations, scientists have begun to examine
the function of developmental genes in GU tissues. At the forefront of these
investigations are studies examining the role of the 5' HOX proteins during the
formation of the GU region. In this report we discuss what is known about HOXA13 
and HOXD13 function during GU development, highlighting some of the cellular and 
molecular mechanisms controlled by these proteins during the GU formation.
Finally, the translational benefits of identifying HOX target genes are
discussed; first to explain the prevalence of some GU defects as well as a
mechanism to facilitate their prevention in the birth population.

PMID: 16002988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Med Genet. 2006 Feb;43(2):111-8. Epub 2005 Jun 24.

Breakpoints around the HOXD cluster result in various limb malformations.

Dlugaszewska B(1), Silahtaroglu A, Menzel C, Kübart S, Cohen M, Mundlos S, Tümer 
Z, Kjaer K, Friedrich U, Ropers HH, Tommerup N, Neitzel H, Kalscheuer VM.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, D-14195 Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Characterisation of disease associated balanced chromosome
rearrangements is a promising starting point in the search for candidate genes
and regulatory elements.
METHODS: We have identified and investigated three patients with limb
abnormalities and breakpoints involving chromosome 2q31. Patient 1 with severe
brachydactyly and syndactyly, mental retardation, hypoplasia of the cerebellum,
scoliosis, and ectopic anus, carries a balanced t(2;10)(q31.1;q26.3)
translocation. Patient 2, with translocation t(2;10)(q31.1;q23.33), has aplasia
of the ulna, shortening of the radius, finger anomalies, and scoliosis. Patient 3
carries a pericentric inversion of chromosome 2, inv(2)(p15q31). Her phenotype is
characterised by bilateral aplasia of the fibula and the radius, bilateral
hypoplasia of the ulna, unossified carpal bones, and hypoplasia and dislocation
of both tibiae.
RESULTS: By fluorescence in situ hybridisation, we have mapped the breakpoints to
intervals of approximately 170 kb or less. None of the three 2q31 breakpoints,
which all mapped close to the HOXD cluster, disrupted any known genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Hoxd gene expression in the mouse is regulated by cis-acting DNA
elements acting over distances of several hundred kilobases. Moreover, Hoxd genes
play an established role in bone development. It is therefore very likely that
the three rearrangements disturb normal HOXD gene regulation by position effects.

PMCID: PMC2564623
PMID: 15980115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Jun;1044:109-16.

Hox genes: from leukemia to hematopoietic stem cell expansion.

Abramovich C(1), Pineault N, Ohta H, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, 675 West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada.

Hox genes are clearly implicated in leukemia; however, neither the specificity of
the leukemogenic potential among Hox genes of different paralog groups nor the
role of the homeodomain is clear. We tested the leukemogenic potential of various
NUP98-Hox fusion genes alone and with MEIS1. All genes tested had a significant
overlapping effect in bone marrow cells in vitro. However, not all formed strong 
leukemogenic NUP98 fusion genes; but together with overexpression of MEIS1, all
induced myeloid leukemia. This phenomenon was also seen with NUP98 fusions
containing only the homeodomain of the corresponding Hox protein. We then
exploited the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 and NUP98-HOXA10 to
establish preleukemic myeloid lines composed of early myeloid progenitors with
extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity, short-term myeloid repopulating
activity, and low propensity for spontaneous leukemic conversion. We also showed 
that MEIS1 can efficiently induce their conversion to leukemic stem cells, thus
providing a novel model for the study of leukemic progression. In contrast to the
leukemogenic effect of most of the Hox genes tested, HOXB4 has the ability to
increase the self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells without disrupting normal
differentiation. On the basis of the discovery that the leukemogenic gene HOXA9
can also expand hematopoietic stem cells, we compared the ability of NUP98-Hox
fusions to that of HOXB4 to trigger HSC expansion in vitro. Our preliminary
results indicate that the expanding potential of HOXB4 is retained and even
augmented by fusion to NUP98. Moreover, even greater expansion may be possible
using Abd-B-like Hox fusions genes.

PMID: 15958703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Jun;22(3):277-80.

Mutation analysis of HOXD13 gene in a Chinese pedigree with synpolydactyly.

Dai L(1), Heng ZC, Zhu J, Cai R, Mao M, Wang H, Lin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Birth Defects Monitoring, West China Second Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical features and to identify homeobox D13 (HOXD13)
gene mutation of the affected individuals in a Chinese synpolydactyly (SPD)
kindred.
METHODS: Clinical data and peripheral blood samples of SPD family members were
obtained through field investigation. For every member of this pedigreeìthe
fragment containing mutational hot spots of HOXD13 was amplified by PCR for
mutation screening. To examine whether there is any other mutation within coding 
sequence of HOXD13, exon 1 and exon 2 of HOXD13 were also amplified by PCR. All
the amplified fragments were electrophoresed on 2% agarose gels and then the
mutant fragments were electrophoresed on 5% polyacrylamide gels to be separated. 
Purified PCR products of normal and selected mutant alleles were directly
sequenced.
RESULTS: Comparing the HOXD13 coding sequence of the affected individuals with
HOXD13 sequence in the GenBank and with that of the unaffected, an inserted
segment coding 8 alanine residues within HOXD13 was found segregating with the
disorder. This mutation is also termed polyalanine expansion. The 8-alanine
expansion can be interpreted as a reduplication of normal alanines 5-12.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that synpolydactyly in this kindred may be caused
by polyalanine expansion in HOXD13.

PMID: 15952114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jun 1;135(2):211-3.

Sensorineural deafness, abnormal genitalia, synostosis of metacarpals and
metatarsals 4 and 5, and mental retardation: description of a second patient and 
exclusion of HOXD13.

Mendioroz J(1), Fernández-Toral J, Suárez E, López-Grondona F, Kjaer KW, Bermejo 
E, Martínez-Frías ML.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas (CIAC), Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Madrid, Spain.
jacobo.mendioroz@isciii.es

In 1988 Pfeiffer and Kapferer reported on a patient with sensorineural deafness, 
psychomotor delay, hypospadias, cerebral manifestations, and bilateral synostosis
of the 4th and 5th metacarpals and metatarsals. Synostosis of the 4th and 5th
metacarpals and metatarsals is a very rare defect that has been described as an
isolated Mendelian defect, as part of multiple congenital anomaly (MCA) patterns,
and in different syndromes. Among a total of 2,023,155 liveborn infants in the
Spanish Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations (ECEMC), we observed only
two cases with this type of metacarpal fusion, for a frequency of 1/1,011,577.
One had the isolated defect, and the other one that we are describing here, had
an MCA pattern similar to that described by Pfeiffer and Kapferer [1988]. We
tested HOXD13 but did not find any mutations in exons and intron-exon boundaries.
To our knowledge this case is the second one reported with this syndrome.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15887301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 May 15;304(3):198-205.

Hox genes, digit identities and the theropod/bird transition.

Galis F(1), Kundrát M, Metz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.
galis@rulsfb.leidenuniv.nl

Comment in
    J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 May 15;304(3):206-19.

Comment on
    J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 Jan 15;304(1):86-90.

Vargas and Fallon (2005. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol) 304B:86-90) propose that Hox
gene expression patterns indicate that the most anterior digit in bird wings is
homologous to digit 1 rather than to digit 2 in other amniotes. This
interpretation is based on the presence of Hoxd13 expression in combination with 
the absence of Hoxd12 expression in the second digit condensation from which this
digit develops (the first condensation is transiently present). This is a pattern
that is similar to that in the developing digit 1 of the chicken foot and the
mouse hand and foot. They have tested this new hypothesis by analysing Hoxd12 and
Hoxd13 expression patterns in two polydactylous chicken mutants, Silkie and
talpid2. They conclude that the data support the notion that the most anterior
remaining digit of the bird wing is homologous to digit 1 in other amniotes
either in a standard phylogenetic sense, or alternatively in a (limited)
developmental sense in agreement with the Frameshift Hypothesis of Wagner and
Gautier (1999, i.e., that the developmental pathway is homologous to the one that
leads to a digit 1 identity in other amniotes, although it occurs in the second
instead of the first digit condensation). We argue that the Hoxd12 and Hoxd13
expression patterns found for these and other limb mutants do not allow
distinguishing between the hypothesis of Vargas and Fallon (2005. J Exp Zool (Mol
Dev Evol) 304B:86-90) and the alternative one, i.e., the most anterior digit in
bird wings is homologous to digit 2 in other amniotes, in a phylogenetic or
developmental sense. Therefore, at the moment the data on limb mutants does not
present a challenge to the hypothesis, based on other developmental data
(Holmgren, 1955. Acta Zool 36:243-328; Hinchliffe, 1984. In: Hecht M, Ostrom JH, 
Viohl G, Wellnhofer P, editors. The beginnings of birds. Eichstätt: Freunde des
Jura-Museum. p 141-147; Burke and Feduccia, 1997. Science 278:666-668; Kundrát et
al., 2002. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol) 294B:151-159; Larsson and Wagner, 2002. J
Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol) 294B:146-151; Feduccia and Nowicki, 2002.
Naturwissenschaften 89:391-393), that the digits of bird wings are homologous to 
digits 2,3,4 in amniotes. We recommend further testing of the hypothesis by
comparing Hoxd expression patterns in different taxa.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15880773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 May 15;304(3):206-19.

The digits of the wing of birds are 1, 2, and 3. A review.

Vargas AO(1), Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Anatomía y Biología del Desarrollo, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Chile, Independencia 1027, Casilla 70.079-Santiago 7, Santiago,
Chile. aovargas@med.uchile.cl

Comment on
    J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 May 15;304(3):198-205.

Fossil evidence documenting the evolutionary transition from theropod dinosaurs
to birds indicates unambiguously that the digits of the wing of birds are digits 
1, 2, and 3. However, some embryological evidence suggests that these digits are 
2, 3, and 4. This apparent lack of correspondence has been described as the
greatest challenge to the widely accepted theropod-bird link (Zhou 2004.
Naturwissenschaften 91:455-471). Here we review the pertinent literature
regarding the debate on the origin of birds and wing digital identity and the
evidence in favor of a 1, 2, 3 identity of the wing digits. Recent molecular
evidence shows that the expression of Hoxd12 and Hoxd13 in the developing wing
supports the theropod-bird link. In the chicken foot and in the mouse hand and
foot, digit 1 is the only digit to combine the expression of Hoxd13 with the
absence of expression of Hoxd12. The same is observed in the anterior digit of
the wing, suggesting it is a digit 1, as expected for a theropod. Nevertheless,
Galis et al. (2005. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol) in press), argue that Hoxd12 and
Hoxd13 expression patterns in mutant limbs do not allow distinguishing the most
anterior digit in the bird wing from digit 2. They also argue that constraints to
the evolution of limb development support the 2, 3, 4 identity of the wing
digits. However, the case put forward by Galis et al. is biased and flawed with
regard to interpretation of mutant limbs, developmental mechanisms, stages
observed, and the description of the evolutionary variation of limb development. 
Importantly, Galis et al. do not present evidence from wild-type limbs that
counters the conclusions of Vargas and Fallon (2005. J Exp Zool (Mol Dev Evol)
304B(1):85-89), and fail to provide molecular evidence to specifically support
the hypothesis that the wing digits are 2, 3, and 4. The expression of Hoxd12 and
Hoxd13 in the developing wing is consistent with the hypothesis that birds are
living dinosaurs; this view can lead to a greater understanding of the actual
limits to the evolutionary variation of limb development.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15880771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 May 15;135(1):21-7.

Split hand malformation, hypospadias, microphthalmia, distinctive face and short 
stature in two brothers suggest a new syndrome.

García-Ortiz JE(1), Banda-Espinoza F, Zenteno JC, Galván-Uriarte LM, Ruiz-Flores 
P, García-Cruz D.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunobiología Molecular, CIB, Facultad de Medicina
Universidad Autónoma de Coahuila, Torreón, Coahuila, México. egarcia@cucs.udg.mx

Split hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a genetically heterogeneous limb
malformation that may be isolated or associated with other malformations. More
than 50 recognizable entities with SHFM have been described and at least 5 mapped
genetic loci have been implicated. Two brothers with intrauterine growth
retardation, short stature, distinctive face, microphthalmia, genital anomalies, 
and SHFM are described. Molecular analyses of TP63, HOXA13, and HOXD13 genes were
normal. We propose this pattern to be a newly recognized SHFM syndrome.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15809993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jun;233(2):288-300.

Studies on epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in vertebrate limb
patterning.

Omi M(1), Fisher M, Maihle NJ, Dealy CN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Limb and Skeletal Development, Department of BioStructure and
Function, School of Dental Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, Connecticut 06030, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) regulates multiple patterning events 
in Drosophila limb development, but its role in vertebrate limb morphogenesis has
received little attention. The EGFR and several of its ligands are expressed in
developing vertebrate limbs in manners consistent with potential patterning
roles. To gain insight into functions of EGFR signaling in vertebrate limb
development, we expressed a constitutively active EGFR in developing chick limbs 
in ovo. Expression of activated EGFR causes pre- and postaxial polydactyly,
including mirror-image-type digit duplication, likely due to induction of ectopic
expression and/or modulation of genes involved in anterior-posterior (AP)
patterning such as Sonic hedgehog (Shh), dHand, Patched (Ptc), Gli3, Hoxd13,
Hoxd11, bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Bmp2), Gremlin, and FGF4. Activation of
EGFR signaling dorsalizes the limb and alters expression of the dorsal-ventral
(DV) patterning genes Wnt7a, Lmx, and En1. Ectopic and/or extended FGF8
expressing apical ectodermal ridges (AERs) are also seen. Interdigital regression
is inhibited and the digits fail to separate, leading to syndactyly, likely due
to antiapoptotic and pro-proliferative effects of activated EGFR signaling on
limb mesoderm, and/or attenuation of interdigital Bmp4 expression. These findings
suggest potential roles for EGFR signaling in AP and DV patterning, AER
formation, and cell survival during limb morphogenesis.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 15778992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Blood. 2005 Jul 1;106(1):287-95. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

NUP98-HOXD13 transgenic mice develop a highly penetrant, severe myelodysplastic
syndrome that progresses to acute leukemia.

Lin YW(1), Slape C, Zhang Z, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20889, USA.

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) are a group of clonal hematopoietic
stem-cell disorders characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis and dysplasia. A
wide spectrum of genetic aberrations has been associated with MDS, including
chromosomal translocations involving the NUP98 gene. Using a NUP98-HOXD13 fusion 
gene, we have developed a mouse model that faithfully recapitulates all of the
key features of MDS, including peripheral blood cytopenias, bone marrow
dysplasia, and apoptosis, and transformation to acute leukemia. The MDS that
develops in NUP98-HOXD13 transgenic mice is uniformly fatal. Within 14 months,
all of the mice died of either leukemic transformation or severe anemia and
leucopenia as a result of progressive MDS. The NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene inhibits 
megakaryocytic differentiation and increases apoptosis in the bone marrow,
suggesting a mechanism leading to ineffective hematopoiesis in the presence of a 
hypercellular bone marrow. These mice provide an accurate preclinical model that 
can be used for the evaluation of MDS therapy and biology.

PMCID: PMC1201424
PMID: 15755899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Leukemia. 2005 Apr;19(4):636-43.

Transplantable cell lines generated with NUP98-Hox fusion genes undergo leukemic 
progression by Meis1 independent of its binding to DNA.

Pineault N(1), Abramovich C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

Hox genes have been identified in chromosomal translocations involving the
nucleoporin gene NUP98. Though the resulting chimeric proteins directly
participate in the development of leukemia, the long latency and monoclonal
nature of the disease support the requirement for secondary mutation(s), such as 
those leading to overexpression of Meis1. Models to identify such events and to
study leukemic progression are rare and labor intensive. Herein, we took
advantage of the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 or NUP98-HOXA10 to
establish preleukemic myeloid lines from bone marrow cells that faithfully
replicate the first step of Hox-induced leukemogenesis. These lines contain early
granulomonocytic progenitors with extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity,
short-term myeloid repopulating activity and low propensity for spontaneous
leukemic conversion. We exploit such lines to show that Meis1 efficiently induces
their leukemic progression and demonstrate a high frequency of preleukemic cells 
in the cultures. Furthermore, we document that the leukemogenic potential of
Meis1 is independent of its direct binding to DNA and likely reflects its ability
to increase the repopulating capacity of the preleukemic cells by increasing
their self-renewal/proliferative capacity. The availability of lines with
repopulating potential and capacity for leukemic conversion should open new
avenues for understanding progression of Hox-mediated acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 15744344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):462-80.

Candidate downstream regulated genes of HOX group 13 transcription factors with
and without monomeric DNA binding capability.

Williams TM(1), Williams ME, Kuick R, Misek D, McDonagh K, Hanash S, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0618, USA.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that regulate the morphogenesis of
developing embryos. In mammals, knowledge of the genetic pathways, including the 
possible direct or indirect targets, regulated by HOX proteins is extremely
limited. To identify the downstream genes regulated by posterior HOX proteins, we
expressed HOXA13 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking paralog group 13
expression using a bicistronic HOXA13/EGFP retroviral vector. Microarray analysis
identified 68 genes with significant, reproducible RNA expression changes (50
activated; 18 repressed) in stable HOXA13-expressing cells. Genes with the GO
annotation terms "extracellular matrix" and "basement membrane" were greatly
overrepresented, and several were shown to be regulated by HOX proteins in other 
studies. Among the genes strongly activated by HOXA13 were Enpp2, a bifunctional 
enzyme known to modulate tumor and normal cell motility and which is expressed in
precartilaginous condensations; Fhl1, a transcription factor implicated in muscle
cell differentiation and development; and M32486, a putative integral membrane
molecule expressed in the female reproductive tract. Expression differences in
the HOXA13-expressing cells were confirmed for selected downstream genes using
semi-quantitative RT-PCR, and in vivo coexpression with Hoxa13 in the limb
interdigital mesenchyme was demonstrated for many. For two candidates, Igfbp4 and
Fstl, interdigital limb bud expression was reduced in Hoxa13 mutants. To explore 
whether paralogous and nonparalogous HOX proteins could regulate the same genes, 
we created new HOX cell lines and examined the expression of selected genes
identified by the HOXA13 screen. HOXD13 similarly activated/repressed 6 tested
candidates, demonstrating that multiple downstream genetic pathways may be
regulated by paralog HOX proteins. In contrast, HOXA9 was only able to repress
expression of some gene targets. A HOXD13 mutant, HOXD13(IQN >)(AAA), incapable
of monomeric DNA-binding, activated the expression of 5 HOXA13-upregulated genes;
but was incapable of repressing the expression of Ngef and Casp8ap2. Our results 
suggest that HOX protein-protein interactions without direct HOX DNA-binding may 
play a larger role in HOX transcriptional regulation than generally assumed, and 
DNA-binding appears critical for repression.

PMID: 15733672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Evol Dev. 2005 Mar-Apr;7(2):130-41.

Hoxd13 expression in the developing limbs of the short-tailed fruit bat, Carollia
perspicillata.

Chen CH(1), Cretekos CJ, Rasweiler JJ 4th, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Bat forelimbs are highly specialized for sustained flight, providing a unique
model to explore the genetic programs that regulate vertebrate limb diversity.
Hoxd9-13 genes are important regulators of stylopodium, zeugopodium, and
autopodium development and thus evolutionary changes in their expression profiles
and biochemical activities may contribute to divergent limb morphologies in
vertebrates. We have isolated the genomic region that includes Hoxd12 and Hoxd13 
from Carollia perspicillata, the short-tailed fruit bat. The bat Hoxd13 gene
encodes a protein that shares 95% identity with human and mouse HOXD13. The
expression pattern of bat Hoxd13 mRNA during limb development was compared with
that of mouse. In bat and mouse hindlimbs, the expression patterns of Hoxd13 are 
relatively similar. However, although the forelimb Hoxd13 expression patterns in 
both organisms during early limb bud stages are similar, at later stages they
diverge; the anterior expression boundary of bat Hoxd13 is posterior-shifted
relative to the mouse. These findings, compared with the Hoxd13 expression
profiles of other vertebrates, suggest that divergent Hoxd13 expression patterns 
may contribute to limb morphological variation.

PMID: 15733311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Feb;22(1):5-9.

[HOXD13 polyalanine tract expansion in synpolydactyly: mutation detection and
prenatal diagnosis in a large Chinese family].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao XL(1), Meng JP, Sun M, Ao Y, Wu AH, Lo HY, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and National Key Laboratory of Medical
Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100005 PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Synpolydactyly (SPD, MIM 186000), also known as syndactyly type II, is
a dominantly inherited limb malformation with incomplete penetrance and variable 
expressivity. Polyalanine tract expansion in HOXD13 has been shown to be the
disease-causing mutation in SPD. The present study was designed to identify
mutation in HOXD13 and to provide prenatal diagnosis, in a large Chinese SPD
family consisting of 54 individuals.
METHODS: The proband and 4 other affected individuals in the family were
evaluated physically and radiologically to ascertain the SPD phenotype. Genomic
DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples obtained from 18 family members
(9 affected and 9 unaffected), and from amniotic fluid and chorionic villus
samples obtained from the proband during her two consecutive pregnancies. With
the use of a pair of specific primers, a fragment of 161bp was amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to cover the imperfect GCN triplet repeat
sequence in exon 1 of HOXD13 encoding the 15-residue polyalanine tract. The PCR
products were detected by agarose gel electrophoresis, and sequenced after
cloning into pMD18T vector. To confirm prenatal diagnosis, haplotype analysis was
also performed by allele-typing three microsatellite markers, including the
intronic CA repeats in HOXD13.
RESULTS: Digital and radiographic findings indicated a typical SPD phenotype in
the family. These included 3/4 finger syndactyly and 4/5 toe syndactyly with an
extra digit in the syndactylous web. Unilateral finger syndactyly in the proband,
unilateral toe syndactyly in 2 individuals, bilateral brachydactyly of the fifth 
toes in 1 individual, and clinodactyly of the fifth fingers in 4 individuals were
also observed, indicating variable expressivity. Gel electrophoresis of the PCR
products showed an additional longer fragment in all 9 affected individuals but
not in the unaffected ones. Sequence analysis of the longer fragment revealed a
9-alanine expansion. The expansion was detectable in DNA from the amniotic fluid 
and chorionic villus samples. Furthermore, haplotype analysis ruled out potential
contamination of the maternal DNA. These suggested that the two fetuses carried
the same polyalanine expansion.
CONCLUSION: HOXD13 polyalanine expansion was detected in a large Chinese family
with SPD and prenatal diagnosis of two affected fetuses was achieved. This is the
first report on prenatal diagnosis of SPD by detecting the HOXD13 polyalanine
expansion in the Han population of the Chinese mainland.

PMID: 15696469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2004 Nov;79(6):719-26.

[Expression of mRNA for HOX gene in human breast cancer and non-cancerous
tissues].

[Article in Japanese]

Makiyama K.

PMID: 15675302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Genet Couns. 2004;15(4):421-8.

Brachydactyly type E in two sibs with increased bone density and mental
retardation. A new autosomal recessive syndrome?

Stoll C(1), Alembik Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Faculte de Medecine, 67085 Strasbourg,
France. Claude.Stoll@medecine.u-strasbg.fr

Brachydactyly type E in two sibs with increased bone density and mental
retardation. A new autosomal recessive syndrome?: We report on two sibs, a boy
and a girl, with syndromic brachydactyly type E. Parents were first cousins.
Facial dysmorphia was characterized by a flat occiput, a large forehead,
hypertelorism, a long triangular nose, an everted lower lip, downslanting
palpebral fissures and strabismus. They had marked shortening of the third,
fourth and fifth fingers and of the third, fourth, and fifth toes. IQ was 16 in
the boy, 63 in the girl. In both sibs ophtalmologic examination showed
strabismus, absence of cataract and normal fundus and radiological findings
disclosed increased bone density involving the skull, the vertebrae and the
corticalis of the long bones. Neither ectopic calcifications, nor exostosic, nor 
osteomalacia, and nor osteotis fibrosa cystica were present. Investigations
revealed that plasma calcium, phosphate, vitamine D, parathyroid hormone (PTH),
response to exogenous PTH, and Gs activity were normal as well as renal and
thyroid function. Molecular genetic studies failed to identify mutations in the
GNAS 1 gene, in the PTH receptor gene and in the HOX D13 gene. Analysis of 2q
showed that there was no deletion 2q37. Other known syndromes with brachydactyly 
type E and mental retardation were excluded. In conclusion we suggest that these 
two sibs with a combination of brachydactyly, mental retardation and increased
bone density have a specific autosomal recessive syndrome.

PMID: 15658617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Science. 2005 Jan 14;307(5707):194.

Developmental biology. Bird wings really are like dinosaurs' hands.

Pennisi E.

PMID: 15653478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Pathol. 2005 Jan;205(2):154-71.

The pathophysiology of HOX genes and their role in cancer.

Grier DG(1), Thompson A, Kwasniewska A, McGonigle GJ, Halliday HL, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, Queen's University, Belfast, Grosvenor Road,
Belfast BT12 6BA, UK.

The HOM-C clustered prototype homeobox genes of Drosophila, and their
counterparts, the HOX genes in humans, are highly conserved at the genomic level.
These master regulators of development continue to be expressed throughout
adulthood in various tissues and organs. The physiological and
patho-physiological functions of this network of genes are being avidly pursued
within the scientific community, but defined roles for them remain elusive. The
order of expression of HOX genes within a cluster is co-ordinated during
development, so that the 3' genes are expressed more anteriorly and earlier than 
the 5' genes. Mutations in HOXA13 and HOXD13 are associated with disorders of
limb formation such as hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS), synpolydactyly (SPD),
and brachydactyly. Haematopoietic progenitors express HOX genes in a pattern
characteristic of the lineage and stage of differentiation of the cells. In
leukaemia, dysregulated HOX gene expression can occur due to chromosomal
translocations involving upstream regulators such as the MLL gene, or the fusion 
of a HOX gene to another gene such as the nucleoporin, NUP98. Recent
investigations of HOX gene expression in leukaemia are providing important
insights into disease classification and prediction of clinical outcome. Whereas 
the oncogenic potential of certain HOX genes in leukaemia has already been
defined, their role in other neoplasms is currently being studied. Progress has
been hampered by the experimental approach used in many studies in which the
expression of small subsets of HOX genes was analysed, and complicated by the
functional redundancy implicit in the HOX gene system. Attempts to elucidate the 
function of HOX genes in malignant transformation will be enhanced by a better
understanding of their upstream regulators and downstream target genes.

PMID: 15643670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Yi Chuan. 2004 May;26(3):387-93.

[Progress on polydactyly character of vertebrate].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang YQ(1), Deng XM, Li N, Qiu XP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key National Laboratory of Biotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100 094, China. hyanqun@yahoo.com.cn

Polydactyly is a common abnormal limb phenotype in vertebrate and there is
similar limb phenotype among different species. Research shows that polydactyly
has a similar development mechanism, and this kind of polydactyly character seems
to be controlled by homologous genes among species. The latest research results
on human and mouse further shows that PPD should be caused by the disruption of a
long range cis-acting regulator for Shh within Lmbr1 intron. Here the development
mechanism and related genes controlling polydactyly character of vertebrate are
reviewed.

PMID: 15640026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Dev Biol. 2005 Jan 15;277(2):457-71.

Range of HOX/TALE superclass associations and protein domain requirements for
HOXA13:MEIS interaction.

Williams TM(1), Williams ME, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Med. Sci. II 4811, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0618, USA.

AbdB-like HOX proteins form DNA-binding complexes with the TALE superclass
proteins MEIS1A and MEIS1B, and trimeric complexes have been identified in
nuclear extracts that include a second TALE protein, PBX. Thus, soluble
DNA-independent protein-protein complexes exist in mammals. The extent of
HOX/TALE superclass interactions, protein structural requirements, and sites of
in vivo cooperative interaction have not been fully explored. We show that Hoxa13
and Hoxd13 expression does not overlap with that of Meis1-3 in the developing
limb; however, coexpression occurs in the developing male and female reproductive
tracts (FRTs). We demonstrate that both HOXA13 and HOXD13 associate with MEIS1B
in mammalian and yeast cells, and that HOXA13 can interact with all MEIS proteins
but not more diverged TALE superclass members. In addition, the C-terminal
domains (CTDs) of MEIS1A (18 amino acids) and MEIS1B (93 amino acids) are
necessary for HOXA13 interaction; for MEIS1B, this domain was also sufficient. We
also show by yeast two-hybrid assay that MEIS proteins can interact with anterior
HOX proteins, but for some, additional N-terminal MEIS sequences are required for
interaction. Using deletion mutants of HOXA13 and HOXD13, we provide evidence for
multiple HOX peptide domains interacting with MEIS proteins. These data suggest
that HOX:MEIS interactions may extend to non-AbdB-like HOX proteins in solution
and that differences may exist in the MEIS peptide domains utilized by different 
HOX groups. Finally, the capability of multiple HOX domains to interact with MEIS
C-terminal sequences implies greater complexity of the HOX:MEIS protein-protein
interactions and a larger role for variation of HOX amino-terminal sequences in
specificity of function.

PMID: 15617687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 Jan 15;304(1):86-90.

Birds have dinosaur wings: The molecular evidence.

Vargas AO(1), Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Morfología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile,
Independencia 1027, Casilla 70.079 -Santiago 7, Santiago, Chile.
aovargas@med.uchile.cl

Comment in
    J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 May 15;304(3):198-205.

Within developmental biology, the digits of the wing of birds are considered on
embryological grounds to be digits 2, 3 and 4. In contrast, within paleontology, 
wing digits are named 1, 2, 3 as a result of phylogenetic analysis of fossil taxa
indicating that birds descended from theropod dinosaurs that had lost digits 4
and 5. It has been argued that the development of the wing does not support the
conclusion that birds are theropods, and that birds must have descended from
ancestors that had lost digits 1 and 5. Here we use highly conserved gene
expression patterns in the developing limbs of mouse and chicken, including the
chicken talpid(2)mutant and polydactylous Silkie breed (Silkie mutant), to aid
the assessment of digital identity in the wing. Digit 1 in developing limbs does 
not express Hoxd12, but expresses Hoxd13. All other digits express both Hoxd12and
Hoxd13. We found this signature expression pattern identifies the anteriormost
digit of the wing as digit 1, in accordance with the hypothesis these digits are 
1, 2 and 3, as in theropod dinosaurs. Our evidence contradicts the long-standing 
argument that the development of the wing does not support the hypothesis that
birds are living dinosaurs.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15515040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Evol Dev. 2004 Nov-Dec;6(6):423-30.

Conserved expression domains for genes upstream and within the HoxA and HoxD
clusters suggests a long-range enhancer existed before cluster duplication.

Lehoczky JA(1), Williams ME, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Division of Genetics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The posterior HoxA and HoxD genes are essential in appendicular development.
Studies have demonstrated that a "distal limb enhancer," remotely located
upstream of the HoxD complex, is required to drive embryonic autopod expression
of the posterior Hox genes as well as the two additional non-Hox genes in the
region: Evx2 and Lnp. Our work demonstrates a similar mode of regulation for
Hoxa13 and four upstream genes: Evx1, Hibadh, Tax1bp, and Jaz1. These genes all
show embryonic (E11.5-E13.5) distal limb and genital bud expression, suggesting
the existence of a nearby enhancer influencing the expression of a domain of
genes. Comparative sequence analysis between homologous human and mouse genomic
sequence upstream of Hoxa13 revealed a remote 2.25-kb conserved noncoding
sequence (mmA13CNS) within the fourth intron of the Hibadh gene. mmA13CNS shares 
a common 131-bp core identity within a conserved noncoding sequence upstream of
Hoxd13, which is located within the previously identified distal limb enhancer
critical region. To test the function of this conserved sequence, we created
mmA13CNS-Hsp86-lacZ transgenic mice. mmA13CNS directed a wide range of tissue
expression, including the central nervous system, developing olfactory tissue,
limb, and genital bud. Limb and genital bud expression directed by mmA13CNS is
not identical to the patterns exhibited by Hoxa13/Evx1/Hibadh/Tax1bp1/Jaz1,
suggesting that mmA13CNS is not sufficient to fully recapitulate their expression
in those tissues. The Evx1- and Evx2-like central nervous system expression
observed in these mice suggests that the long-range regulatory element(s) for the
Hox cluster existed before the cluster duplication.

PMID: 15509224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Dec;41(4):339-52.

Analysis of translocations that involve the NUP98 gene in patients with 11p15
chromosomal rearrangements.

Kobzev YN(1), Martinez-Climent J, Lee S, Chen J, Rowley JD.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Biological Sciences
Division, University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The NUP98 gene has been reported to be fused with at least 15 partner genes in
leukemias with 11p15 translocations. We report the results of screening of cases 
with cytogenetically documented rearrangements of 11p15 and the subsequent
identification of involvement of NUP98 and its partner genes. We identified 49
samples from 46 hematology patients with 11p15 (including a few with 11p14)
abnormalities, and using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we found that
NUP98 was disrupted in 7 cases. With the use of gene-specific FISH probes, in 6
cases, we identified the partner genes, which were PRRX1 (PMX1; in 2 cases),
HOXD13, RAP1GDS1, HOXC13, and TOP1. In the 3 cases for which RNA was available,
RT-PCR was performed, which confirmed the FISH results and identified the
location of the breakpoints in patient cDNA. Our data confirm the previous
findings that NUP98 is a recurrent target in various types of leukemia.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15390187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Oct 15;13(20):2351-9. Epub 2004 Aug 27.

A molecular pathogenesis for transcription factor associated poly-alanine tract
expansions.

Albrecht AN(1), Kornak U, Böddrich A, Süring K, Robinson PN, Stiege AC, Lurz R,
Stricker S, Wanker EE, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Charité, Berlin, Germany.

Poly-alanine (Ala) tract expansions in transcription factors have been shown to
be associated with human birth defects such as malformations of the brain, the
digits, and other structures. Expansions of a poly-Ala tract from 15 to 22
(+7)-29 (+14) Ala in Hoxd13, for example, result in the limb malformation
synpolydactyly in humans and in mice [synpolydactyly homolog (spdh)]. Here, we
show that an increase of the Ala repeat above a certain length (22 Ala) is
associated with a shift in the localization of Hoxd13 from nuclear to
cytoplasmic, where it forms large amorphous aggregates. We observed similar
aggregates for expansion mutations in SOX3, RUNX2 and HOXA13, pointing to a
common mechanism. Cytoplasmic aggregation of mutant Hoxd13 protein is influenced 
by the length of the repeat, the level of expression and the efficacy of
degradation by the proteasome. Heat shock proteins Hsp70 and Hsp40 co-localize
with the aggregates and activation of the chaperone system by geldanamycin leads 
to a reduction of aggregate formation. Furthermore, recombinant mutant Hoxd13
protein forms aggregates in vitro demonstrating spontaneous misfolding of the
protein. We analyzed the mouse mutant spdh, which harbors a +7 Ala expansion in
Hoxd13 similar to the human synpolydactyly mutations, as an in vivo model and
were able to show a reduction of mutant Hoxd13 and, in contrast to wt Hoxd13, a
primarily cytoplasmic localization of the protein. Our results provide evidence
that poly-Ala repeat expansions in transcription factors result in misfolding,
degradation and cytoplasmic aggregation of the mutant proteins.

PMID: 15333588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Aug 15;129A(1):95-7.

Is brachydactyly type Ballard a variant of brachydactyly type E?

Jensen K, Hoo JJ.

PMID: 15266625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1669-72.

A dual role for Hox genes in limb anterior-posterior asymmetry.

Zákány J(1), Kmita M, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and National Program Frontiers in
Genetics, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Jun 11;304(5677):1610-1.

Anterior-to-posterior patterning, the process whereby our digits are differently 
shaped, is a key aspect of limb development. It depends on the localized
expression in posterior limb bud of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and the morphogenetic
potential of its diffusing product. By using an inversion of and a large
deficiency in the mouse HoxD cluster, we found that a perturbation in the early
collinear expression of Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 in limb buds led to a loss of 
asymmetry. Ectopic Hox gene expression triggered abnormal Shh transcription,
which in turn induced symmetrical expression of Hox genes in digits, thereby
generating double posterior limbs. We conclude that early posterior restriction
of Hox gene products sets up an anterior-posterior prepattern, which determines
the localized activation of Shh. This signal is subsequently translated into
digit morphological asymmetry by promoting the late expression of Hoxd genes, two
collinear processes relying on opposite genomic topographies, upstream and
downstream Shh signaling.

PMID: 15192229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2003 Oct;30(10):973-7.

[Genetic analysis of a Chinese pedigree with congenital synpolydactyly].

[Article in Chinese]

Qin W(1), Shu AL, Xing QH, Yang MS, Feng GY, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Bio-X Life
Science Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
weiqin@sibs.ac.cn

Syndactyly is a limb malformation that shows a characteristic manifestation in
both hands and feet. This condition is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait
with reduced penetrance. Clinical presentation, in general, is complete or
partial webbing between 3rd and 4th fingers. Syndactyly type I, II and III were
mapped to 2q34-36, 2q31-q32 and 6q21-23.2 respectively. Syndactyly type II is
named as synpolydactyly (SPD). Expansion of a polyalanine tract in the HOXD13
gene is known to cause synpolydactyly. HOXD13 gene locates in the HoxD complex.
Nine homologous genes (HOXD1, -D3, -D4, -D8, -D9, -D10, -D11, -D12, -D13) of HoxD
complex locate on chromosome 2 in the order of HOXD1 to HOXD13, among which
HOXD13 is closest to the centromere. Deletions and duplications in HoxD complex
or its upstream regulator factors have been identified to cause hand heteroplasia
and consequently lead to abnormity of finger number or abnormity of
configuration. We performed linkage analysis in a kindred with autosomal dominant
hereditary syndactyly. Tight linkage to markers on chromosome 2q31-q32 (maximum
two-point lod score: 6.78 at recombination fraction theta = 0.00) was observed.
Multipoint linkage analysis produced a maximum LOD score of 7.02. Haplotype
construction and analysis of recombination events narrowed this locus to a 20.61 
cM region between markers D2S2302 and D2S315. No mutation was found in the coding
region, the intro-exon boundaries, or part of the promoter region of HOXD13. Our 
result demonstrates that synpolydactyly locus in the Chinese Han Population is in
the region of chromosome 2q31-q32 but a different causal gene can be involved.

PMID: 14669516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):325-35. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Skeletal development is regulated by fibroblast growth factor receptor 1
signalling dynamics.

Hajihosseini MK(1), Lalioti MD, Arthaud S, Burgar HR, Brown JM, Twigg SR, Wilkie 
AO, Heath JK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15
2TT, UK.

Ligand-dependent signalling pathways have been characterised as having morphogen 
properties where there is a quantitative relationship between receptor activation
and response, or threshold characteristics in which there is a binary switch in
response at a fixed level of receptor activation. Here we report the use of a
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-based transgenic system in which a
hypermorphic mutation has been introduced into the murine Fgfr1 gene. These mice 
exhibit cranial suture and sternal fusions that are exacerbated when the BAC copy
number is increased. Surprisingly, increasing mutant BAC copy number also leads
to the de novo appearance of digit I polydactyly in the hind limb and
transformations of the vertebrae. Polydactyly is accompanied by a reduction of
programmed cell death in the developing hind limb. Candidate gene analysis
reveals downregulation of Dkk1 in the digit I field and upregulation of Wnt5a and
Hoxd13. These findings show that Fgfr1-mediated developmental pathways exhibit
differing signalling dynamics, whereby development of the cranial sutures and
sternum follows a morphogen mode, whereas development of the vertebral column and
the hind limbs has threshold signalling properties.

PMID: 14668415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):299-309. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb
zeugopod.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the 5' or posterior murine Hox genes (paralogous groups 9-13)
markedly affect the formation of the stylopod, zeugopod and autopod of both
forelimbs and hindlimbs. Targeted disruption of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 or Hoxa10,
Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 result in gross mispatterning of the radius and ulna or the
femur, respectively. Similarly, in mice with disruptions of both Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13, development of the forelimb and hindlimb autopod is severely curtailed.
Although these examples clearly illustrate the major roles played by the
posterior Hox genes, little is known regarding the stage or stages at which Hox
transcription factors intersect with the limb development program to ensure
proper patterning of the principle elements of the limb. Moreover, the cellular
and/or molecular bases for the developmental defects observed in these mutant
mice have not been described. In this study, we show that malformation of the
forelimb zeugopod in Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants is a consequence of
interruption at multiple steps during the formation of the radius and ulna. In
particular, reductions in the levels of Fgf8 and Fgf10 expression may be related 
to the observed delay in forelimb bud outgrowth that, in turn, leads to the
formation of smaller mesenchymal condensations. However, the most significant
defect appears to be the failure to form normal growth plates at the proximal and
distal ends of the zeugopod bones. As a consequence, growth and maturation of
these bones is highly disorganized, resulting in the creation of amorphous bony
elements, rather than a normal radius and ulna.

PMID: 14668414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Aug 15;121A(1):69-74.

An acceptor splice site mutation in HOXD13 results in variable hand, but
consistent foot malformations.

Kan SH(1), Johnson D, Giele H, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom.

HOXD13 is the most 5' of the HOXD cluster of homeobox genes in chromosome band
2q31.1. Heterozygous expansions of a polyalanine tract in HOXD13 are typically
associated with synpolydactyly characterized by insertional digit duplication
associated with syndactyly. We screened for mutations of HOXD13 in patients with 
a variety of limb malformations and identified a novel heterozygous mutation
(758-2delA) in a three-generation family without the typical synpolydactyly
phenotype in the hands, but with bilateral partial duplication of the 2nd
metatarsals within the first web space of the feet. This mutation locates in the 
acceptor splice site of exon 2 and is predicted to cause failure of normal
splicing of HOXD13. The foot abnormality in this family is similar to that
described in two families by Goodman et al. [1998: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63:
992-1000] in which different deletions of HOXD13 were reported. These findings
together lend support to a distinct phenotype resulting from haploinsufficiency
of HOXD13.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12900906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 8;278(32):30148-56. Epub 2003 May 27.

Hox proteins functionally cooperate with the GC box-binding protein system
through distinct domains.

Suzuki M(1), Ueno N, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602, Japan.

Hox genes encode a transcriptional factor that plays a key role in regulating
position-specific cartilage pattern formation. We found that Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13,
which are members of the Abd-B subfamily of Hox genes and are crucial for the
autopod development of the limb, stimulate transcription from the Bmp-4 promoter.
This stimulation was dependent on the GC box within the promoter and independent 
of the putative Hox protein binding site. The stimulation by HoxA-13 was
remarkably enhanced by cotransfection with members of a family of zinc finger GC 
box binding transcriptional factors including Sp1. The stimulation was suppressed
by another Abd-B Hox protein, HoxA-11, indicating that each Abd-B Hox protein has
a different effect on the target genes through the Sp1 system. We have identified
multiple functional domains involved in transcriptional regulation, including
three independent transcriptional activation domains (ADs) in HoxA-13. AD1 and
AD3 in helices 1 and 2 of the homeodomain individually cooperate with
Sp1-dependent stimulation. The homeodomain is also required for cooperation of
the AD with Sp1. By contrast, AD2 strongly activates transcription in an
Sp1-independent manner only when the homeodomain has been removed. These
observations indicate that HoxA-13 regulates transcription through multiple
pathways. In addition, we found that a helix 3 mutation of the HoxA-13
homeodomain behaves as a dominant negative form.

PMID: 12771139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Dev Biol. 2003 Apr 15;256(2):212-20.

An enhancer-titration effect induces digit-specific regulatory alleles of the
HoxD cluster.

Monge I(1), Kondo T, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology and NCCR Frontiers in Genetics,
University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest Ansermet 30,1211 Geneva 11,
Switzerland.

Mice carrying transgenes targeted upstream the HoxD cluster display abnormal
digits, with alterations resembling those obtained with loss of functions of Hoxd
genes. Because the HoxD cluster remained entirely untouched by the insertional
events, we investigated whether these phenotypes were induced by regulatory
modifications at a distance. We report here that these targeted relocations
behaved as hypomorphic alleles of the distantly located gene Hoxd13 and showed
that posterior Hoxd genes located in cis with the integration site were
down-regulated. Genetic analyses suggested that this down-regulation resulted
from the titration of the activity of a remote located enhancer sequence. These
results indicate that the transcriptional efficiency of Hoxd genes in digits
could be modulated by the presence of other, unrelated, promoters, within the
regulatory landscape of this enhancer. Modifications in these latter
transcription units may thus impact upon digit morphology, through misregulation 
of Hoxd genes, thus illustrating the "buffering effect" that such a global
regulatory element can exert upon a short genomic interval.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science (USA)

PMID: 12679098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Development. 2003 May;130(10):2061-9.

Hoxb13 is required for normal differentiation and secretory function of the
ventral prostate.

Economides KD(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The murine prostate is a structure that is made up of four distinct lobes; the
dorsal and lateral prostates (often grouped together as the dorsolateral
prostate), the anterior (coagulating gland) and the ventral prostate. Previous
work has implicated Hox genes in the development of these structures, but how
each lobe acquires unique identities for specific functions has not been
addressed. In this study, the ventral prostate-specific function of Hoxb13 is
described. Mice lacking Hoxb13 function show normal numbers of duct tips, but
mice mutant for both Hoxb13 and Hoxd13 exhibit severe hypoplasia of the duct
tips, revealing a role for Hoxb13 in ventral prostate morphogenesis.
Additionally, a ventral lobe-specific defect was identified in Hoxb13 mutants
wherein the epithelium is composed of simple cuboidal cells rather than of tall
columnar cells. Ventral prostate ducts appear devoid of contents and do not
express the ventral prostate-specific secretory proteins p12, a kazal-type
protease inhibitor and p25, a spermine binding protein. These defects are not due
to reduction of Nkx3.1 expression or to a global effect on androgen receptor
signaling. These results suggest a specific role for Hoxb13 in a differentiation 
pathway that gives the ventral prostate epithelium a unique identity, as well as 
a more general role in ventral prostate morphogenesis that is redundant with
other Hox13 paralogs.

PMID: 12668621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Apr;72(4):984-97. Epub 2003 Mar 14.

Missense mutations in the homeodomain of HOXD13 are associated with brachydactyly
types D and E.

Johnson D(1), Kan SH, Oldridge M, Trembath RC, Roche P, Esnouf RM, Giele H,
Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, and
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford,
United Kingdom.

HOXD13, the most 5' gene of the HOXD cluster, encodes a homeodomain transcription
factor with important functions in limb patterning and growth. Heterozygous
mutations of human HOXD13, encoding polyalanine expansions or frameshifts, are
believed to act by dominant negative or haploinsufficiency mechanisms and are
predominantly associated with synpolydactyly phenotypes. Here, we describe two
mutations of HOXD13 (923C-->G encoding Ser308Cys and 940A-->C encoding Ile314Leu)
that cause missense substitutions within the homeodomain. Both are associated
with distinctive limb phenotypes in which brachydactyly of specific metacarpals, 
metatarsals, and phalangeal bones is the most constant feature, exhibiting
overlap with brachydactyly types D and E. We investigated the binding of
synthetic mutant proteins to double-stranded DNA targets in vitro. No consistent 
differences were found for the Ser308Cys mutation compared with the wild type,
but the Ile314Leu mutation (which resides at the 47th position of the
homeodomain) exhibited increased affinity for a target containing the core
recognition sequence 5'-TTAC-3' but decreased affinity for a 5'-TTAT-3' target.
Molecular modeling of the Ile314Leu mutation indicates that this mixed gain and
loss of affinity may be accounted for by the relative positions of methyl groups 
in the amino acid side chain and target base.

PMCID: PMC1180360
PMID: 12649808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Development. 2003 Apr;130(8):1701-12.

An I47L substitution in the HOXD13 homeodomain causes a novel human limb
malformation by producing a selective loss of function.

Caronia G(1), Goodman FR, McKeown CM, Scambler PJ, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Functional Genomics, DIBIT-H San Raffaele,
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy.

Erratum in
    Development. 2003 May;130(10):2289.

The 5' members of the Hoxa and Hoxd gene clusters play major roles in vertebrate 
limb development. One such gene, HOXD13, is mutated in the human limb
malformation syndrome synpolydactyly. Both polyalanine tract expansions and
frameshifting deletions in HOXD13 cause similar forms of this condition, but it
remains unclear whether other kinds of HOXD13 mutations could produce different
phenotypes. We describe a six-generation family in which a novel combination of
brachydactyly and central polydactyly co-segregates with a missense mutation that
substitutes leucine for isoleucine at position 47 of the HOXD13 homeodomain. We
compared the HOXD13(I47L) mutant protein both in vitro and in vivo to the
wild-type protein and to an artificial HOXD13 mutant, HOXD13(IQN), which is
completely unable to bind DNA. We found that the mutation causes neither a
dominant-negative effect nor a gain of function, but instead impairs DNA binding 
at some sites bound by wild-type HOXD13. Using retrovirus-mediated misexpression 
in developing chick limbs, we showed that wild-type HOXD13 could upregulate chick
EphA7 in the autopod, but that HOXD13(I47L) could not. In the zeugopod, however, 
HOXD13(I47L) produced striking changes in tibial morphology and ectopic
cartilages, which were never produced by HOXD13(IQN), consistent with a selective
rather than generalised loss of function. Thus, a mutant HOX protein that
recognises only a subset of sites recognised by the wild-type protein causes a
novel human malformation, pointing to a hitherto undescribed mechanism by which
missense mutations in transcription factors can generate unexpected phenotypes.
Intriguingly, both HOXD13(I47L) and HOXD13(IQN) produced more severe shortening
in proximal limb regions than did wild-type HOXD13, suggesting that functional
suppression of anterior Hox genes by more posterior ones does not require DNA
binding and is mediated by protein:protein interactions.

PMID: 12620993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Blood. 2003 Jun 1;101(11):4529-38. Epub 2003 Jan 23.

Induction of acute myeloid leukemia in mice by the human leukemia-specific fusion
gene NUP98-HOXD13 in concert with Meis1.

Pineault N(1), Buske C, Feuring-Buske M, Abramovich C, Rosten P, Hogge DE, Aplan 
PD, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

HOX genes, notably members of the HOXA cluster, and HOX cofactors have
increasingly been linked to human leukemia. Intriguingly, HOXD13, a member of the
HOXD cluster not normally expressed in hematopoietic cells, was recently
identified as a partner of NUP98 in a t(2;11) translocation associated with
t-AML/MDS. We have now tested directly the leukemogenic potential of the
NUP98-HOXD13 t(2; 11) fusion gene in the murine hematopoietic model. NUP98-HOXD13
strongly promoted growth and impaired differentiation of early hematopoietic
progenitor cells in vitro; this effect was dependent on the NUP98 portion and an 
intact HOXD13 homeodomain. Expression of the NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene in vivo
resulted in a partial impairment of lymphopoiesis but did not induce evident
hematologic disease until late after transplantation (more than 5 months), when
some mice developed a myeloproliferative-like disease. In contrast, mice
transplanted with bone marrow (BM) cells cotransduced with NUP98-HOXD13 and the
HOX cofactor Meis1 rapidly developed lethal and transplantable acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), with a median disease onset of 75 days. In summary, this study
demonstrates that NUP98-HOXD13 can be directly implicated in the molecular
process leading to leukemic transformation, and it supports a model in which the 
transforming properties of NUP98-HOXD13 are mediated through HOX-dependent
pathways.

PMID: 12543865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 2003 Feb;130(3):527-37.

The chick oligozeugodactyly (ozd) mutant lacks sonic hedgehog function in the
limb.

Ros MA(1), Dahn RD, Fernandez-Teran M, Rashka K, Caruccio NC, Hasso SM, Bitgood
JJ, Lancman JJ, Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011
Santander, Spain.

We have analyzed a new limb mutant in the chicken that we name oligozeugodactyly 
(ozd). The limbs of this mutant have a longitudinal postaxial defect, lacking the
posterior element in the zeugopod (ulna/fibula) and all digits except digit 1 in 
the leg. Classical recombination experiments show that the limb mesoderm is the
defective tissue layer in ozd limb buds. Molecular analysis revealed that the ozd
limbs develop in the absence of Shh expression, while all other organs express
Shh and develop normally. Neither Ptc1 nor Gli1 are detectable in mutant limb
buds. However, Bmp2 and dHAND are expressed in the posterior wing and leg bud
mesoderm, although at lower levels than in normal embryos. Activation of
Hoxd11-13 occurs normally in ozd limbs but progressively declines with time.
Phase III of expression is more affected than phase II, and expression is more
severely affected in the more 5' genes. Interestingly, re-expression of Hoxd13
occurs at late stages in the distal mesoderm of ozd leg buds, correlating with
formation of digit 1. Fgf8 and Fgf4 expression are initiated normally in the
mutant AER but their expression is progressively downregulated in the anterior
AER. Recombinant Shh protein or ZPA grafts restore normal pattern to ozd limbs;
however, retinoic acid fails to induce Shh in ozd limb mesoderm. We conclude that
Shh function is required for limb development distal to the elbow/knee joints,
similar to the Shh(-/-) mouse. Accordingly we classify the limb skeletal elements
as Shh dependent or independent, with the ulna/fibula and digits other than digit
1 in the leg being Shh dependent. Finally we propose that the ozd mutation is
most likely a defect in a regulatory element that controls limb-specific
expression of Shh.

PMID: 12490559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Jan;36(1):107-12.

Fusion of the NUP98 gene and the homeobox gene HOXC13 in acute myeloid leukemia
with t(11;12)(p15;q13).

Panagopoulos I(1), Isaksson M, Billström R, Strömbeck B, Mitelman F, Johansson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

The NUP98 gene at 11p15 is known to be fused to DDX10, HOXA9, HOXA11, HOXA13,
HOXD11, HOXD13, LEDGF, NSD1, NSD3, PMX1, RAP1GDS1, and TOP1 in various
hematologic malignancies. The common theme in all NUP98 chimeras is a transcript 
consisting of the 5' part of NUP98 and the 3' portion of the partner gene;
however, apart from the frequent fusion to different homeobox genes, there is no 
apparent similarity among the other partners. We here report a de novo acute
myeloid leukemia with a t(11;12)(p15;q13), resulting in a novel NUP98/HOXC13
fusion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses, by the use of probes
covering NUP98 and the HOXC gene cluster at 12q13, revealed a fusion signal at
the der(11)t(11;12), indicating a NUP98/HOXC chimera, whereas no fusion was found
on the der(12)t(11;12), suggesting that the translocation was accompanied by a
deletion of the reciprocal fusion gene. Reverse transcription-PCR and sequence
analyses showed that exon 16 (nucleotide 2290) of NUP98 was fused in-frame with
exon 2 (nucleotide 852) of HOXC13. Neither the HOXC13/NUP98 transcript nor the
normal HOXC13 was expressed. The present results, together with previous studies 
of NUP98/homeobox gene fusions, strongly indicate that NUP98/HOXC13 is of
pathogenetic importance in t(11;12)-positive acute myeloid leukemia.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12461755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Genetica. 2002 Aug;115(3):269-72.

Cytogenetic mapping of five YAC clones to human chromosome region 2q31 --> q32.1 
in relation to the FRA2G common fragile site.

Pelliccia F(1), Limongi MZ, Gaddini L, Russo MT, Rocchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, Roma, 
Italy.

In this work, five YAC clones have been mapped by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) to human chromosome region 2q31 --> q32.1 and ordered in
relation to each other and to the FRA2G common fragile site. YAC clones that span
the fragile site have been identified. Moreover a deleted HOXD 13 gene has been
identified on the 942D2 YAC.

PMID: 12440566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Med Genet. 2002 Nov;39(11):852-6.

Severe digital abnormalities in a patient heterozygous for both a novel missense 
mutation in HOXD13 and a polyalanine tract expansion in HOXA13.

Debeer P, Bacchelli C, Scambler PJ, De Smet L, Fryns JP, Goodman FR.

PMCID: PMC1735011
PMID: 12414828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Orthop Res. 2002 Sep;20(5):899-901.

Mutational analysis of HOXD13 and HOXA13 genes in the triphalangeal
thumb-brachyectrodactyly syndrome.

Pérez-Cabrera A(1), Kofman-Alfaro S, Zenteno JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital General de Mexico,
UNAM, Mexico City.

The triphalangeal thumb-brachyectrodactyly syndrome is a very rare autosomal
dominant disorder of unknown etiology characterized by an unusual pattern of limb
malformations: triphalangeal thumbs and brachyectrodactyly in the hands, and
ectrodactyly in the feet. In a previous report, we described the clinical and
radiographical features of three related subjects with the disease and suggest
that due to the unusual combination of limb defects and to its phenotypic
similarity with the limb malformative pattern induced by disrupting the Hoxd13
gene in mouse, the triphalangeal thumb-brachyectrodactyly syndrome might be
caused by mutations in a HOX gene. After sequencing the entire coding region of
HOXD13 and the highly conserved homeodomain encoding region of HOXA13, we do not 
detect any deleterious mutation in any of the patients excluding that alterations
at these sequences are responsible for the disease. Mutations in regulatory
regions of these genes or in other genes involved in limb development might be
responsible for the disease.

PMID: 12382951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Oct 15;112(3):256-65.

Limb malformations and the human HOX genes.

Goodman FR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, England.
fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

HOX genes encode a family of transcription factors of fundamental importance for 
body patterning during embryonic development. Humans, like most vertebrates, have
39 HOX genes organized into four clusters, with major roles in the development of
the central nervous system, axial skeleton, gastrointestinal and urogenital
tracts, external genitalia, and limbs. The first two limb malformations shown to 
be caused by mutations in the human HOX genes were synpolydactyly and
hand-foot-genital syndrome, which result from mutations in HOXD13 and HOXA13,
respectively. This review describes a variety of limb malformations now known to 
be caused by specific different mutations in these two genes, including
polyalanine tract expansions, nonsense mutations, and missense mutations, many
with phenotypic consequences that could not have been predicted from previous
knowledge of mouse models or HOX protein function. Limb malformations may also
result from chromosomal deletions involving the HOXD and HOXA clusters, and from 
regulatory mutations affecting single or multiple HOX genes.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12357469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):96-107.

Duplication of the Hoxd11 gene causes alterations in the axial and appendicular
skeleton of the mouse.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5331, USA.

The Hox genes encode a group of transcription factors essential for proper
development of the mouse. Targeted mutation of the Hoxd11 gene causes reduced
male fertility, vertebral transformation, carpal bone fusions, and reductions in 
digit length. A duplication of the Hoxd11 gene was created with the expectation
that the consequences of restricted overexpression in the appropriate cells would
provide further insight into the function of the Hoxd11 gene product. Genetic
assays demonstrated that two tandem copies of Hoxd11 were functionally
indistinguishable from the normal two copies of the gene on separate chromosomes 
with respect to formation of the axial and appendicular skeleton. Extra copies of
Hoxd11 caused an increase in the lengths of some bones of the forelimb autopod
and a decrease in the number of lumbar vertebrae. Further, analysis of the Hoxd11
duplication demonstrated that the Hoxd11 protein can perform some functions
supplied by its paralogue Hoxa11. For example, the defects in forelimb bones are 
corrected when extra copies of Hoxd11 are present in the Hoxa11 homozygous mutant
background. Thus, it appears that Hoxd11 can quantitatively compensate for the
absence of Hoxa11 protein, and therefore Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are functionally
equivalent in the zeugopod. However, extra copies of Hoxd11 did not improve male 
or female fertility in Hoxa11 mutants. Interestingly, the insertion of an
additional Hoxd11 locus into the HoxD complex does not appear to affect the
expression patterns of the neighboring Hoxd10, -d12, or -d13 genes.

PMID: 12217321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jun 15;110(2):116-21.

HOXD13 polyalanine tract expansion in classical synpolydactyly type Vordingborg.

Kjaer KW(1), Hedeboe J, Bugge M, Hansen C, Friis-Henriksen K, Vestergaard MB,
Tommerup N, Opitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Wilhelm Johannsen Center for Functional Genome
Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. klaus@medgen.ku.dk

In 1927, Oluf Thomsen, in a classic paper, described a seven-generation family
with autosomal dominant axial synpolydactyly (SPD)--the Vordingborgtyp of axis
duplication and dysostosis. Expansion of a polyalanine tract in the HOXD13 gene
is known to cause synpolydactyly. We have rediscovered part of the family
described by Thomsen, and detected a 9 triplet polyalanine expansion within
HOXD13segregating with the disorder. The phenotypic spectrum in mutation carriers
ranged from severe to inapparent bone malformations. In the latter case, only
dermatoglyphics revealed the genetic status.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12116248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Hum Genet. 2002 May;110(5):488-94. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

A novel stable polyalanine [poly(A)] expansion in the HOXA13 gene associated with
hand-foot-genital syndrome: proper function of poly(A)-harbouring transcription
factors depends on a critical repeat length?

Utsch B(1), Becker K, Brock D, Lentze MJ, Bidlingmaier F, Ludwig M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Bonn, Adenauerallee 119,
53113 Bonn, Germany. utsch@uni-bonn.de

Hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS) is a dominantly inherited congenital
malformation affecting the distal limbs and genitourinary tract. Here, we
describe the phenotype and its molecular basis in a family that presented with
HFGS. Genetic analysis revealed that the condition is caused by an 18-bp in-frame
duplication within a cryptic trinucleotide repeat sequence encoding an 18-residue
polyalanine tract in the homeoboxgene ( HOX) A13. This mutation expands the
stretch with six extra alanine residues. Similar types of mutation (plus eight
alanines) have recently been found in another HFGS family and also in the human
HOXD13 gene (plus seven up to plus 14 residues) where it leads to synpolydactyly 
(SPD), a further congenital limb malformation rarely associated with genital
abnormalities. As observed in our family, all the expanded tracts encoding
polyalanine, either reported for HOXA13 or HOXD13, are quite stable when
transmitted within affected families. Unlike disorders with unstable expansions
of perfect trinucleotide repeats the molecular mechanism underlying these
polyalanine expansions should be unequal crossing-over rather than replication
slippage. The alanine tract elongation may prevent protein-protein interactions
of the mutant HOXA13, thereby inducing a localized heterochrony in the sequence
of distal limb and genitourinary development.

PMID: 12073020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Teratology. 2002 Feb;65(2):50-62.

Complete mutation analysis panel of the 39 human HOX genes.

Kosaki K(1), Kosaki R, Suzuki T, Yoshihashi H, Takahashi T, Sasaki K, Tomita M,
McGinnis W, Matsuo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
kkosaki@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Comment in
    Teratology. 2002 Feb;65(2):47-9.

BACKGROUND: The HOX gene family consists of highly conserved transcription
factors that specify the identity of the body segments along the anteroposterior 
axis of the embryo. Because the phenotypes of mice with targeted disruptions of
Hox genes resemble some patterns of human malformations, mutations in HOX genes
have been expected to be associated with a significant number of human
malformations. Thus far, however, mutations have been documented in only three of
the 39 human HOX genes (HOXD13, HOXA13, and HOXA11) partly because current
knowledge on the complete coding sequence and genome structure is limited to only
20 of the 39 human HOX genes.
METHODS: Taking advantage of the human and mouse draft genome sequences, we
attempted to characterize the remaining 19 human HOX genes by bioinformatic
analysis including phylogenetic footprinting, the probabilistic prediction
method, and comparison of genomic sequences with the complete set of the human
anonymous cDNA sequences.
RESULTS: We were able to determine the full coding sequences of 19 HOX genes and 
their genome structure and successfully designed a complete set of PCR primers to
amplify the entire coding region of each of the 39 HOX genes from genomic DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate the usefulness of bioinformatic analysis of the
draft genome sequences for clinically oriented research projects. It is hoped
that the mutation panel provided here will serve as a launchpad for a new
discourse on the genetic basis of human malformations.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11857506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mech Dev. 2002 Mar;112(1-2):53-67.

The synpolydactyly homolog (spdh) mutation in the mouse -- a defect in patterning
and growth of limb cartilage elements.

Albrecht AN(1), Schwabe GC, Stricker S, Böddrich A, Wanker EE, Mundlos S.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut fur Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany.

We have investigated the recessive mouse mutant synpolydactyly homolog (spdh) as 
a model for human synpolydactyly (SPD). As in human SPD, the spdh phenotype
consists of central polydactyly, syndactyly and brachydactyly and is caused by
the expansion of a polyalanine encoding repeat in the 5' region of the Hoxd13
gene. We performed a detailed phenotypic and functional analysis of spdh/spdh
embryos using skeletal preparations, histology, in situ hybridization, BrdU
labeling of proliferating cells, and in vitro expression studies. The absence of 
normal phalangeal joints and the misexpression of genes involved in joint
formation demonstrate a role for Hox-genes in joint patterning. The spdh mutation
results in abnormal limb pattering, defective chondrocyte differentiation, and in
a drastic reduction in proliferation. Abnormal chondrocyte differentiation and
proliferation persisted after birth and correlated with the expression of the
mutant Hoxd13 and other Hox-genes during late-embryonic and postnatal growth.

PMID: 11850178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Development. 2002 Feb;129(3):551-61.

Tail gut endoderm and gut/genitourinary/tail development: a new tissue-specific
role for Hoxa13.

de Santa Barbara P(1), Roberts DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Hoxa13 is expressed early in the caudal mesoderm and endoderm of the developing
hindgut. The tissue-specific roles of Hoxa13 function have not been described.
Hand-foot-genital syndrome, a rare dominantly inherited human malformation
syndrome characterized by distal extremity and genitourinary anomalies, is caused
by mutations in the HOXA13 gene. We show evidence that one specific HOXA13
mutation likely acts as a dominant negative in vivo. When chick HFGa13 is
overexpressed in the chick caudal endoderm early in development, caudal
structural malformations occur. The phenotype is specific to HFGa13 expression in
the posterior endoderm, and includes taillessness and severe gut/genitourinary
(GGU) malformations. Finally, we show that chick HFGa13 negatively regulates
expression of Hoxd13 and antagonizes functions of both endogenous Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13 proteins. We suggest a fundamental role for epithelial specific expression
of Hoxa13 in the epithelial-mesenchymal interaction necessary for tail growth and
posterior GGU patterning.

PMCID: PMC2435615
PMID: 11830557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cancer Res. 2002 Jan 1;62(1):33-7.

The HOXD11 gene is fused to the NUP98 gene in acute myeloid leukemia with
t(2;11)(q31;p15).

Taketani T(1), Taki T, Shibuya N, Ito E, Kitazawa J, Terui K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

The nucleoporin gene, NUP98, has been reported to be fused to seven partner genes
in hematological malignancies with 11p15 translocations. We report here a novel
NUP98 partner gene, HOXD11, not HOXD13, in a pediatric patient with de novo AML
having t(2;11)(q31;p15), using a cDNA panhandle PCR. The HOXD11 gene is one of
the HOXD cluster genes and contains 2 exons, encoding a protein of 338 amino
acids with a homeodomain. Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analysis showed that two
alternatively spliced 5'-NUP98 transcripts were fused in frame to the HOXD11
gene. Both proteins consist of an NH(2)-terminal phenylalanine-glycine repeat
motif of NUP98 and COOH-terminal homeodomain of HOXD11. RT-PCR analysis in
various leukemic cell lines showed that expression of the HOXD11 gene was
significantly more frequent in BCR-ABL-positive than in BCR-ABL-negative leukemic
cell lines (P = 0.028). Our results revealed that t(2;11)(q31;p15) was not a
single chromosomal abnormality and that the NUP98-HOXD fusion genes encode
similar fusion proteins, which suggests that the NUP98-HOXD11 as well as
NUP98-HOXD13 fusion protein play a role in leukemogenesis through similar
mechanisms.

PMID: 11782354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Feb;70(2):547-55. Epub 2002 Jan 3.

A 117-kb microdeletion removing HOXD9-HOXD13 and EVX2 causes synpolydactyly.

Goodman FR(1), Majewski F, Collins AL, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Studies in mouse and chick have shown that the 5' HoxD genes play major roles in 
the development of the limbs and genitalia. In humans, mutations in HOXD13 cause 
the dominantly inherited limb malformation synpolydactyly (SPD).
Haploinsufficiency for the 5' HOXD genes has recently been proposed to underlie
the monodactyly and penoscrotal hypoplasia in two children with chromosomal
deletions encompassing the entire HOXD cluster. Similar deletions, however, have 
previously been associated with split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM), including
monodactyly. Here we report a father and daughter with SPD who carry a 117-kb
microdeletion at the 5' end of the HOXD cluster. By sequencing directly across
the deletion breakpoint, we show that this microdeletion removes only
HOXD9-HOXD13 and EVX2. We also report a girl with bilateral split foot and a
chromosomal deletion that includes the entire HOXD cluster and extends
approximately 5 Mb centromeric to it. Our findings indicate that
haploinsufficiency for the 5' HOXD genes causes not SHFM but SPD and point to the
presence of a novel locus for SHFM in the interval between EVX2 and D2S294. They 
also suggest that there is a regulatory region, upstream of the HOXD cluster,
that is responsible for activating the cluster as a whole.

PMCID: PMC384929
PMID: 11778160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3718-26. Epub 2001 Nov 19.

HOXC13 is involved in the regulation of human hair keratin gene expression.

Jave-Suarez LF(1), Winter H, Langbein L, Rogers MA, Schweizer J.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Tumor Cell Regulation and Cell Biology, German Cancer Research
Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

At present, HOXC13 is the only member of the HOX multigene family that produces a
fragile hair phenotype when mutated or overexpressed in mice. To determine
whether hair keratin genes are targets for this transcription factor, we analyzed
the HOXC13 responsiveness of human hair keratin genes, whose expression matched
that of nuclear HOXC13, immunologically revealed in cells of the lower
hair-forming compartment of the human anagen hair follicle. We show that HOXC13, 
but not a homeobox-deleted HOXC13, strongly activated the promoters of the genes,
with the respective proximal promoter regions being sufficient for optimal
activation. The hair keratin promoters contained numerous putative Hox binding
core motifs TAAT, TTAT, and TTAC. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed 
that HOXC13 bound exclusively to distinct TAAT and TTAT core motifs that were
clearly concentrated in the proximal promoter regions. A comparison of the
sequences flanking HOXC13 binding and nonbinding core motifs, respectively,
allowed the deduction of an extended 8-bp HOXC13 consensus binding sequence
TT(A/T)ATNPuPu. Thus, the DNA binding conditions for HOXC13 were distinct from
those of other members of the paralogous group 13, i.e. murine Hoxb13 and HOXd13,
for which previous investigations yielded the consensus binding sequence
TTTA(T/C)NPuPu. Collectively, our data speak for a direct involvement of HOXC13
in the control of hair keratin expression during early trichocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 11714694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Development. 2001 Nov;128(21):4241-50.

Unique functions of Sonic hedgehog signaling during external genitalia
development.

Haraguchi R(1), Mo R, Hui C, Motoyama J, Makino S, Shiroishi T, Gaffield W,
Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Resources and Development (CARD) and Graduate School of
Molecular and Genomic Pharmacy, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto
860-0811, Japan.

Coordinated growth and differentiation of external genitalia generates a
proximodistally elongated structure suitable for copulation and efficient
fertilization. The differentiation of external genitalia incorporates a unique
process, i.e. the formation of the urethral plate and the urethral tube. Despite 
significant progress in molecular embryology, few attempts have been made to
elucidate the molecular developmental processes for external genitalia. The sonic
hedgehog (Shh) gene and its signaling genes have been found to be dynamically
expressed during murine external genitalia development. Functional analysis by
organ culture revealed that Shh could regulate mesenchymally expressed genes,
patched 1 (Ptch1), bone morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4), Hoxd13 and fibroblast
growth factor 10 (Fgf10), in the anlage: the genital tubercle (GT). Activities of
Shh for both GT outgrowth and differentiation were also demonstrated. Shh(-/-)
mice displayed complete GT agenesis, which is compatible with such observations. 
Furthermore, the regulation of apoptosis during GT formation was revealed for the
first time. Increased cell death and reduced cell proliferation of the Shh(-/-)
mice GT were shown. A search for alterations of Shh downstream gene expression
identified a dramatic shift of Bmp4 gene expression from the mesenchyme to the
epithelium of the Shh mutant before GT outgrowth. Regulation of mesenchymal Fgf10
gene expression by the epithelial Shh was indicated during late GT development.
These results suggest a dual mode of Shh function, first by the regulation of
initiating GT outgrowth, and second, by subsequent GT differentiation.

PMID: 11684660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 1;15(17):2209-14.

Large scale transgenic and cluster deletion analysis of the HoxD complex separate
an ancestral regulatory module from evolutionary innovations.

Spitz F(1), Gonzalez F, Peichel C, Vogt TF, Duboule D, Zákány J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The ancestral role of the Hox gene family is specifying morphogenetic differences
along the main body axis. In vertebrates, HoxD genes were also co-opted along
with the emergence of novel structures such as limbs and genitalia. We propose
that these functional recruitments relied on the appearance, or implementation,
of regulatory sequences outside of the complex. Whereas transgenic human and
murine HOXD clusters could function during axial patterning, in mice they were
not expressed outside the trunk. Accordingly, deletion of the entire cluster
abolished axial expression, whereas recently acquired regulatory controls were
preserved.

PMCID: PMC312772
PMID: 11544178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Biol. 2001 Sep 15;237(2):345-53.

The mouse Hoxd13(spdh) mutation, a polyalanine expansion similar to human type II
synpolydactyly (SPD), disrupts the function but not the expression of other Hoxd 
genes.

Bruneau S(1), Johnson KR, Yamamoto M, Kuroiwa A, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Polyalanine expansion in the human HOXD13 gene induces synpolydactyly (SPD), an
inherited congenital limb malformation. A mouse model was isolated, which showed 
a spontaneous alanine expansion due to a 21-bp duplication at the corresponding
place in the mouse gene. This mutation (synpolydactyly homolog, spdh), when
homozygous, causes malformations in mice similar to those seen in affected human 
patients. We have studied the genetics of this condition, by using several
engineered Hoxd alleles, as well as by looking at the expression of Hox and other
marker genes. We show that the mutated SPDH protein induces a gain-of-function
phenotype, likely by behaving as a dominant negative over other Hox genes. The
mutation, however, seems to act independently from Hoxa13 and doesn't appear to
affect Hox gene expression, except for a slight reduction of the HOXD13 protein
itself. Developmental studies indicate that the morphological effect is mostly
due to a severe retardation in the growth and ossification of the bony elements, 
in agreement with a general impairment in the function of posterior Hoxd genes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11543619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2001 Aug;92(8):854-62.

Frequent increase of DNA copy number in the 2q24 chromosomal region and its
association with a poor clinical outcome in hepatoblastoma: cytogenetic and
comparative genomic hybridization analysis.

Kumon K(1), Kobayashi H, Namiki T, Tsunematsu Y, Miyauchi J, Kikuta A, Horikoshi 
Y, Komada Y, Hatae Y, Eguchi H, Kaneko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Ina,
Saitama 362-0806, Japan.

In a cytogenetic and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) study of 38
hepatoblastomas, we found gain of 1q in 17 tumors (44.7%), that of 2 / 2q in 14
(36.8%), that of 20 / 20q in 9 (23.7%) and that of 8 / 8q in 8 (21.0%), loss of
4q in 4 (10.5%) and no DNA copy changes with normal karyotype or no mitotic cells
in 11 (28.9%). Eleven tumors with 2 / 2q gain detected by CGH had a total
chromosome 2 gain, a partial 2q gain, or a total chromosome 2 gain with an
augmented partial 2q region; the common region for DNA copy gain was 2q24.
Two-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses using probes
covering the centromere of chromosome 2 or HOXD13 (2q31) confirmed the CGH
findings, and showed that the common region for gain in 2q was centromeric to
HOXD13. Event-free survival (EFS) +/- standard error (SE) at 5 years was lowest
in patients with 2q gain [37 +/- 15%], highest in those with no DNA copy changes 
[82 +/- 12%], and intermediate in those with DNA copy changes other than 2q gain 
[74 +/- 13%] (P = 0.0549). Multivariate analysis showed that 2q gain was an
independent factor predicting a poor outcome. These findings suggest the presence
of a growth-promoting gene or an oncogene in the 2q24 chromosome band, and a
tumor suppressor gene in terminal 4q, which have important roles in the
development and progression of hepatoblastoma.

PMID: 11509117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dev Dyn. 2001 Aug;221(4):402-11.

Differential response of Shh expression between chick forelimb and hindlimb buds 
by FGF-4.

Wada N(1), Nohno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki, Japan.

The interactions of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) play 
important roles in vertebrate limb pattern formation. In the posterior region of 
the chick limb bud, Shh and FGF-4 each maintain expression in a positive feedback
loop. In the anterior region, Shh can also induce Fgf-4 expression in the
anterior apical ectodermal ridge. However, the possibility of Shh induction by
FGF protein is unclear. Because many experiments to analyze gene expression have 
been carried out by using the forelimb bud of the chick embryo, we investigated
gene expression of the cells in the anterior region of the chick hindlimb bud
after FGF-4 application and compared the results with those for the forelimb bud.
When an FGF-4-containing bead was implanted into the anterior region of a stage
20 hindlimb bud, ectopic expression of Shh was induced in the mesenchyme beneath 
the anterior end of the apical ectodermal ridge at 36 hr after implantation.
Subsequent to Shh activation, Hoxd13 was also observed in the anterior-distal
region of the limb bud. Furthermore, FGF-4 implantation to the hindlimb bud
caused additional digit formation accompanying respecification of positional
value in the anterior tissue. Ectopic Shh was induced in cells located distal to 
the FGF-4 bead, and the cells of the flank region did not contribute to ectopic
Shh induction. On the other hand, no ectopic Shh and Hoxd13 expression was
detected by grafting an FGF-4 bead into the forelimb bud. Although FGF-4
implantation to the forelimb bud occasionally induced extra digit 2 formation, no
embryos had an extra digit 3 or digit 4, and many specimens exhibited normal
skeletal pattern. These results demonstrate the difference between the fore- and 
hindlimb buds in the cell competence of Shh induction in response to FGF-4,
suggesting the possibility that the responsiveness of mesenchymal cells in
signaling molecules is not the same in the fore- and hindlimb buds.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11500977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cell. 2001 Jun 1;105(5):599-612.

Cholesterol modification of sonic hedgehog is required for long-range signaling
activity and effective modulation of signaling by Ptc1.

Lewis PM(1), Dunn MP, McMahon JA, Logan M, Martin JF, St-Jacques B, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
16 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling from the posterior zone of polarizing activity
(ZPA) is the primary determinant of anterior-posterior polarity in the vertebrate
limb field. An active signal is produced by an autoprocessing reaction that
covalently links cholesterol to the N-terminal signaling moiety (N-Shh(p)),
tethering N-Shh(p) to the cell membrane. We have addressed the role played by
this lipophilic modification in Shh-mediated patterning of mouse digits. Both the
distribution and activity of N-Shh(p) indicate that N-Shh(p) acts directly over a
few hundred microns. In contrast, N-Shh, a form that lacks cholesterol, retains
similar biological activity to N-Shh(p), but signaling is posteriorly restricted.
Thus, cholesterol modification is essential for the normal range of signaling. It
also appears to be necessary for appropriate modulation of signaling by the Shh
receptor, Ptc1.

PMID: 11389830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Novartis Found Symp. 2001;232:81-91; discussion 91-101.

Defects of human skeletogenesis--models and mechanisms.

Mundlos S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum der Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Campus Charité Mitte,
Institut für Medzinische Genetik, Schumannstrasse 20/21, 10117 Berlin, Germany.

Heritable diseases of the skeleton are a highly complex group of genetic
disorders. Skeletal morphogenesis involves, in principle, four distinct
developmental processes: patterning, organogenesis, growth and homeostasis.
Defects in patterning affect the number and shape of bones and will result in
dysostosis. Organogenesis involves the formation of bone and cartilage as an
organ. Defects in growth plate function lead to abnormal proliferation and/or
differentiation of chondrocytes resulting in dwarfism and dysplasia. Bone mass,
shape and strength are maintained in equilibrium throughout development and
adulthood (homeostasis). Animal studies are providing good correlations between
specific embryological events and gene function, and consequently a framework for
understanding the fundamental pathways that build and pattern bone. Based on the 
remarkable conservation of basic developmental mechanisms between animal species,
connections to human disorders are frequently possible. As examples for recent
advances in our understanding of the processes that underlie skeletal pathology, 
the molecular basis of a patterning defect, synpolydactyly, and a defect of
organogenesis, cleidocranial dysplasia, will be presented and discussed.

PMID: 11277089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Genet. 2001 Jan;59(1):1-11.

Human HOX gene mutations.

Goodman FR(1), Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

HOX genes play a fundamental role in the development of the vertebrate central
nervous system, axial skeleton, limbs, gut, urogenital tract and external
genitalia, but it is only in the last 4 years that mutations in two of the 39
human HOX genes have been shown to cause congenital malformations; HOXD13, which 
is mutated in synpolydactyly, and HOXA13, which is mutated in Hand-Foot-Genital
syndrome. Here we review the mutations already identified in these two genes,
consider how these mutations may act, and discuss the possibility that further
mutations remain to be discovered both in developmental disorders and in cancer.

PMID: 11206481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):45-58.

Some distal limb structures develop in mice lacking Sonic hedgehog signaling.

Kraus P(1), Fraidenraich D, Loomis CA.

Author information: 
(1)Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University School of
Medicine, NY, New York, USA.

Patterning of the limb is coordinated by the complex interplay of three signaling
regions: the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), the zone of polarizing activity
(ZPA), and the non-ridge limb ectoderm. Complex feedback loops exist between Shh 
in the ZPA, Bmps and their antagonists in the adjacent mesenchyme, Wnt7a in the
dorsal ectoderm and Fgfs in the AER. In contrast to the previously reported
complete absence of digits in Shh(-/-) mice, we show that one morphologically
distinct digit, with a well-delineated nail and phalanges, forms in Shh(-/-)
hindlimbs, while intermediate structures are severely truncated and fused. The
presence of distal autopod elements is consistent with weak expression of Hoxd13 
in Shh(-/-) hindlimbs. Shh(-/-) forelimbs in contrast have one distal cartilage
element, a less-well differentiated nail and fused intermediate bones.
Interestingly, Ihh is expressed at the tip of Shh mutant limbs and could account 
for formation of distal structures. In contrast to previous studies we also
demonstrate that Shh signaling is required for maintenance of normal Fgf8
expression, since expression of Fgf8, unlike some other AER marker genes, is
rapidly lost from anterior to posterior after E10.5, with only a small domain of 
Fgf8 expression remaining posteriorly. Furthermore, loss of expanded Fgf8
expression is paralleled by a collapse of the handplate. Our data show that
development of most intermediate elements of the hindlimb skeleton are
Shh-dependent, and that Shh signaling is required for anterior-posterior
expansion of the AER in both limbs and for the subsequent branching of zeugopod
and autopod elements. Finally, we show that Shh is also required for outgrowth of
the limb ectoderm and thus for the formation of a distinct limb compartment.

PMID: 11118883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. BMC Mol Biol. 2000;1:2. Epub 2000 Nov 16.

A simple method for generating full length cDNA from low abundance partial
genomic clones.

Wang Y(1), Fugaro JM, Siddiq F, Goparaju CM, Lonardo F, Wali A, Lechner JF, Pass 
HI.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit,
USA. wang@karmano.org

BACKGROUND: PCR amplification of target molecules involves sequence specific
primers that flank the region to be amplified. While this technique is generally 
routine, its applicability may not be sufficient to generate a desired target
molecule from two separate regions involving intron /exon boundaries. For these
situations, the generation of full-length complementary DNAs from two partial
genomic clones becomes necessary for the family of low abundance genes.
RESULTS: The first approach we used for the isolation of full-length cDNA from
two known genomic clones of Hox genes was based on fusion PCR. Here we describe a
simple and efficient method of amplification for homeobox D13 (HOXD13) full
length cDNA from two partial genomic clones. Specific 5' and 3' untranslated
region (UTR) primer pairs and website program (primer3_www.cgv0.2) were key steps
involved in this process.
CONCLUSIONS: We have devised a simple, rapid and easy method for generating cDNA 
clone from genomic sequences. The full length HOXD13 clone (1.1 kb) generated
with this technique was confirmed by sequence analysis. This simple approach can 
be utilized to generate full-length cDNA clones from available partial genomic
sequences.

PMCID: PMC29089
PMID: 11114844  [PubMed]


238. Leukemia. 2000 Sep;14(9):1621-9.

Heterogenous fusion transcripts involving the NUP98 gene and HOXD13 gene
activation in a case of acute myeloid leukemia with the t(2;11)(q31;p15)
translocation.

Arai Y(1), Kyo T, Miwa H, Arai K, Kamada N, Kita K, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Division, National Cancer Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

We report the characterization of a rare chromosomal translocation, a
t(2;11)(q31;p15), which occurred in a patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia
(AML-M4). By 3'-RACE and RT-PCR analyses, two kinds of NUP98-HOXD13 fusion
transcript were detected. In addition, we identified a novel fusion transcript,
NUP98-FN1, in the same patient. Ectopic expression of the wild-type HOXD13 gene
was also observed in the patient, suggesting that HOXD13 contributes to the
development of this type of leukemia. The NUP98-HOXD13 fusion transcript was
predicted to encode a 552 or 569-amino acid protein containing the Phe-Gly (FG)
repeat region of NUP98 and the homeodomain of HOXD13. The NUP98-FN1 fusion
transcript was predicted to encode a 482 or 499-amino acid protein consisting of 
the same N-terminal region of NUP98 and a C-terminal region of 12 amino acids
derived from a previously unidentified sequence. We isolated and characterized
the chromosomal breakpoints. The breakpoint at 11p15 is mapped within a LINE
repetitive element in a 9 kb intron of NUP98, and more than 60% of the sequenced 
3 kb region surrounding the breakpoint junction consists of repetitive elements. 
The other breakpoint at 2q31 is in an intron of FN1, which is located 7 kb
upstream of HOXD13, and the repetitive sequence content of the breakpoint
junction is low. Local sequence duplications at genomic breakpoints suggest that 
the t(2;11) translocation is mediated through staggered double-strand DNA breaks.
These results throw light on the mechanisms responsible for the generation of
t(2;11) translocation and on the processes leading to t(2;11) leukemia.

PMID: 10995009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Growth Differ. 2000 Aug;42(4):367-76.

Suppression of polydactyly of the Gli3 mutant (extra toes) by deltaEF1 homozygous
mutation.

Moribe H(1), Takagi T, Kondoh H, Higashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Digit patterning is established through multiple genetic interactions.
Delta-crystallin enhancer/E2-box factor (deltaEF1) is a zinc finger and
homeodomain containing repressor protein, and is expressed in the posterior half 
of the forelimb bud and in the entire hindlimb bud during the early stage of limb
development. The 6EF1-deficient mutant mice display various skeletal
abnormalities, among which inferior ossification and abnormal patterning of
autopodial bones are similar to those observed in Hox and Gli gene mutants. Gli3 
mutant mice, extra toes (Xt), exhibit pre-axial polydactyly losing the identity
of digit I. It is demonstrated here that deltaEF1null(lacZ) homozygosity
suppressed formation of the extra digit, uniquely of the hindlimb, in both
Gli3XtJ heterozygous and homozygous mutants, but with no restoration of digit I
identity. In Gli3XtJ mutants, the Hoxd13 expression domain was expanded more
dramatically in homozygotes. In Gli3XtJ;deltaEF1null(lacZ) double homozygous
mutants, Hoxd13 expression once expanded in Gli3XtJ homozygous mutant was
reduced, more conspicuously in the hindlimbs, which may account for
hindlimb-restricted suppression of formation of the extra digit. The data suggest
the possibility that the extent of Hoxd13 expression along the distal margin of
the limb bud is determinative in defining the digit number.

PMID: 10969736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000 Sep 1;167(2):100-6.

Alteration of programmed cell death and gene expression by 5-bromodeoxyuridine
during limb development in mice.

Nakamura N(1), Fujioka M, Mori C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Central Laboratory for
Electron Microscopy, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto,
606-8501, Japan.

Some chemicals are known to induce limb malformations in mice. The occurrence of 
limb abnormality induced by chemical reagents is due to changes in the programmed
cell death (PCD). 5-Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) is known as a potent teratogen and
has been reported to induce polydactyly and other limb malformations in rodents
(DiPaolo, Science 145, 501-503, 1964). Here, we undertook the morphological and
genetic analyses of fetuses with limb malformations in BrdU-treated mice, in
order to investigate an alteration of gene expression that resembles that of
mutant mice with similar limb malformations. The fetuses of the BrdU-treated mice
exhibited preaxial polydactyly and preaxial triphalangism of the hindlimb at a
high incidence. Our observations showed that the PCD in the preaxial necrotic
zone was found to be delayed or absent on day 11 of pregnancy. Histological
analyses of these fetuses showed that the preaxial apical ectodermal ridge (AER) 
of the hindlimb was hyperplastic and consisted of several irregular layers. In
observation of the whole-mount in situ hybridization, we detected the
anterior-extended overexpression of Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 genes in the mesenchyme
cells and the overexpression of Fgf4 and Fgf8 genes in the anterior region of the
AER of hindlimbs of BrdU-treated fetuses. Our study shows that the injection of
BrdU changed the PCD and gene expression during limb development and induced
time-specific limb malformations during fetal development. This examination of
the changes of the PCD and gene expression will be useful markers for the
investigation of toxicities and teratologieties of other chemicals now present in
the world environment.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10964760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Aug;8(8):561-70.

Physical map of a 1.5 mb region on 12p11.2 harbouring a synpolydactyly associated
chromosomal breakpoint.

Debeer P(1), Schoenmakers EF, Thoelen R, Holvoet M, Kuittinen T, Fabry G, Fryns
JP, Goodman FR, Van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven and Flanders Interuniversity
Institute for Biotechnology, Belgium.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a rare malformation of the distal limbs known to be
caused by mutations in HOXD13. We have previously described a complex form of SPD
associated with synostoses in three members of a Belgian family, which
co-segregates with a t(12;22)(p11.2;q13.3) chromosomal translocation. The
chromosome 12 breakpoint of this translocation maps to 12p11.2 between markers
D12S1034 and D12S1596. Here we show that a mutation in the HOXD13 gene is not
responsible for the phenotype, and present a physical map of the region around
the 12p11.2 breakpoint. Starting from D12S1034 and D12S1596, we have established 
a contig approximately 1.5 Mb in length, containing 13 YAC clones, 16 BAC clones,
and 11 cosmid clones. FISH analysis shows that cosmid LL12NCO1-149H4 maps across 
the breakpoint, and Southern blot experiments using fragments of this cosmid as
probes identify a rearranged BamHI fragment in the patients carrying the
translocation. A search for expressed sequences within the contig have so far
revealed one CpG island, seven anonymous ESTs and three previously characterised 
genes, DAD-R, KRAG and HT21, all of which were found not to be directly disrupted
by the translocation. The gene represented by EST R72964 was found to be
disrupted by the translocation. These findings lay the groundwork for further
efforts to characterise a gene critical for normal distal limb development that
is perturbed by this translocation.

PMID: 10951517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Orthop Res. 2000 May;18(3):340-4.

Localization of dominantly inherited isolated triphalangeal thumb to chromosomal 
region 7q36.

Dobbs MB(1), Dietz FR, Gurnett CA, Morcuende JA, Steyers CM, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa
City 52242-1088, USA. matthew-dobbs@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    J Orthop Res. 2000 May;18(3):339.

Triphalangeal thumb is an autosomal dominantly inherited form of abnormal
preaxial skeletal development. In most families, however, the triphalangeal thumb
phenotype coexists with a spectrum of limb deformities, including polydactyly and
syndactyly. We describe two Iowa kindreds with triphalangeal thumb. In one
family, with nine affected members, triphalangeal thumb was the only
manifestation of limb deformity. We performed linkage analysis on both pedigrees,
demonstrating a maximum LOD score of 6.23 with marker D7S559 on chromosome 7q36. 
This corresponds to a previous study of a candidate region of 450 kb in which
data from several families with preaxial polydactyly were employed. Further
analysis of the unique family with isolated triphalangeal thumb in the current
study may demonstrate allelic variability of the gene involved in these
disorders.

PMID: 10937618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Br J Haematol. 2000 Jul;110(1):210-3.

Generation of the NUP98-HOXD13 fusion transcript by a rare translocation,
t(2;11)(q31;p15), in a case of infant leukaemia.

Shimada H(1), Arai Y, Sekiguchi S, Ishii T, Tanitsu S, Sasaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Division, National Cancer Centre Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan. hrshimad@gan2.ncc.go.jp

We report a case of de novo acute myelomonocytic leukaemia with the
t(2;11)(q31;p15) translocation in a Japanese female infant. The NUP98-HOXD13
fusion transcript generated by the translocation was detected in the patient's
bone marrow cells by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Additionally, ectopic expression of the normal allele of the HOXD13 gene was
observed in this patient, suggesting that it might be associated with
leukaemogenic development. This case is the third report of t(2;11) leukaemia
with NUP98-HOXD13 and the first report showing that NUP98 rearrangements are
associated with infant leukaemia, as well as therapy-related acute myelogenous
leukaemia or myelodysplastic syndrome.

PMID: 10931000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mech Dev. 2000 Jul;95(1-2):101-12.

Expression and regulation of chicken fibroblast growth factor homologous factor
(FHF)-4 at the base of the developing limbs.

Muñoz-Sanjuán I(1), Fallon JF, Nathans J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, 805 PCTB, 725 North Wolfe Street, MD 21205, Baltimore, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor homologous factors (FHFs) have been implicated in limb
and nervous system development. In this paper we describe the expression of the
cFHF-4 gene during early chicken development. cFHF-4 is expressed in the paraxial
mesoderm, lateral ridge, and, most prominently, in the posterior-dorsal side of
the base of each limb bud. The expression pattern of cFHF-4 at the base of the
limbs is not altered by tissue grafts containing the zone of polarizing activity 
(ZPA), by implants of Shh-expressing cells, or by implants of beads containing
retinoic acid, nor does it depend on the distal growth of the limb as it is not
altered in limb buds that are surgically truncated. In three chicken mutants
affecting limb patterning - talpid(2), limbless, and wingless - altered patterns 
of cFHF-4 expression are correlated with abnormal nerve plexus formation and
altered patterns of limb bud innervation. Similarly, ectopic expression of cFHF-4
is correlated with a local induction of limb-like innervation patterns when beads
containing FGF-2 are implanted in the flank. In these experiments, both ectopic
innervation and ectopic expression of cFHF-4 in the flank were observed
regardless of the size of the FGF-2-induced outgrowths. By contrast, ectopic
expression of Shh and HoxD13 are seen only in the larger FGF-2-induced
outgrowths. Taken together, these data suggest that cFHF-4 regulates or is
coregulated with early events related to innervation at the base of the limbs.

PMID: 10906454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2471-9.

Molecular analysis of external genitalia formation: the role of fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) genes during genital tubercle formation.

Haraguchi R(1), Suzuki K, Murakami R, Sakai M, Kamikawa M, Kengaku M, Sekine K,
Kawano H, Kato S, Ueno N, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Resources and Development (CARD), Kumamoto University, Honjo
2-2-1, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The molecular mechanisms underlying the development of the external genitalia in 
mammals have been very little examined. Recent gene knockout studies have
suggested that the developmental processes of its anlage, the genital tubercle
(GT), have much in common with those of limb buds. The Fgf genes have been
postulated as regulating several downstream genes during organogenesis. Fgf8 was 
expressed in the distal urethral plate epithelium of the genital tubercle (GT)
together with other markers such as the Msx1, Fgf10, Hoxd13 and Bmp4 expressed in
the mesenchyme. To analyze the role of the FGF system during GT formation, an in 
vitro organ culture system was utilized. It is suggested that the distal urethral
plate epithelium of GT, the Fgf8-expressing region, regulates the outgrowth of
GT. Ectopic application of FGF8 beads to the murine GT induced mesenchymal gene
expression, and also promoted the outgrowth of the GT. Experiments utilizing
anti-FGF neutralizing antibody suggested a growth-promoting role for FGF
protein(s) in GT outgrowth. In contrast, despite its vital role during limb-bud
formation, Fgf10 appears not to be primarily essential for initial outgrowth of
GT, as extrapolated from Fgf10(-/-) GTs. However, the abnormal external genitalia
development of Fgf10(-/-) perinatal mice suggested the importance of Fgf10 in the
development of the glans penis and the glans clitoridis. These results suggest
that the FGF system is a key element in orchestrating GT development.

PMID: 10804187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mamm Genome. 2000 Feb;11(2):151-8.

Evolution of N-terminal sequences of the vertebrate HOXA13 protein.

Mortlock DP(1), Sateesh P, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48104-0618, USA.

While the the role of the homeodomain in HOX function has been evaluated
extensively, little attention has been given to the non-homeodomain portions of
the HOX proteins. To investigate the evolution of the HOXA13 protein and to
identify conserved residues in the N-terminal region of the protein with
potential functional significance, N-terminal Hoxa13 coding sequences were
PCR-amplified from fish, amphibian, reptile, chicken, and marsupial and eutherian
mammal genomic DNA. Compared with fish HOXA13, the mammalian protein has
increased in size by 35% primarily owing to the accumulation of alanine repeats
and flanking segments rich in proline, glycine, or serine within the first 215
amino acids. Certain residues and amino acid motifs were strongly conserved, and 
several HOXA13 N-terminal domains were also shared in the paralogous HOXB 13 and 
HOXD13 genes; however, other conserved regions appear to be unique to HOXA13. Two
domains highly conserved in HOXA13 orthologs are shared with Drosophila AbdB and 
other vertebrate AbdB-like proteins. Marsupial and eutherian mammalian HOXA13
proteins have three large homopolymeric alanine repeats of 14, 12, and 17-18
residues that are absent in reptiles, birds, and fish. Thus, the repeats arose
after the divergence of reptiles from the lineage that would give rise to the
mammals. In contrast, other short homopolymeric alanine repeats in mammalian
HOXA13 have remained virtually the same length, suggesting that forces driving or
limiting repeat expansion are context dependent. Consecutive stretches of
identical third-base usage in alanine codons within the large repeats were found,
supporting replication slippage as a mechanism for their generation. However,
numerous species-specific base substitutions affecting third-base alanine repeat 
codon positions were observed, particularly in the largest repeat. Therefore, if 
the large alanine repeats were present prior to eutherian mammal development as
is suggested by the opossum data, then a dynamic process of recurring replication
slippage and point mutation within alanine repeat codons must be considered to
reconcile these observations. This model might also explain why the alanine
repeats are flanked by proline, serine, and glycine-rich sequences, and it
reveals a biological mechanism that promotes increases in protein size and,
potentially, acquisition of new functions.

PMID: 10656931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genes Dev. 2000 Jan 15;14(2):198-211.

Mechanisms of Hox gene colinearity: transposition of the anterior Hoxb1 gene into
the posterior HoxD complex.

Kmita M(1), van Der Hoeven F, Zákány J, Krumlauf R, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Transposition of Hoxd genes to a more posterior (5') location within the HoxD
complex suggested that colinearity in the expression of these genes was due, in
part, to the existence of a silencing mechanism originating at the 5' end of the 
cluster and extending towards the 3' direction. To assess the strength and
specificity of this repression, as well as to challenge available models on
colinearity, we inserted a Hoxb1/lacZ transgene within the posterior HoxD
complex, thereby reconstructing a cluster with a copy of the most anterior gene
inserted at the most posterior position. Analysis of Hoxb1 expression after
ectopic relocation revealed that Hoxb1-specific activity in the fourth rhombomere
was totally abolished. Treatment with retinoic acid, or subsequent relocations
toward more 3' positions in the HoxD complex, did not release this silencing in
hindbrain cells. In contrast, however, early and anterior transgene expression in
the mesoderm was unexpectedly not suppressed. Furthermore, the transgene induced 
a transient ectopic activation of the neighboring Hoxd13 gene, without affecting 
other genes of the complex. Such a local and transient break in colinearity was
also observed after transposition of the Hoxd9/lacZ reporter gene, indicating
that it may be a general property of these transgenes when transposed at an
ectopic location. These results are discussed in the context of existing models, 
which account for colinear activation of vertebrate Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC316340
PMID: 10652274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 15;216(2):595-610.

Targeted disruption of Hoxd9 and Hoxd10 alters locomotor behavior, vertebral
identity, and peripheral nervous system development.

de la Cruz CC(1), Der-Avakian A, Spyropoulos DD, Tieu DD, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California at Los Angeles School of
Medicine 90024, USA.

The five most 5' HoxD genes, which are related to the Drosophila Abd-B gene, play
an important role in patterning axial and appendicular skeletal elements and the 
nervous system of developing vertebrate embryos. Three of these genes, Hoxd11,
Hoxd12, and Hoxd13, act synergistically to pattern the hindlimb autopod. In this 
study, we examine the combined effects of two additional 5' HoxD genes, Hoxd9 and
Hoxd10. Both of these genes are expressed posteriorly in overlapping domains in
the developing neural tube and axial mesoderm as well as in developing limbs.
Locomotor behavior in animals carrying a double mutation in these two genes was
altered; these alterations included changes in gait, mobility, and adduction.
Morphological analysis showed alterations in axial and appendicular skeletal
structure, hindlimb peripheral nerve organization and projection, and distal
hindlimb musculature. These morphological alterations are likely to provide the
substrate for the observed alterations in locomotor behavior. The alterations
observed in double-mutant mice are distinct from the phenotypes observed in mice 
carrying single mutations in either gene, but exhibit most of the features of
both individual phenotypes. This suggests that the combined activity of two
adjacent Hox genes provides more patterning information than activity of each
gene alone. These observations support the idea that adjacent Hox genes with
overlapping expression patterns may interact functionally to provide patterning
information to the same regions of developing mouse embryos.

PMID: 10642795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 1999;(11):22-6.

[Regulation of child development: genetic aspects].

[Article in Russian]

Ivanov VI.

Since antiquity numerous attempts have been made to evaluate a relative role of
heredity and the environment in human development. In the last quarter of the
19th century Francis Galton formulated this problem as a dilemma of "Nature or
Nurture"? Actually, human development is the fulfillment of a genetic programme
inherited by an individual from his/her parents under quite definite
environmental conditions. So, Galton's query is rather to be reformulated into a 
statement--"Nature or Nurture". The genetic programme of an individual is
established during fertilization when the haploid nuclei of an egg-cell and sperm
are united to form a diploid nucleus of the zygote. During subsequent
proliferation and differentiation, the zygote progressively develops into an
embryo, fetus, neonate and so on. Little known about genetic factors regulating
human embryogenesis and fetogenesis. Some important inferences were made when it 
was found that many regulatory genes and gene families comprehensively
investigated in Drosophila are close homologues to respective human genes. Among 
such genes are those coding for transcription factors presumably taking part in
cascade regulation of embryogenesis. Some mutations of these genes were found to 
be involved in the origin of certain malformations in humans (Sonic Hedgehog,
HOXD13 etc.). Within a wide spectrum of human malformation syndromes, a
considerable part is comprised by chromosomal disorders, especially those related
to partial aneusomies (some 2,000 forms). Clinical manifestations of such
chromosomal syndromes are highly variable, which calls for application of
computer-assisted devices for their classification and diagnosis. In addition to 
a number of well elaborated English- and French-language databases,
Russian-language computer banks of cytogenetic and clinical data aimed at
practical use in genetic health care, teaching, and research are already
available; among them there are "SYNGEN", "CHRODYS", "CHRODYS-PHOTO" elaborated
in the Research Center for Medical Genetics of the Russian Academy of Medical
Sciences, Moscow.

PMID: 10635748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Growth Differ. 1999 Oct;41(5):567-74.

Sonic hedgehog signaling during digit pattern duplication after application of
recombinant protein and expressing cells.

Wada N(1), Kawakami Y, Nohno T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Kawasaki Medical School, Kurashiki Japan.

HoxD expression and cartilage pattern formation were compared after application
of a recombinant amino-terminal peptide of Sonic hedgehog protein (Shh-N) and
implantation of cells expressing the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene. During digit
duplication after implantation of a Shh-N-soaked bead, BMP-2 and Patched
expression was transiently induced in the anterior limb mesenchyme 20 h after
grafting, but was reduced to the basal level 48 h after grafting. On the
contrary, when Shh-expressing cells were grafted to the anterior limb bud,
expression domains of the BMP-2 and Patched genes were initially induced in the
restricted region in close proximity to the grafted cells. Induced expression of 
BMP-2 and Patched was maintained in the anterior-peripheral region of the limb
bud for 42 h after grafting. In either case, HoxD12 and HoxD13 were consistently 
induced in the anterior-distal limb mesenchyme, accompanying mirror-image
duplication of the digit pattern. Induction and maintenance of HoxD expression
were consistent with the resultant digit pattern. A steep gradient of Shh
activity provided by Shh-expressing cells is most adequate to induce complete
digit pattern, as compared to the shallow gradient provided by Shh-N protein
released from a bead. These results suggest that positional identity is
respecified by Shh-N activity within the first 24 h during digit duplication, and
that Shh-N on its own is not acting as a long-range signaling molecule to
determine positional identity at a distance in the limb bud.

PMID: 10545029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mech Dev. 1999 Nov;88(2):147-57.

Disrupting the establishment of polarizing activity by teratogen exposure.

Bell SM(1), Schreiner CM, Scott WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Division of Developmental Biology,
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. sheila.bell@chmcc.org

Between days 9.5 and 10, the forelimb buds of developing murine embryos progress 
from stage 1 which are just beginning to express shh and whose posterior mesoderm
has only weak polarizing activity to stage 2 limbs with a distinguishable shh
expression domain and full polarizing activity. We find that exposure on day 9.5 
to teratogens that induce the loss of posterior skeletal elements disrupts the
polarizing activity of the stage 2 postaxial mesoderm and polarizing activity is 
not subsequently restored. The ontogeny of expression of the mesodermal markers
shh, ptc, bmp2, and hoxd-12 and 13, as well as the ectodermal markers wnt7a,
fgf4, fgf8, cx43, and p21 occurred normally in day 9.5 teratogen-exposed limb
buds. At stage 3, the treated limb apical ectodermal ridge usually possessed no
detectable abnormalities, but with continued outgrowth postaxial deficiencies
became evident. Recombining control, stage matched limb bud ectoderm with treated
mesoderm prior to ZPA grafting restored the duplicating activity of treated ZPA
tissue. We conclude that in addition to shh an early ectoderm-dependent signal is
required for the establishment of the mouse ZPA and that this factor is dependent
on the posterior ectoderm.

PMID: 10534614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Int J Dev Biol. 1999 Jul;43(4):287-94.

Altered Hox expression and increased cell death distinguish Hypodactyly from
Hoxa13 null mice.

Post LC(1), Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0618,
USA.

Hypodactyly (Hoxa13Hd) mice have a small deletion within the coding sequence of
Hoxa13 and a limb phenotype that is more severe than that of mice with an
engineered null allele of Hoxa13. We used whole-mount in situ hybridization, Nile
blue sulfate staining and genetic crosses to determine the basis for the
phenotypic differences between these two mutants. Expression of Hoxd13 was
unaffected in Hoxa13-/- mice, but its domain was reduced at the anterior and
posterior margins of the autopod in Hoxa13Hd/Hd limb buds. The maturation of
Hoxd11 expression was delayed and expression of Hoxa11 failed to become
restricted to the autopod/zeugopod junction in both Hoxa13Hd/Hd and Hoxa13-/-
limb buds compared to wild-type mice. Fgf8 expression was normal in both
Hoxa13Hd/Hd and Hoxa13-/- mice throughout limb development. A dramatic increase
in cell death was observed in limb bud mesenchyme of Hoxa13Hd/Hd mice as early as
E11.5 but not in mice homozygous for the null allele. Genetic background was
excluded as the basisforthe phenotypic differences. Compound heterozygotes
(Hoxa13-/Hd) displayed an intermediate phenotype relative to both homozygotes
suggesting that Hoxa13Hd has an effect on the development of the autopod beyond
that which may result from a loss of HOXA13 protein. These results showthat
Hoxa13Hd has a negative effect on the survival of the mesenchyme in the autopod, 
unlike the Hoxa13 null mutation, that cannot be explained by a failure of the AER
to express Fgfs. In addition, at least one target of HOXA13 may be Hoxa11.

PMID: 10470645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Biol. 1999 Aug 1;212(1):137-49.

Constitutive activation of sonic hedgehog signaling in the chicken mutant
talpid(2): Shh-independent outgrowth and polarizing activity.

Caruccio NC(1), Martinez-Lopez A, Harris M, Dvorak L, Bitgood J, Simandl BK,
Fallon JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin,
53706, USA.

We have examined the developmental properties of the polydactylous chicken
mutant, talpid(2). Ptc, Gli1, Bmp2, Hoxd13, and Fgf4 are expressed throughout the
anteroposterior axis of the mutant limb bud, despite normal Shh expression. The
expression of Gli3, Ihh, and Dhh appears to be normal, suggesting that the Shh
signaling pathway is constitutively active in talpid(2) mutants. We show that
preaxial talpid(2) limb bud mesoderm has polarizing activity in the absence of
detectable Shh mRNA. When the postaxial talpid(2) limb bud (including all
Shh-expressing cells) is removed, the preaxial cells reform a normal-shaped
talpid(2) limb bud (regulate). However, a Shh-expressing region (zone of
polarizing activity) does not reform; nevertheless Fgf4 expression in the apical 
ectodermal ridge is maintained. Such reformed talpid(2) limb buds develop
complete talpid(2) limbs. After similar treatment, normal limb buds downregulate 
Fgf4, the preaxial cells do not regulate, and a truncated anteroposterior
deficient limb forms. In talpid(2) limbs, distal outgrowth is independent of Shh 
and correlates with Fgf4, but not Fgf8, expression by the apical ectodermal
ridge. We propose a model for talpid(2) in which leaky activation of the Shh
signaling pathway occurs in the absence of Shh ligand.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10419691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Blood. 1999 Jul 15;94(2):741-7.

NUP98 is fused to PMX1 homeobox gene in human acute myelogenous leukemia with
chromosome translocation t(1;11)(q23;p15).

Nakamura T(1), Yamazaki Y, Hatano Y, Miura I.

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Corp, Tokyo, Japan; The Cancer Institute,
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
takuro-ind@unin.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The nucleoporin gene NUP98 was found fused to the HOXA9, HOXD13, or DDX10 genes
in human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) with chromosome translocations
t(7;11)(p15;p15), t(2;11)(q35;p15), or inv(11)(p15;q22), respectively. We report 
here the fusion between the NUP98 gene and another homeobox gene PMX1 in a case
of human AML with a t(1;11)(q23;p15) translocation. The chimeric NUP98-PMX1
transcript was detected; however, there was no reciprocal PMX1-NUP98 fusion
transcript. Like the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion, NUP98 and PMX1 were fused in frame and
the N-terminal GLFG-rich docking region of the NUP98 and the PMX1 homeodomain
were conserved in the NUP98-PMX1 fusion, suggesting that PMX1 homeodomain
expression is upregulated and that the fusion protein may act as an oncogenic
transcription factor. The fusion to NUP98 results in the addition of the strong
transcriptional activation domain located in the N-terminal region of NUP98 to
PMX1. These findings suggest that constitutive expression and alteration of the
transcriptional activity of the PMX1 homeodomain protein may be critical for
myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10397741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jul;65(1):104-10.

Monodactylous limbs and abnormal genitalia are associated with hemizygosity for
the human 2q31 region that includes the HOXD cluster.

Del Campo M(1), Jones MC, Veraksa AN, Curry CJ, Jones KL, Mascarello JT,
Ali-Kahn-Catts Z, Drumheller T, McGinnis W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dysmorphology, Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Vertebrates have four clusters of Hox genes (HoxA, HoxB, HoxC, and HoxD). A
variety of expression and mutation studies indicate that posterior members of the
HoxA and HoxD clusters play an important role in vertebrate limb development. In 
humans, mutations in HOXD13 have been associated with type II syndactyly or
synpolydactyly, and, in HOXA13, with hand-foot-genital syndrome. We have
investigated two unrelated children with a previously unreported pattern of
severe developmental defects on the anterior-posterior (a-p) limb axis and in the
genitalia, consisting of a single bone in the zeugopod, either monodactyly or
oligodactyly in the autopod of all four limbs, and penoscrotal hypoplasia. Both
children are heterozygous for a deletion that eliminates at least eight
(HOXD3-HOXD13) of the nine genes in the HOXD cluster. We propose that the
patients' phenotypes are due in part to haploinsufficiency for HOXD-cluster
genes. This hypothesis is supported by the expression patterns of these genes in 
early vertebrate embryos. However, the involvement of additional genes in the
region could explain the discordance, in severity, between these human phenotypes
and the milder, non-polarized phenotypes present in mice hemizygous for HoxD
cluster genes. These cases represent the first reported examples of deficiencies 
for an entire Hox cluster in vertebrates and suggest that the diploid dose of
human HOXD genes is crucial for normal growth and patterning of the limbs along
the anterior-posterior axis.

PMCID: PMC1378080
PMID: 10364522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cell. 1999 Apr 30;97(3):407-17.

Breaking colinearity in the mouse HoxD complex.

Kondo T(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Switzerland.

Vertebrate Hox genes are activated in a spatiotemporal sequence that reflects
their clustered organization. While this colinear relationship is a property of
most metazoans with an anterior to posterior polarity, the underlying molecular
mechanisms are unknown. Previous work suggested that Hox genes were made
progressively available for transcription in the course of gastrulation, implying
the existence of an element capable of initiating a repressive conformation,
subsequently relieved from the clusters sequentially. We searched for this
element by combining a genomic walk with successive transgene insertions upstream
of the HoxD complex followed by a series of deletions. The largest deficiency
induced posterior homeotic transformations coincidentally with an earlier
activation of Hoxd genes. These data suggest that a regulatory element located
upstream of the complex is necessary for setting up the early pattern of Hox gene
colinear activation.

PMID: 10319820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Arthritis Rheum. 1999 Apr;42(4):686-96.

Expression of murine HOXD9 during embryonic joint patterning and in human T
lymphotropic virus type I tax transgenic mice with arthropathy resembling
rheumatoid arthritis.

Khoa ND(1), Hasunuma T, Kobata T, Kato T, Nishioka K.

Author information: 
(1)St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the expression of murine HOXD9 during normal joint
development and in arthritic joints of human T lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I)
tax transgenic mice and the role of HTLV-I tax in HOXD9 expression.
METHODS: Expression of HOXD9, HOXD1O, HOXD11, HOXD12, and HOXD13 genes in joint
tissues at the ankle/foot regions of mouse embryos at day 10 to day 18 of
gestation (E10-E18) and neonates within 10 days after birth was determined by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and in situ reverse transcription
methods. Adult synovial tissues from 5 HTLV-I tax transgenic mice with chronic
polyarthritis and 4 nontransgenic (normal) mice were also examined for expression
of these HOXD genes. The effect of HTLV-I on HOXD9 expression in cultured
synoviocytes was studied by in vitro infection and transfection experiments.
RESULTS: Expression of HOXD9 was detected in embryonic joints, preferentially on 
articular cartilage, only during the early stages of joint development (up to
E15), whereas other HOXD genes were expressed throughout the embryonic and
neonatal stages. In adult mice, transcripts of HOXD9 were specifically detected
in synovial tissues from 4 of 5 arthritic mice, especially in the lining and
sublining synovial cells, but not in synovial tissues of normal mice. Activation 
of HOXD9 was observed in cultured synoviocytes infected with HTLV-I in vitro as
well as in those transfected with HTLV-I tax.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HOXD9 is involved not only in the early
stages of normal joint development, but may also be involved in the pathologic
process of arthritis. HTLV-I tax appeared as an activator of this HOX gene in
cultured synoviocytes.

PMID: 10211882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Dev Biol. 1999 Apr 1;208(1):157-65.

Hox gene expression in limbs: colinearity by opposite regulatory controls.

Hérault Y(1), Beckers J, Gérard M, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, Geneva 4, 1211, Switzerland.

Genes of the HoxD complex have a crucial role in the morphogenesis of vertebrate 
limbs. During development, their functional domains are colinear with their
genomic positions within the HoxD cluster such that Hoxd13 and Hoxd12 are
necessary for digit development, whereas Hoxd11 and Hoxd10 are involved in making
forearms. Mutational analyses of these genes have demonstrated their importance
and illustrated the requirement for a precise control of their expression during 
early limb morphogenesis. To study the nature of this control, we have scanned
the posterior part of the HoxD complex with a targeted reporter transgene and
analyzed the response of this foreign promoter to limb regulatory influences. The
results suggest that this regulation is achieved through the opposite effects of 
two enhancer elements which would compete with each other for interacting with
nearby-located promoters. The physical position of a given gene within this
genomic interval of opposite regulations might thus determine its final
expression pattern. This model provides a conceptual link between the morphology 
of the future limb and the genetic organization of the Hox gene cluster, a
translation of a genomic context into a morphogenetic topology.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10075849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Curr Biol. 1999 Jan 28;9(2):97-100.

Identification of sonic hedgehog as a candidate gene responsible for the
polydactylous mouse mutant Sasquatch.

Sharpe J(1), Lettice L, Hecksher-Sorensen J, Fox M, Hill R, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

The mouse mutants of the hemimelia-luxate group (lx, lu, lst, Dh, Xt, and the
more recently identified Hx, Xpl and Rim4; [1] [2] [3] [4] [5]) have in common
preaxial polydactyly and longbone abnormalities. Associated with the duplication 
of digits are changes in the regulation of development of the anterior limb bud
resulting in ectopic expression of signalling components such as Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) and fibroblast growth factor-4 (Fgf4), but little is known about the
molecular causes of this misregulation. We generated, by a transgene insertion
event, a new member of this group of mutants, Sasquatch (Ssq), which disrupted
aspects of both anteroposterior (AP) and dorsoventral (DV) patterning. The mutant
displayed preaxial polydactyly in the hindlimbs of heterozygous embryos, and in
both hindlimbs and forelimbs of homozygotes. The Shh, Fgf4, Fgf8, Hoxd12 and
Hoxd13 genes were all ectopically expressed in the anterior region of affected
limb buds. The insertion site was found to lie close to the Shh locus.
Furthermore, expression from the transgene reporter has come under the control of
a regulatory element that directs a pattern mirroring the endogenous expression
pattern of Shh in limbs. In abnormal limbs, both Shh and the reporter were
ectopically induced in the anterior region, whereas in normal limbs the reporter 
and Shh were restricted to the zone of polarising activity (ZPA). These data
strongly suggest that Ssq is caused by direct interference with the cis
regulation of the Shh gene.

PMID: 10021368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Development. 1999 Jan;126(2):409-21.

Expression of chicken fibroblast growth factor homologous factor (FHF)-1 and of
differentially spliced isoforms of FHF-2 during development and involvement of
FHF-2 in chicken limb development.

Munoz-Sanjuan I(1), Simandl BK, Fallon JF, Nathans J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Department of Anatomy,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family have been identified as
signaling molecules in a variety of developmental processes, including important 
roles in limb bud initiation, growth and patterning. This paper reports the
cloning and characterization of the chicken orthologues of fibroblast growth
factor homologous factors-1 and -2 (cFHF-1/cFGF-12 and cFHF-2/cFGF-13,
respectively). We also describe the identification of a novel, conserved isoform 
of FHF-2 in chickens and mammals. This isoform arises by alternative splicing of 
the first exon of the FHF-2 gene and is predicted to encode a polypeptide with a 
distinct amino-terminus. Whole-mount in situ hybridization reveals restricted
domains of expression of cFHF-1 and cFHF-2 in the developing neural tube,
peripheral sensory ganglia and limb buds, and shows that the two cFHF-2
transcript isoforms are present in non-overlapping spatial distributions in the
neural tube and adjacent structures. In the developing limbs, cFHF-1 is confined 
to the posterior mesoderm in an area that encompasses the zone of polarizing
activity and cFHF-2 is confined to the distal anterior mesoderm in a region that 
largely overlaps the progress zone. Ectopic cFHF-2 expression is induced adjacent
to grafts of cells expressing Sonic Hedgehog and the zone of cFHF-2 expression is
expanded in talpid2 embryos. In the absence of the apical ectodermal ridge or in 
wingless or limbless mutant embryos, expression of cFHF-1 and cFHF-2 is lost from
the limb bud. A role for cFHF-2 in the patterning and growth of skeletal elements
is implied by the observation that engraftment of developing limb buds with QT6
cells expressing a cFHF-2 isoform that is normally expressed in the limb leads to
a variety of morphological defects. Finally, we show that a secreted version of
cFHF-2 activates the expression of HoxD13, HoxD11, Fgf-4 and BMP-2 ectopically,
consistent with cFHF-2 playing a role in anterior-posterior patterning of the
limb.

PMID: 9847253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Development. 1999 Jan;126(1):13-21.

Gli3 (Xt) and formin (ld) participate in the positioning of the polarising region
and control of posterior limb-bud identity.

Zúñiga A(1), Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

During initiation of limb-bud outgrowth in vertebrate embryos, the polarising
region (limb-bud organizer) is established upon activation of the Sonic Hedgehog 
(SHH) signaling molecule at the posterior limb-bud margin. Another hallmark of
establishing anteroposterior limb-bud identities is the colinear activation of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster (5'HoxD genes). The unique and
shared functions of Gli3 and formin in these determinative events were
genetically analyzed using single and double homozygous Extra-toes (Xt;
disrupting Gli3) and limb deformity (ld; disrupting formin) mouse embryos.
Analysis of the limb skeletal phenotypes reveals genetic interaction of the two
genes. In addition to loss of digit identity and varying degrees of polydactyly, 
proximal skeletal elements are severely shortened in Xt;ld double homozygous
limbs. The underlying molecular defects affect both establishment of the
polarising region and posterior limb-bud identity. In particular, the synergism
between Gli3- and formin-mediated mesenchyme-AER interactions positions the SHH
signaling center at the posterior limb-bud margin. The present study shows that
establishment and positioning of the polarising region is regulated both by
restriction of Shh through Gli3 and its positive feedback regulation through
formin. Concurrently, Gli3 functions independently of formin during initial
posterior nesting of 5'HoxD domains, whereas their subsequent distal restriction 
and anterior expansion depends on genetic interaction of Gli3 and formin.

PMID: 9834182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Med Genet. 1998 Oct;35(10):868-74.

Mesoaxial complete syndactyly and synostosis with hypoplastic thumbs: an unusual 
combination or homozygous expression of syndactyly type I?

Percin EF(1), Percin S, Egilmez H, Sezgin I, Ozbas F, Akarsu AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Cumhuriyet University, Medical
Faculty, Sivas, Turkey.

Syndactyly type I is an autosomal dominant condition with complete or partial
webbing between the third and fourth fingers or the second and third toes or
both. We report here a previously undescribed phenotype of severe mesoaxial
syndactyly and synostosis in patients born to affected parents. The
characteristic features of these severe cases are (1) complete syndactyly and
synostosis of the third and fourth fingers; (2) severe bone reduction in the
proximal phalanges of the same fingers; (3) hypoplasia of the thumbs and
halluces; (4) aplasia/hypoplasia of the middle phalanges of the second and fifth 
fingers; and (5) complete or partial soft tissue syndactyly of the toes. We
report on three offspring with this phenotype from two different branches of a
syndactyly type I family, suggesting that they may be homozygous for this
condition. SSCP and linkage analysis indicated that neither HOXD13 nor other
relevant genes in the chromosome 2q31 region was responsible for this phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1051468
PMID: 9783716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Res. 1998 Oct 1;58(19):4269-73.

NUP98-HOXD13 gene fusion in therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia.

Raza-Egilmez SZ(1), Jani-Sait SN, Grossi M, Higgins MJ, Shows TB, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

A novel chromosomal translocation, t(2;11)(q31;p15), was identified in a patient 
with therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia (t-AML). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization experiments mapped the breakpoint near NUP98; Southern blot
analysis demonstrated that the nucleoporin gene NUP98 was disrupted by this
translocation. We used rapid amplification of cDNA ends to identify a chimeric
mRNA. An in-frame, chimeric mRNA that fused NUP98 sequences to the homeobox gene 
HOXD13 was cloned; the predicted fusion protein contains both the GLFG repeats
from NUP98 as well as the homeodomain from HOXD13. The NUP98-HOXD13 fusion is
structurally similar to the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion previously identified in patients 
with AML, leading to the speculation that NUP98-homeobox gene fusions may be
oncogenic. Moreover, this report, along with a recent study that demonstrated
NUP98-DDX10 fusions in patients with t-AML, raises the possibility that NUP98 may
be a previously unsuspected target for chromosomal translocations in patients
with t-AML.

PMID: 9766650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Oct;63(4):992-1000.

Deletions in HOXD13 segregate with an identical, novel foot malformation in two
unrelated families.

Goodman F(1), Giovannucci-Uzielli ML, Hall C, Reardon W, Winter R, Scambler P.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Florence. fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a dominantly inherited congenital limb malformation
consisting of 3/4 syndactyly in the hands and 4/5 syndactyly in the feet, with
digit duplication in the syndactylous web. The condition recently has been found 
to result from different-sized expansions of an amino-terminal polyalanine tract 
in HOXD13. We report a novel type of mutation in HOXD13, associated in some cases
with features of classic SPD and in all cases with a novel foot phenotype. In two
unrelated families, each with a different intragenic deletion in HOXD13, all
mutation carriers have a rudimentary extra digit between the first and second
metatarsals and often between the fourth and fifth metatarsals as well. This
phenotype has not been reported in any mice with genetic modifications of the
HoxD gene cluster. The two different deletions affect the first exon and the
homeobox, respectively, in each case producing frameshifts followed by a long
stretch of novel sequence and a premature stop codon. Although the affected genes
may encode proteins that exert a dominant negative or novel effect, they are most
likely to act as null alleles. Either possibility has interesting implications
for the role of HOXD13 in human autopod development.

PMCID: PMC1377502
PMID: 9758628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):229-34.

Physical mapping of the t(12;22) translocation breakpoints in a family with a
complex type of 3/3'/4 synpolydactyly.

Debeer P(1), Schoenmakers EF, Thoelen R, Fryns JP, Van de Ven WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics and Flanders Interuniversity Institute for
Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium.

We previously reported clinical and radiological findings in a Belgian family
with a complex type of synpolydactyly associated with metacarpal and metatarsal
synostoses, cosegregating with a balanced t(12;22). Recently, expansions of a
polyalanine stretch within the first exon of the HOXD13 gene, which resides on
chromosome 2q31, have been shown to cause synpolydactyly (SPD). Using exon
amplification followed by direct sequencing, we were able to exclude the direct
involvement of the HOXD13 gene in this family. As a first step toward the
positional cloning of a candidate disease gene on chromosome 12 and/or 22
responsible for the type of complex synpolydactyly observed in this family, we
report here the construction of a somatic cell hybrid retaining only the der(22) 
of the t(12;22)(p11.3;q13.3). STS content mapping and FISH experiments allowed us
to position the chromosomal breakpoints between markers D12S1596 and D12S1034 on 
chromosome 12 and markers N73F4 and D22S158 on chromosome 22.

PMID: 9730609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3123-32.

Evidence that preaxial polydactyly in the Doublefoot mutant is due to ectopic
Indian Hedgehog signaling.

Yang Y(1), Guillot P, Boyd Y, Lyon MF, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, The Biolabs, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Patterning of the vertebrate limb along the anterior-posterior axis is controlled
by the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) located at the posterior limb margin.
One of the vertebrate Hh family members, Shh, has been shown to be able to
mediate the function of the ZPA. Several naturally occurring mouse mutations with
the phenotype of preaxial polydactyly exhibit ectopic Shh expression at the
anterior limb margin. In this study, we report the molecular characterization of 
a spontaneous mouse mutation, Doublefoot (Dbf). Dbf is a dominant mutation which 
maps to chromosome 1. Heterozygous and homozygous embryos display a severe
polydactyly with 6 to 8 digits on each limb. We show here that Shh is expressed
normally in Dbf mutants. In contrast, a second Hh family member, Indian hedgehog 
(Ihh) which maps close to Dbf, is ectopically expressed in the distal limb bud.
Ectopic Ihh expression in the distal and anterior limb bud results in the ectopic
activation of several genes associated with anterior-posterior and
proximal-distal patterning (Fgf4, Hoxd13, Bmp2). In addition, specific components
in the Hedgehog pathway are either ectopically activated (Ptc, Ptc-2, Gli1) or
repressed (Gli2). We propose that misexpression of Ihh, and not a novel
Smoothened ligand as recently suggested (Hayes et al., 1998), is responsible for 
the Dbf phenotype. We consider that Ihh has a similar activity to Shh when
expressed in the early Shh-responsive limb bud. To determine whether Dbf maps to 
the Ihh locus, which is also on chromosome 1, we performed an interspecific
backcross. These results demonstrate that Dbf and Ihh are genetically separated
by approximately 1.3 centimorgans, suggesting that Dbf mutation may cause an
exceptionally long-range disruption of Ihh regulation. Although this leads to
ectopic activation of Ihh, normal expression of Ihh in the cartilaginous elements
is retained.

PMID: 9671585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Cell. 1998 Jan;1(2):289-300.

Control of colinearity in AbdB genes of the mouse HoxD complex.

Kondo T(1), Zákány J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

During development, vertebrate Hox genes are activated in a temporal and spatial 
sequence colinear with the position of the genes within their clusters. To
investigate the mechanistic basis of this phenomenon, we used the ES cell
technology and the loxP/Cre system to engineer a conditional fusion of the 5'
exon of Hoxd-13 with the 3' exon of Hoxd-12. This hybrid transcription unit was
regulated like Hoxd-11, with expression limits in the trunk, limbs, intestinal,
and urogenital systems more anterior than those expected for either Hoxd-13 or
Hoxd-12. An in vivo interspecies replacement by the fish homologous DNA fragment 
showed that anteriorization was not due to a distance effect, thus suggesting the
presence of a regulatory element between Hoxd-13 and Hoxd-12 that may contribute 
to the establishment, early on, of a repressive state over these two genes.

PMID: 9659925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Jun;7(6):1033-8.

A new spontaneous mouse mutation of Hoxd13 with a polyalanine expansion and
phenotype similar to human synpolydactyly.

Johnson KR(1), Sweet HO, Donahue LR, Ward-Bailey P, Bronson RT, Davisson MT.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. krj@jax.org

Human synpolydactyly (SPD) is an inherited congenital limb malformation caused by
mutations in the HOXD13 gene. Heterozygotes are typically characterized by 3/4
finger and 4/5 toe syndactyly with associated duplicated digits; hands and feet
of homozygotes are very small because of a shortening of the phalanges,
metacarpal and metatarsal bones. Here we describe the phenotype and molecular
basis of a spontaneous mutation of Hoxd13 in mice that provides a phenotypically 
and molecularly accurate model for human SPD. The new mutation, named
synpolydactyly homolog (spdh), is a 21 bp in-frame duplication within a
polyalanine-encoding region at the 5'-end of the Hoxd13 coding sequence. The
duplication expands the stretch of alanines from 15 to 22; the same type of
expansion occurs in human SPD mutations. spdh/spdh homozygotes exhibit severe
malformations of all four feet, including polydactyly, syndactyly and
brachydactylia. The phenotype of spdh is much more severe than that exhibited by 
mice with a genetically engineered, presumably null, disruption of Hoxd13. Thus
spdh probably acts in a dominant-negative manner and will be valuable for
examining interactions with other Hox genes and their protein products during
limb development. Homozygous mice of both sexes also lack preputial glands and
males do not breed; therefore, spdh/spdh mice may also be valuable in studies of 
reproductive physiology and behavior.

PMID: 9580668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Int J Dev Biol. 1997 Oct;41(5):733-6.

Shh, Fgf4 and Hoxd gene expression in the mouse limb mutant hypodactyly.

Robertson KE(1), Tickle C, Darling SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
UK.

The semidominant mouse mutation hypodactyly (Hd), caused by a deletion within the
Hoxa13 gene, results in reduced digits; heterozygotes lack digit I in the
hindlimb and homozygotes have only one digit on each limb. We investigated
expression of Shh and Fgf4 signaling molecules involved in digit specification in
mutant limb buds. Shh and Fgf4 are expressed in the posterior part of the limb
buds as normal but expression may be slightly prolonged. The extent of digit
reduction in hypodactyly is much more severe than in the Hoxa13 deficient mouse
and resembles that in the Hoxa13(-/-)/Hoxd13(-/-) double mutant mouse. We found
that the pattern of Hoxd13 and Hoxd11 transcripts was not markedly different in
the mutant compared with the normal limbs even though the mutant limbs are
narrower. Therefore Hoxd genes are transcribed as normal in the mutant. This
makes it likely that the severe digit reductions in hypodactyly are caused by
interference with Hoxd13 function at the protein level. Similar interactions
between mutant and normal HOX gene products have been suggested to occur in the
human semidominant disorder, synpolydactyly, caused by mutations in HOXD13.

PMID: 9415493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Development. 1997 Dec;124(23):4781-91.

Gene dosage-dependent effects of the Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13 mutations on
morphogenesis of the terminal parts of the digestive and urogenital tracts.

Warot X(1), Fromental-Ramain C, Fraulob V, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collége de France, Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg.

Gene targeting experiments have shown that the murine Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13
paralogous genes control skeletal patterning in the distal region of the
developing limbs. However, both genes are also expressed in the terminal part of 
the digestive and urogenital tracts during embryogenesis and postnatal
development. Here, we report the abnormalities occuring in these systems in
Hoxa-13(-/-) and Hoxa-13/Hoxd-13 compound mutant mice. Hoxa-13(-/-) mutant
fetuses show agenesis of the caudal portion of the Müllerian ducts, lack of
development of the presumptive urinary bladder and premature stenosis of the
umbilical arteries, which could account for the lethality of this mutation at
mid-gestational stages. Due to such lethality, only Hoxa-13(+/-)/Hoxd-13(-/-)
compound mutants can reach adulthood. These compound mutants display: (i)
agenesis or hypoplasia of some of the male accessory sex glands, (ii)
malpositioning of the vaginal, urethral and anal openings, and improper
separation of the vagina from the urogenital sinus, (iii) hydronephrosis and (iv)
anomalies of the muscular and epithelial layers of the rectum. Thus, Hoxa-13 and 
Hoxd-13 play important roles in the morphogenesis of the terminal part of the gut
and urogenital tract. While Hoxa-13(-/-)/Hoxd-13(+/-) fetuses show severely
impaired development of the urogenital sinus, double null
(Hoxa-13[-/-]/Hoxd-13[-/-]) fetuses display no separation of the terminal
(cloacal) hindgut cavity into a urogenital sinus and presumptive rectum, and no
development of the genital bud, thereby demonstrating that both genes act, in a
partly redundant manner, during early morphogenesis of posterior trunk
structures.

PMID: 9428414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Development. 1998 Feb;125(3):351-7.

Sonic hedgehog is not required for polarising activity in the Doublefoot mutant
mouse limb bud.

Hayes C(1), Brown JM, Lyon MF, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, UK.

The mouse mutant Doublefoot (Dbf) shows preaxial polydactyly of all four limbs.
We have analysed limb development in this mutant with respect to morphogenesis,
gene expression patterns and ectopic polarising activity. The results reveal a
gain-of-function mutation at a locus that mediates pattern formation in the
developing limb. Shh expression is identical with that of wild-type embryos, i.e.
there is no ectopic expression. However, mesenchyme from the anterior aspects of 
Dbf/+ mutant limb buds, when transplanted to the anterior side of chick wing
buds, induces duplication of the distal skeletal elements. Mid-distal mesenchymal
transplants from early, but not later, Dbf/+ limb buds are also able to induce
duplication. This demonstration of polarising activity in the absence of Shh
expression identifies the gene at the Dbf locus as a new genetic component of the
Shh signalling pathway, which (at least in its mutated form) is able to activate 
signal transduction independently of Shh. The mutant gene product is sufficient
to fulfil the signalling properties of Shh including upregulation of the direct
Shh target genes Ptc and Gli, and induction of the downstream target genes Bmp2, 
Fgf4 and Hoxd13. The expression domains of all these genes extend from their
normal posterior domains into the anterior part of the limb bud without being
focused on a discrete ectopic site. These observations dissociate polarising
activity from Shh gene expression in the Dbf/+ limb bud. We suggest that the
product of the normal Dbf gene is a key active constituent of the polarising
region, possibly acting in the extracellular compartment.

PMID: 9425131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Development. 1997 Oct;124(20):3999-4008.

Polydactyly and ectopic ZPA formation in Alx-4 mutant mice.

Qu S(1), Niswender KD, Ji Q, van der Meer R, Keeney D, Magnuson MA, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Correct development of the limb is dependent on coordination between three
distinct signaling centers. Recently, fibroblast growth factor-4 has been
identified as a crucial determinant of AER function, which directs limb bud
outgrowth, and Sonic hedgehog has been identified as a signaling molecule that
mediates ZPA function, which specifies anterior-posterior patterning in the
developing limb bud. In addition, Shh and FGF-4 reciprocally reinforce each
other's expression via a positive feedback loop, providing a molecular basis for 
the coordination of limb bud outgrowth and anterior-posterior patterning. The
mechanisms by which these signaling centers come to occupy their normal positions
in the posterior limb bud during development are not understood. Here we identify
and characterize Alx-4, a gene that encodes a paired-type homeodomain protein.
Alx-4 is expressed in several populations of mesenchymal cells, including
mesenchymal cells in the anterior limb bud, and mice homozygous for targeted
disruption of the Alx-4 gene have multiple abnormalities, including preaxial
polydactyly. The polydactyly is associated with the formation of an ectopic
anterior ZPA, as indicated by anterior expression of Sonic hedgehog, HoxD13 and
fibroblast growth factor-4. The expression of other candidate regulators of
anterior-posterior positional information in the limb bud, including HoxB8 and
Gli3, is not altered in Alx-4 mutant embryos. By chromosomal mapping experiments,
Alx-4 is tightly linked to Strong's luxoid, a polydactylous mouse mutant. The
results identify Alx-4 as a determinant of anterior-posterior positional identity
in the limb and a component of a regulatory program that restricts ZPA formation 
to the posterior limb bud mesenchyme.

PMID: 9374397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Development. 1997 Sep;124(18):3493-500.

Ulnaless (Ul), a regulatory mutation inducing both loss-of-function and
gain-of-function of posterior Hoxd genes.

Hérault Y(1), Fraudeau N, Zákány J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Switzerland.

Ulnaless (Ul), an X-ray-induced dominant mutation in mice, severely disrupts
development of forearms and forelegs. The mutation maps on chromosome 2, tightly 
linked to the HoxD complex, a cluster of regulatory genes required for proper
morphogenesis. In particular, 5'-located (posterior) Hoxd genes are involved in
limb development and combined mutations within these genes result in severe
alterations in appendicular skeleton. We have used several engineered alleles of 
the HoxD complex to genetically assess the potential linkage between these two
loci. We present evidence indicating that Ulnaless is allelic to Hoxd genes.
Important modifications in the expression patterns of the posterior Hoxd-12 and
Hoxd-13 genes at the Ul locus suggest that Ul is a regulatory mutation that
interferes with a control mechanism shared by multiple genes to coordinate Hoxd
function during limb morphogenesis.

PMID: 9342042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jul 8;94(14):7458-63.

Synpolydactyly phenotypes correlate with size of expansions in HOXD13 polyalanine
tract.

Goodman FR(1), Mundlos S, Muragaki Y, Donnai D, Giovannucci-Uzielli ML, Lapi E,
Majewski F, McGaughran J, McKeown C, Reardon W, Upton J, Winter RM, Olsen BR,
Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London
WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a dominantly inherited congenital limb malformation.
Typical cases have 3/4 finger and 4/5 toe syndactyly, with a duplicated digit in 
the syndactylous web, but incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity are
common. The condition has recently been shown to be caused by expansions of an
imperfect trinucleotide repeat sequence encoding a 15-residue polyalanine tract
in HOXD13. We have studied 16 new and 4 previously published SPD families, with
between 7 and 14 extra residues in the tract, to analyze the molecular basis for 
the observed variation in phenotype. Although there is no evidence of change in
expansion size within families, even over six generations, there is a highly
significant increase in the penetrance and severity of phenotype with increasing 
expansion size, affecting both hands (P = 0.012) and feet (P < 0. 00005).
Affected individuals from a family with a 14-alanine expansion, the largest so
far reported, all have a strikingly similar and unusually severe limb phenotype, 
involving the first digits and distal carpals. Affected males from this family
also have hypospadias, not previously described in SPD, but consistent with
HOXD13 expression in the developing genital tubercle. The remarkable correlation 
between phenotype and expansion size suggests that expansion of the tract leads
to a specific gain of function in the mutant HOXD13 protein, and has interesting 
implications for the role of polyalanine tracts in the control of transcription.

PMCID: PMC23843
PMID: 9207113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Matrix Biol. 1997 May;16(2):53-8.

The role of sonic hedgehog in vertebrate development.

Weed M(1), Mundlos S, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Members of the hedgehog family are important signalling molecules during
embryonic development. One member, Sonic hedgehog, is expressed in embryonic
structures such as the zone of polarizing activity in the posterior limb bud, the
notochord, and the floor plate of the neural tube, where it plays a role in
patterning of the embryo. Sonic hedgehog is synthesized as an inactive precursor 
which must be proteolytically cleaved and modified by the addition of a
cholesterol moiety to become active as a signalling molecule. In this processing,
the C-terminal region of Sonic hedgehog serves as both the endoprotease and a
cholesterol transferase. The importance of cholesterol for Sonic hedgehog
function may explain many of the profound developmental defects caused by
perturbations of cholesterol metabolism. The receptor for Sonic hedgehog is
Patched, a multi-pass transmembrane protein which forms a complex with Smoothened
Mutations in Patched are associated with basal cell naevus syndrome, while
mutations in Sonic hedgehog cause holoprosencephaly. Downstream targets of Sonic 
hedgehog signalling are transcription factors like Gli3, responsible for Greigs
polycephalosyndactyly in humans and Hoxd13, responsible for polysyndactyly.

PMID: 9205942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Dyn. 1997 Apr;208(4):454-65.

Male accessory sex organ morphogenesis is altered by loss of function of Hoxd-13.

Podlasek CA(1), Duboule D, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Urology Department, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.

The role of the Hox gene Hoxd-13 in postnatal morphogenesis of the male accessory
sex organs was examined by correlating the distribution and temporal regulation
of expression in the accessory sex organs of postnatal mice with morphologic
abnormalities of Hoxd-13-deficient transgenic mice. Previous studies of Hoxd-13
expression in the perinatal period have shown a broad domain of expression in the
lower genitourinary tract, with expression in both mesenchyme and epithelium;
focal expression was also noted in the epithelium of the nascent ducts of the
developing prostate. Quantitative RT-PCR studies of Hoxd-13 expression in the 5
day mouse confirm widespread expression in the accessory sex organs developing
from both the Wolffian duct and the urogenital sinus. Expression is
down-regulated with age, and a detailed time course of expression in the
developing prostate shows that the level of Hoxd-13 expression correlates with
morphogenetic activity in the development of the prostate ductal system.
Transgenic Hoxd-13-deficient mice display multiple abnormalities in the male
accessory sex organs. The most severe abnormalities were observed in organs
exhibiting ductal branching during postnatal development and included diminished 
mesenchymal folding in the seminal vesicles, decreased size and diminished ductal
branching in the ventral and dorsal prostate, and agenesis of the bulbourethral
gland. We conclude that Hoxd-13 expression in the postnatal period correlates
with a period of intense morphogenetic activity in accessory sex organ
development and that the function of Hoxd-13 is evidenced by morphologic
abnormalities in accessory sex organs of the Hoxd-13-deficient mutant.

PMID: 9097018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8198-206.

The Abd-B-like Hox homeodomain proteins can be subdivided by the ability to form 
complexes with Pbx1a on a novel DNA target.

Shen WF(1), Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

Previous studies showed that the Hox homeodomain proteins from paralog groups 1-8
display cooperative DNA binding with the non-Hox homeodomain protein Pbx,
mediated by a canonical YPWM. Although the Abd-B-like Hox proteins in paralogs
9-13 lack this sequence, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 were reported to bind with Pbx1a to
DNA. We show that these interactions require a tryptophan 6 amino acids
N-terminal to the homeodomain. Binding site selection for Hoxb-9 with Pbx1a
yielded ATGATTTACGAC, containing a novel TTAC Hox-binding site adjacent to a Pbx 
site. In the presence of Pbx1a, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 bound to targets containing
either TTAC or TTAT. These data extend previous findings that interactions with
Pbx define a Hox protein binding code for different DNA sequences across paralog 
groups 1 through 10. Members of the 11, 12, and 13 paralogs do not cooperatively 
bind DNA with Pbx1a, despite the presence of tryptophan residues N-terminal to
the homeodomain in Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-13. Hoxa-11, Hoxd-12, or Hoxd-13, in the
presence of Pbx1a, selected a TTAC Hox site but lacking a Pbx1a site. These data 
suggest that Abd-B-like Hox proteins bind to a novel TTAC site and can be divided
by their cooperative binding to DNA with Pbx1a.

PMID: 9079637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Science. 1997 Jan 17;275(5298):408-9.

Polyalanine expansion in synpolydactyly might result from unequal crossing-over
of HOXD13.

Warren ST.

Comment on
    Science. 1996 Apr 26;272(5261):548-51.

PMID: 9005557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6727-38.

Function of the Evx-2 gene in the morphogenesis of vertebrate limbs.

Hérault Y(1), Hraba-Renevey S, van der Hoeven F, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Switzerland.

Vertebrate gene members of the HoxD complex are essential for proper development 
of the appendicular skeletons. Inactivation of these genes induces severe
alterations in the size and number of bony elements. Evx-2, a gene related to the
Drosophila even-skipped (eve) gene, is located close to Hoxd-13 and is expressed 
in limbs like the neighbouring Hoxd genes. To investigate whether this tight
linkage reflects a functional similarity, we produced a null allele of Evx-2.
Furthermore, and because Hoxd-13 function is prevalent over that of nearby Hoxd
genes, we generated two different double mutant loci wherein both Evx-2 and
Hoxd-13 were inactivated in cis. The analysis of these various genetic
configurations revealed the important function of Evx-2 during the development of
the autopod as well as its genetic interaction with Hoxd-13. These results show
that, in limbs, Evx-2 functions like a Hoxd gene. A potential evolutionary
scenario is discussed, in which Evx-2 was recruited by the HoxD complex in
conjunction with the emergence of digits in an ancestral tetrapod.

PMCID: PMC452496
PMID: 8978698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3851-61.

The chick limbless mutation causes abnormalities in limb bud dorsal-ventral
patterning: implications for the mechanism of apical ridge formation.

Grieshammer U(1), Minowada G, Pisenti JM, Abbott UK, Martin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Program in Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0452, USA.

In chick embryos homozygous for the limbless mutation, limb bud outgrowth is
initiated, but a morphologically distinct apical ridge does not develop and limbs
do not form. Here we report the results of an analysis of gene expression in
limbless mutant limb buds. Fgf4, Fgf8, Bmp2 and Msx2, genes that are expressed in
the apical ridge of normal limb buds, are not expressed in the mutant limb bud
ectoderm, providing molecular support for the hypothesis that limb development
fails in the limbless embryo because of the inability of the ectoderm to form a
functional ridge. Moreover, Fgf8 expression is not detected in the ectoderm of
the prospective limb territory or the early limb bud of limbless embryos. Since
the early stages of limb bud outgrowth occur normally in the mutant embryos, this
indicates that FGF8 is not required to promote initial limb bud outgrowth. In the
absence of FGF8, Shh is also not expressed in the mutant limb buds, although its 
expression can be induced by application of FGF8-soaked beads. These observations
support the hypothesis that Fgf8 is required for the induction of Shh expression 
during normal limb development. Bmp2 expression was also not detected in mutant
limb mesoderm, consistent with the hypothesis that SHH induces its expression. In
contrast, SHH is not required for the induction of Hoxd11 or Hoxd13 expression,
since expression of both these genes was detected in the mutant limb buds. Thus, 
some aspects of mesoderm A-P patterning can occur in the absence of SHH and
factors normally expressed in the apical ridge. Intriguingly, mutant limbs
rescued by local application of FGF displayed a dorsalized feather pattern.
Furthermore, the expression of Wnt7a, Lmx1 and En1, genes involved in limb D-V
patterning, was found to be abnormal in mutant limb buds. These data suggest that
D-V patterning and apical ridge formation are linked, since they show that the
limbless mutation affects both processes. We present a model that explains the
potential link between D-V positional information and apical ridge formation, and
discuss the possible function of the limbless gene in terms of this model.

PMID: 9012506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nature. 1996 Nov 7;384(6604):69-71.

Synpolydactyly in mice with a targeted deficiency in the HoxD complex.

Zákány J(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Switzerland.

The morphogenesis of mammalian digits requires the function of several genes of
the HoxD complex during development of limb buds. Using embryonic stem (ES) cells
and a site-specific recombination system (loxP/Cre), we have induced a deficiency
that eliminates the products of the Hoxd-13, Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-11 genes
simultaneously. A Hoxd-11/lacz reporter gene replaced the deleted region in order
to monitor the effect of this triple inactivation at the cellular level. Mice
homozygous for this deficiency showed small digit primordia, a disorganized
cartilage pattern and impaired skeletal mass. These alterations are similar to
the defects seen in a human synpolydactyly, suggesting that this syndrome, which 
is associated with a subtle mutation in HOXD13 (ref. 8), may involve the loss of 
function of several Hoxd genes. These results indicate the existence of a
functional hierarchy among these genes and provide us with an animal model to
study human digit malformations.

PMID: 8900279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Development. 1996 Oct;122(10):2997-3011.

Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13 play a crucial role in the patterning of the limb autopod.

Fromental-Ramain C(1), Warot X, Messadecq N, LeMeur M, Dollé P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

Members of the Abdominal-B-related Hox gene subfamily (belonging to homology
groups 9 to 13) are coordinately expressed during limb bud development. Only two 
genes from homology group 13 (Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13) are specifically expressed in 
the developing distal region (the autopod), which displays the most complex and
evolutionarily flexible pattern among limb 'segments'. We report here that
targeted disruption of the Hoxa-13 gene leads to a specific forelimb and hindlimb
autopodal phenotype, distinct from that of the Hoxd-13 paralogous gene
inactivation. In both limbs, Hoxa-13 loss of function results in the lack of
formation of the most anterior digit and to altered morphogenesis of some
'preaxial' carpal/tarsal elements. We have generated mice with all possible
combinations of disrupted Hoxa-13 and/or Hoxd-13 alleles, which allowed us to
investigate the degree of functional specificity versus redundancy of the
corresponding gene products in the developing limb autopod. The phenotype of any 
double mutant was much more severe than the sum of the phenotypes seen in the
corresponding single mutants, indicating that these genes act in a partially
redundant manner. Our major findings were: (1) an abnormal autopodal phenotype in
Hoxa-13+/-/Hoxd-13+/- double heterozygous mutants, which mostly consists of
subsets of the alterations seen in each individual homozygous mutant, and
therefore appears to result from quantitative, rather than qualitative,
homeoprotein deficiency; (2) partly distinct alterations in mutants harboring a
single non-disrupted allele of Hoxa-13 or Hoxd-13, indicating that the remaining 
reduced protein amounts are not functionally equivalent; (3) a polydactyly in the
forelimbs of Hoxa-13+/-/Hoxd-13-/-double mutants, consisting of seven
symmetrically arranged, truncated and mostly non-segmented digits; (4) an almost 
complete lack of chondrified condensations in the autopods of double homozygous
mutants, showing that the activity of group 13 Hox gene products is essential for
autopodal patterning in tetrapod limbs.

PMID: 8898214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Development. 1996 Sep;122(9):2651-9.

Function of posterior HoxD genes in the morphogenesis of the anal sphincter.

Kondo T(1), Dollé P, Zákány J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Vertebrate 5'-located HoxD genes are expressed in the most caudal part of the
digestive tract and their potential functions during gut development have been
assessed by gene disruptions. We have inserted reporter lacZ sequences within the
Hoxd-12 gene and analysed the morphology of the gut in these mice as well as in
Hoxd-13 mutant animals. When homozygous, both mutations induce an important
disorganization of the anorectal region. In particular, severe alterations of the
smooth muscle layers of the rectum led to defective morphogenesis of the internal
anal sphincter. Similarly, Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-13 functionally overlap during digit 
development. The function of these genes in the morphogenesis of the digestive
system as well as their functional evolution are discussed.

PMID: 8787740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Hum Mol Genet. 1996 Jul;5(7):945-52.

Genomic structure of HOXD13 gene: a nine polyalanine duplication causes
synpolydactyly in two unrelated families.

Akarsu AN(1), Stoilov I, Yilmaz E, Sayli BS, Sarfarazi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
USA.

Synpolydactyly (SPD) is a limb malformation that shows a characteristic
manifestation in both hands and feet. This condition is inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait with reduced penetrance. We have recently mapped this locus
centromeric to the HOXD8 intragenic marker and suggested the HOXD13 gene as a
potential candidate for this condition. The genomic structure of HOXD13
established in this study consists of two exons that encodes a polypeptide of 335
amino acids. The downstream exon at the 3' end of this gene contains the
homeodomain sequences that are highly conserved. Sixty-three bp upstream of this 
exon lies a stretch of intronic CA-repeats that proved to be polymorphic in two
different populations. The upstream exon encodes 75% of the entire protein and
contains a stretch of 15 normal alanines at its 5' end. Sequence comparison at
this position in the homozygous affected individuals identified a total of 24
alanine residues that resulted from a duplication of nine polyalanines. In two
unrelated SPD families, this duplication was directly transmitted from the
affected parents to their affected, but not unaffected, offspring; in one family 
its size has remained constant for at least 150 years spanning over seven
generations. The presence of this duplication confirmed the status of four normal
gene carriers, one incomplete penetrance and two affected individuals who were
recombinants for HOXD8 or HOXD13-CA repeat markers. This duplication was not
present in 150 chromosomes of unrelated healthy subjects of two different
populations.

PMID: 8817328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Nat Genet. 1996 Jul;13(3):284-9.

The molecular basis of hypodactyly (Hd): a deletion in Hoxa 13 leads to arrest of
digital arch formation.

Mortlock DP(1), Post LC, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109-0618, USA.

Hypodactyly (Hd) is a semidominant mutation in mice that maps in a genetic
interval overlapping the Hoxa cluster. The profound deficiency of digital arch
structures in Hd/Hd mice is consistent with a defect in a gene activated late in 
limb morphogenesis. We have determined the structure of the Hoxa13 gene and
describe a 50-base pair deletion in the first exon of the Hd allele that probably
arose from unequal recombination or misalignment between triplet repeats. It is
predicted that no Hoxa13 protein is made from Hd mRNA. The hypodactyly limb
phenotype is similar to that of Hoxd13-deficient mice in sharing defects along
multiple axes and alterations in cartilage maturation; however, the overall
effects on digital arch formation are more severe in Hd/Hd mice. Our results
confirm the critical role of AbdB-like Hox genes in the development of the
autopod, and add to the spectrum of mutations involving triplet repeats.

PMID: 8673126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nat Genet. 1996 Jul;13(3):256-8.

Hox mutations au naturel.

Goff DJ, Tabin CJ.

PMID: 8673117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Dev Biol. 1996 Jun 15;176(2):185-98.

Morphological and molecular characterization of retinoic acid-induced limb
duplications in mice.

Niederreither K(1), Ward SJ, Dollé P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collége de France, Strasbourg.

This study reports a morphological, skeletal, and molecular characterization of
the supernumerary limbs induced by systemic administration of all-trans retinoic 
acid to egg-cylinder stage mouse embryos. As initially described by Rutledge et
al. (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 5436, 1994), we have found that oral
administration of all-trans retinoic acid (70 mg/kg body weight) at 5.5 days
postcoitum induced the formation of supernumerary limbs. Most often, these arose 
as a pair of extra buds located caudally and ventrally to the normal (orthotopic)
hindlimb buds without duplication of the lower body axis. The resulting one or
two supernumerary hindlimbs were connected to an imperfectly
mirror-image-duplicated pelvic girdle. Variable truncations of the stylopodium
and zeugopodium skeleton, as well as abnormal splitting of the distal skeleton,
were frequently observed. The apical ectodermal ridge of the extra limb buds
expressed expected growth factor genes. However, an ectopic anterior expression
of Sonic hedgehog and Hoxd-13 was seen in the supernumerary buds, suggesting that
these buds would incorporate potential polarizing cells of the hindlimb or
genital field and generate an ectopic polarizing zone. This is consistent with
the reverse orientation of most supernumerary limbs at later stages. Some of the 
buds did not express limb-specific markers and were thus expected to degenerate
or form nonlimb structures, as observed in an adult specimen. Less frequently,
extra limb buds with normal polarity were associated to a duplicated lower body
axis. Retinoic acid also generated a novel type of duplication in which "twin"
hindlimbs with two parallel apical ectodermal ridges and zones of polarizing
activity arose on one side of the embryo.

PMID: 8660860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Development. 1996 Jun;122(6):1821-8.

Activation of Fgf-4 and HoxD gene expression by BMP-2 expressing cells in the
developing chick limb.

Duprez DM(1), Kostakopoulou K, Francis-West PH, Tickle C, Brickell PM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Department of Molecular Pathology, University 
College London Medical School, UK.

Bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) has been implicated in the polarizing region
signalling pathway, which specifies pattern across the antero-posterior of the
developing vertebrate limb. Retinoic acid and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) can act as
polarizing signals; when applied anteriorly in the limb bud, they induce
mirror-image digit duplications and ectopic Bmp-2 expression in anterior
mesenchyme. In addition, the two signals can activate Fgf-4 expression in
anterior ridge and HoxD expression in anterior mesenchyme. We tested the role of 
BMP-2 in this signalling cascade by ectopically expressing human BMP-2 (hBMP-2)
at the anterior margin of the early wing bud using a replication defective
retroviral vector, and found that ectopic expression of Fgf-4 was induced in the 
anterior part of the apical ectodermal ridge, followed later by ectopic
expression of Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 in anterior mesenchyme. This suggests that
BMP-2 is involved in regulating Fgf-4 and HoxD gene expression in the normal limb
bud. Ectopically expressed hBMP-2 also induced duplication of digit 2 and
bifurcation of digit 3, but could not produce the mirror-image digit duplications
obtained with SHH-expressing cells. These results suggest that BMP-2 may be
involved primarily in maintenance of the ridge, and in the link between
patterning and outgrowth of the limb bud.

PMID: 8674421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Science. 1996 Apr 26;272(5261):548-51.

Altered growth and branching patterns in synpolydactyly caused by mutations in
HOXD13.

Muragaki Y(1), Mundlos S, Upton J, Olsen BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Jan 17;275(5298):408-9.

Hox genes regulate patterning during limb development. It is believed that they
function in the determination of the timing and extent of local growth rates.
Here, it is demonstrated that synpolydactyly, an inherited human abnormality of
the hands and feet, is caused by expansions of a polyalanine stretch in the
amino-terminal region of HOXD13. The homozygous phenotype includes the
transformation of metacarpal and metatarsal bones to short carpal- and
tarsal-like bones. The mutations identify the polyalanine stretch outside of the 
DNA binding domain of HOXD13 as a region necessary for proper protein function.

PMID: 8614804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Development. 1996 Apr;122(4):1175-85.

A mutational analysis of the 5' HoxD genes: dissection of genetic interactions
during limb development in the mouse.

Davis AP(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Using gene targeting in mice, we have undertaken a systematic mutational analysis
of the homeobox-containing 5' HoxD genes. In particular, we have characterized
the limb defects observed in mice with independent targeted disruptions of
hoxd-12 and hoxd-13. Animals defective for hoxd-12 are viable, fertile, and
appear outwardly normal yet have minor autopodal defects in the forelimb which
include a reduction in the bone length of metacarpals and phalanges, and a
malformation of the distal carpal bone d4. The limb phenotypes observed in
hoxd-13 mutant mice are more extensive, including strong reductions in length,
complete absences, or improper segmentations of many metacarpal and phalangeal
bones. Additionally, the d4 carpal bone is not properly formed and often produces
an extra rudimentary digit. To examine the genetic interactions between the 5'
HoxD genes, we bred these mutant strains with each other and with our previously 
characterized hoxd-11 mouse to produce a series of trans-heterozygotes. Skeletal 
analyses of these mice reveal that these genes interact in the formation of the
vertebrate limb, since the trans-heterozygotes display phenotypes not present in 
the individual heterozygotes, including more severe carpal, metacarpal and
phalangeal defects. Some of these phenotypes appear to be accounted for by a
delay in the ossification events in the autopod, which lead to either the failure
of fusion or the elimination of cartilaginous elements. Characteristically, these
mutations lead to the overall truncation of digits II and V on the forelimb.
Additionally, some trans-animals show the growth of an extra postaxial digit VI, 
which is composed of a bony element resembling a phalange. The results
demonstrate that these genes interact in the formation of the limb. In addition
to the previously characterized paralogous interactions, a multitude of
interactions between Hox genes is used to finely sculpt the forelimb. The 5' Hox 
genes could therefore act as a major permissive genetic milieu that has been
exploited by evolutionary adaptation to form the tetrapod limbs.

PMID: 8620844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Exp Zool. 1996 Mar 1;274(4):234-47.

FGF-2 influences cell movements and gene expression during limb development.

Li S(1), Anderson R, Reginelli AD, Muneoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans,
Louisiana 70118, USA.

FGF-2 is proposed to be an important ectodermal signal directing limb outgrowth
and patterning. Consistent with this hypothesis we show that ectopic application 
of FGF-2 can maintain the apical ectodermal ridge (AER)-dependent expression of
Sonic hedgehog (Shh), and AER-dependent zone of polarizing activity (ZPA)
signaling. We also find that ectopic FGF-2 applied to the posterior wing bud
caused a dramatic change in the morphology of the limb bud, and results in limbs 
that display a reduction in the length of individual skeletal elements and loss
of digits. Associated with these morphological changes was an FGF-2-stimulated
expansion and bifurcation of the expression domains of two posteriorly expressed 
genes, Shh and HoxD13. Applying FGF-2 at a central or anterior location in the
limb bud did not alter the Shh expression domain or cause digit loss. To test
whether ectopic application of FGF-2 into the posterior limb bud was influencing 
the movement of limb bud cells, we used the lipophilic dye DiI to map the
behavior of posterior cells in response to FGF-2. In response to FGF-2 posterior 
limb bud cells move in both a proximal and a distal direction, causing the
initially labeled cell population to bifurcate into two distinct domains. Our
data suggest that FGF-2 is influencing limb outgrowth by modifying cell movements
and subsequent position-specific cell-cell interactions that are important for
limb morphogenesis.

PMID: 8919748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mech Dev. 1996 Jan;54(1):9-21.

Teleost HoxD and HoxA genes: comparison with tetrapods and functional evolution
of the HOXD complex.

van der Hoeven F(1), Sordino P, Fraudeau N, Izpisúa-Belmonte JC, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

In tetrapods, Hox genes are essential for the proper organization and development
of axial structures. Experiments involving Hox gene inactivations have revealed
their particularly important functions in the establishment of morphological
transitions within metameric series such as the vertebral column. Teleost fish
show a much simpler range of axial (trunk or appendicular) morphologies, which
prompted us to investigate the nature of the Hox system in these lower
vertebrates. Here, we show that fish have a family of Hox genes, very similar in 
both number and general organization, to that of tetrapods. Expression studies,
carried out with HoxD and HoxA genes, showed that all vertebrates use the same
general scheme, involving the colinear activation of gene expression in both
space and time. Comparisons between tetrapods and fish allowed us to propose a
model which accounts for the primary function of this gene family. In this model,
a few ancestral Hox genes were involved in the determination of polarity in the
digestive tract and were further recruited in more elaborate axial structures.

PMID: 8808402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Dev Genet. 1996;19(1):74-84.

Effects of all-trans-retinoic acid on skeletal pattern, 5'HoxD gene expression,
and RAR beta 2/beta 4 promoter activity in embryonic mouse limbs.

Wood HB(1), Ward SJ, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Mouse embryos were exposed to all-trans-retinoic acid on day 11 or day 12 of
development and the resulting skeletal pattern alterations compared with early
effects on Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 expression domains and RAR-beta 2/beta 4 promoter 
activity. The effects on skeletal pattern showed a clear correlation between the 
timing of retinoic acid exposure and the sequence of mesenchymal condensation.
Ectopic RAR-beta 2/beta 4 promoter activity was detected within 2 hr of exposure 
to retinoic acid, and was present throughout the limb bud after 5 hr; it remained
high in the apical ectodermal ridge and proximal mesenchyme after 12 hr, by which
time the abnormal digital pattern could be seen. HoxD gene expression domains in 
the distal handplate were narrowed by 5 hr after maternal retinoic acid
administration on day 11. Following retinoic acid treatment on both day 11 and
day 12, the normal downregulation of Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 in the digital
mesenchymal condensations was retarded. There was no evidence to suggest that
RAR-beta 2/beta 4 promoter activity mediates the effects of RA on HoxD gene
expression, but ectopic promoter activity is a useful indicator of at least some 
of the sites in which RA levels are raised. We suggest (1) that the apical
ectodermal ridge is the most functionally significant of these sites, (2) that
raised retinoic acid levels in the ridge result in altered gene expression and/or
altered cell proliferation within this epithelium, (3) that both altered HoxD
gene expression domains and altered skeletal pattern formation are secondary to
this effect. There was a good correlation between the effects of retinoic acid on
Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-13 expression and delay of skeletal differentiation, suggesting 
that this may be a direct effect.

PMID: 8792611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Development. 1995 Dec;121(12):4237-45.

The limb deformity mutation disrupts the SHH/FGF-4 feedback loop and regulation
of 5' HoxD genes during limb pattern formation.

Haramis AG(1), Brown JM, Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.

Mutations in the murine limb deformity (ld) gene disrupt differentiation of the
Apical Ectodermal Ridge (AER) and patterning of distal limb structures. However, 
initial outgrowth of the limb bud is not affected, suggesting that early and late
functions of the AER are uncoupled. Similarly, activation of the 5' members of
the HoxD gene cluster (Hoxd-11 to Hoxd-13) is not affected in ld mutant posterior
limb bud mesenchyme, but the subsequent anteriorization of 5' HoxD domains is
delayed by about 12 hours and is associated with reduced levels of polarising
activity. These results indicate that the ld gene products act upstream of 5'
HoxD genes during patterning of the autopod. Expression of the signalling
molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the posterior limb bud mesenchyme is initiated
normally, but ceases prematurely indicating a defect in maintenance of Shh by the
ld mutant AER. Furthermore, no Fgf-4 transcripts are detected in the ld mutant
AER, whereas Fgf-8 transcripts remain expressed. However, Shh expression can be
rescued by heterospecific grafting of ld mutant posterior mesenchyme under a
wild-type chicken AER. These studies show that the AER defect in ld homozygous
limb buds causes disruption of the FGF-4/SHH feedback loop and support the
proposed essential role for FGF-4 in maintaining Shh expression during limb
pattern formation.

PMID: 8575323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Hum Mol Genet. 1995 Aug;4(8):1453-8.

Localization of the syndactyly type II (synpolydactyly) locus to 2q31 region and 
identification of tight linkage to HOXD8 intragenic marker.

Sarfarazi M(1), Akarsu AN, Sayli BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
USA.

Syndactyly type II (SynPolyDactyly; SPD) is an autosomal dominant condition with 
incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Sixty-two meioses from a kindred
with 425 individuals were used to map the SPD locus to 2q31 region, approximately
1.7 cM (Lod score = 12.96) centromeric to HOXD8 intragenic marker. Other
homeobox-containing genes in this region have previously been ordered as
cen-DLX1/DLX2-EVX2-(5' --> HOXD13..HOXD8.HOXD1 --> 3')-tel')-tel. A single
recombinant with HOXD8 excluded the most 3' end of HOXD cluster as a candidate
site for SPD, but a mutation in the 5' end of HOXD cluster, especially in HOXD13,
EVX2 or DLX2/DLX1, may still be responsible for this phenotype. An updated order 
of D2S142-D2S111-(D2S335/D2S333)-D2S326-D2 S1238-SPD-
(HOXD8/D2S1244)-(D2S300/D2S138)-D2S148- D2S324- D2S1384-D2S434 [sequence:see
text] was deduced from meiotic recombination events.

PMID: 7581388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Med Genet. 1995 Jan 16;55(2):155-60.

Deletion of chromosome 2q24-q31 causes characteristic digital anomalies: case
report and review.

Boles RG(1), Pober BR, Gibson LH, Willis CR, McGrath J, Roberts DJ, Yang-Feng TL.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

We describe a newborn boy with multiple anomalies, including bilateral split foot
and an interstitial deletion of chromosome 2 (q24.2-q31.1). Four additional cases
in 2 families involving similar deletions have been reported. Bilateral digital
anomalies of hands and feet were seen in all 5 cases, including a wide cleft
between the first and second toes, wide halluces, brachysyndactyly of the toes,
and camptodactyly of the fingers. Other common manifestations have included
postnatal growth and mental retardation, microcephaly, down-slanting palpebral
fissures, micrognathia, and apparently low-set ears. Bilateral digital anomalies 
were reported in 22 of 24 cases with deletions including at least part of region 
2q24-q31. Digital anomalies were not prevalent in 18 patients with deletions of
chromosome 2q not overlapping 2q24-q31. 2q31.1 appears to be the common deleted
segment in all cases with significant digital anomalies, which implies the
existence of one or more genes involved in distal limb morphogenesis in this
region. HOXD13 and EVX2, located in the proximity of 2q31, were not deleted in
our patient by Southern analysis. Bilateral digital malformations of the hands
and feet associated with other anomalies should be evaluated by chromosome
analysis focused at the 2q24-q31 region.

PMID: 7717414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int J Dev Biol. 1994 Dec;38(4):633-40.

Differential expression of two different homeobox gene families during mouse
tegument morphogenesis.

Kanzler B(1), Viallet JP, Le Mouellic H, Boncinelli E, Duboule D, Dhouailly D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie de la Différenciation Epithéliale, Université Joseph
Fourier, Grenoble, France.

The expression of six genes belonging to two different homeobox gene families was
studied during the embryonic and postnatal morphogenesis of head and body regions
of the mouse integument. The first family included the Otx1 and Otx2 genes, both 
related to the orthodenticle Drosophila gene and the second was represented by
four members of the Antennapedia class HOX genes: Hoxc8 and three Hoxd genes, d9,
d11 and d13. In situ hybridizations with 35S labeled antisense RNA probes were
performed on head serial frontonasal sections, as well as entire embryo and
postnatal tail longitudinal sections. The expression of these genes shows a
differential spatiotemporal pattern along the cephalo-caudal axis. In 12.5-day
and 15.5-day embryos, the Otx2 gene expression is restricted to the nasal
epithelium and its associated glands, while the Otx1 transcripts are present in
both nasal and facial integuments, including nasal glands and hair vibrissa
follicles. The Hoxc8 expression first appears in skin at 14.5 days of gestation
in the sternal region and is extended at 16.5 days to the thoracic ventral and
lumbar dorsal regions. The Hoxd9 and Hoxd11 genes are only expressed in the
caudal skin from 14.5 days of gestation. The Hoxd13 transcripts are the last to
appear, 2 days after birth, and are limited to the last epidermal cells to
differentiate, i.e. those of the hair matrix of the caudal pelage hair follicles.
Taken together, these observations strengthen the hypothesis that different
homeobox gene families specify the regional identity of the skin in the cephalic 
and body regions.

PMID: 7779685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Dev Biol. 1994 Feb;161(2):504-12.

Regeneration of HoxD expression domains during pattern regulation in chick wing
buds.

Hayamizu TF(1), Wanek N, Taylor G, Trevino C, Shi C, Anderson R, Gardiner DM,
Muneoka K, Bryant SV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Center, University of California, Irvine 92717.

The expression domains of genes located at the 5' end of the HoxD (formerly
Hox-4) complex appear to correlate with pattern along both the proximal-distal
(PrDi) and the anterior-posterior (AP) axes of the developing limb bud, and it
has been suggested that the HoxD gene products are involved in the specification 
of positional information during limb development. The apical ectodermal ridge is
required for limb outgrowth and is thought to influence mesodermal cells at the
distal end of the limb bud in a region within which patterning events occur. In
this paper, we examine the expression of 5' HoxD genes during PrDi pattern
regulation in chick wing buds. In limbs undergoing pattern regulation, we
demonstrate that the domains of HoxD11 and HoxD13 gene expression are
"regenerated" within 24 hr of removal of the distal mesenchyme. In contrast, in
limbs which will not form distal structures, HoxD13 expression becomes reduced.

PMID: 7906235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cell. 1993 Nov 5;75(3):431-41.

Disruption of the Hoxd-13 gene induces localized heterochrony leading to mice
with neotenic limbs.

Dollé P(1), Dierich A, LeMeur M, Schimmang T, Schuhbaur B, Chambon P, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS Unité 184 INSERM, 
Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Vertebrate Hoxd genes are sequentially activated during the morphogenesis and
pattern formation of the limb. Using the approach of gene disruption via
homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells, we have assessed the function
of the last gene of the complex, Hoxd-13. Mutant mice displayed skeletal
alterations along all body axes suggesting the existence of a general multiaxial 
patterning system. In limbs, abnormalities such as a reduction in the length of
some bony elements, loss of phalanges, bone fusions, and the presence of an extra
element were observed. We propose that the mutation induces local heterochrony,
as illustrated by an important retardation in limb morphogenesis. The relevance
of these observations to our understanding of the development and evolution of
the tetrapod limb is discussed.

PMID: 8106170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mech Dev. 1991 Dec;36(1-2):3-13.

The Hox-4.8 gene is localized at the 5' extremity of the Hox-4 complex and is
expressed in the most posterior parts of the body during development.

Dollé P(1), Izpisúa-Belmonte JC, Boncinelli E, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

We report the isolation and expression pattern of a novel mouse homeobox gene,
Hox-4.8. Hox-4.8 is the most 5'-located homeobox gene in the HOX-4 complex.
Sequence analysis confirmed that Hox-4.8 is a member of the subfamily of
AbdominalB-related Hox-4 genes and revealed strong interspecies conservation. As 
for the human locus, Hox-4.8 is probably the last Hox gene in this part of the
HOX-4 complex. During development, Hox-4.8 transcripts are restricted to the
extremities of the embryonic anteroposterior axis and limbs as well as in the
developing tail bud and to the most posterior segment of the gut (the rectum).
Within the limb mesenchyme, Hox-4.8 is expressed in more posterodistal regions
than those of its neighbour Hox-4.7. Hence, Hox-4.8 expression appears to be
related to the last significant phenotypic changes towards the extremities of the
embryonic body and limb axes.

PMID: 1685889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


