
1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 29;34:133. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0245-3.

HOXD9 promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer metastasis by ZEB1
regulation in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lv X(1), Li L(2), Lv L(3), Qu X(4), Jin S(5), Li K(6), Deng X(7), Cheng L(8), He 
H(9), Dong L(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, 116001, China. ttsdoc@126.com. (2)Department of the 4th
Internal Medical, Liaoning Cancer Hospital & Institute, Shenyang, 110042, China. 
lifangyidoc@163.com. (3)Department of Pathology, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116027, China. zyltg2013@163.com.
(4)Department of Second Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian
Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China. snldoc@163.com. (5)Department of
Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, 116001, China. jinshidoc@163.com. (6)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China.
zhiqhutg@126.com. (7)Department of Radiation Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital 
of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China. guangyingqitg@163.com.
(8)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian
Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China. chengleidoc@126.com. (9)Department of 
Laparoscopic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, 116001, China. hehuidoc@yeah.net. (10)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery,
First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, 116001, China.
dlleidong@126.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common malignant tumor that severely
threatens human health. The poor prognosis of HCC is mainly attributed to
intrahepatic and extrahepatic metastases. HOXD9 proteins belong to a superfamily 
that regulates the development and control of many cellular processes, including 
proliferation, apoptosis, cell shape, and cell migration. HOXD9 can also function
as an oncogene in several cancer cells. However, its biological function in human
HCC requires further investigation. In this study, HOXD9 exhibited high
expression in invasive HCC cells. HOXD9 overexpression can significantly enhance 
HCC cell migration, invasion, and metastasis, whereas silencing HOXD9 inhibits
these processes. HOXD9 also promotes the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
of HCC cells. Microarray analysis suggests that ZEB1 can function as a downstream
factor of HOXD9. HOXD9 can interact with the promoter region of ZEB1 and promotes
ZEB1 expression. ZEB1 knockdown inhibits HOXD9-induced migration and invasion, as
well as EMT in HCC cells. This study helps elucidates the oncogenic functions of 
HOXD9 in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4625617
PMID: 26514226  [PubMed - in process]


2. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2015;53 Suppl 2:S188-93.

[The role of developmental HOX genes in cervical cancer].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

López-Romero R(1), Marrero-Rodríguez D, Romero-Morelos P, Villegas V, Valdivia A,
Arreola H, Huerta-Padilla V, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de
Oncología, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal, México. rlopez_99@yahoo.com.

Cervical cancer (CC) is a multifactorial disease associated to genetic,
environmental and epigenetic factors, being the infection by human papillomavirus
the main etiologic agent. Additionally, the alteration in the expression of
transcription factors has been considered of importance for the development of
this tumor. HOX genes encode a group of transcription factors involved in
cellular proliferation and differentiation processes during the development of
embryonic structures in vertebrates; their aberrant expression is associated with
tumorigenesis and metastasis. A range of evidence suggests a role for HOX genes
in the development of cervical neoplastic cell. Studies in CC cell lines, primary
tumors and premalignant lesions have suggested the involvement of HOXA1, HOXC5,
C6, C8 and C10, HOXD9 and HOXD13 in the process of cervical carcinogenesis. Also,
the de novo expression of genes HOXB2, B4, B13 and HOXC11-C13 appears to be
involved in the process of malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cell. 
These data would allow to open a field in search of new molecular markers in
cervical cancer and the development of new therapeutic strategies for this
malignancy.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26462515  [PubMed - in process]


3. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 22;6:8234. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9234.

Cis-eQTL analysis and functional validation of candidate susceptibility genes for
high-grade serous ovarian cancer.

Lawrenson K, Li Q, Kar S, Seo JH, Tyrer J, Spindler TJ, Lee J, Chen Y, Karst A,
Drapkin R, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N; Australian Ovarian Cancer
Study Group, Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean Y, Beckmann MW, Berchuck A, Bisogna M,
Bjorge L, Bogdanova N, Brinton LA, Brooks-Wilson A, Bruinsma F, Butzow R,
Campbell IG, Carty K, Chang-Claude J, Chenevix-Trench G, Chen A, Chen Z, Cook LS,
Cramer DW, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C, Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, 
Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Dürst M, Eccles D, Easton DT, Edwards RP, Eilber
U, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT, Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG,
Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J, Harrington P, Harter P, Hasmad
HN, Hein A, Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E, Hogdall C, Hosono
S, Iversen ES, Jakubowska A, James P, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan BY, Kruger Kjaer S,
Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley JL, Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C, Kupryjanczyk J,
Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Lele S, Leminen A, Lester J, Levine
DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall L, Massuger LF, Matsuo K,
McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, Nevanlinna H, McNeish I, Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich
KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Azmi MA, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I,
Orsulic S, Weber RP, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM,
Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph
A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Sellers TA,
Shu XO, Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston L, Tangen 
IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tsai YY, Tworoger SS, van Altena
AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C,
Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu AH, Yang
H, Zheng W, Ziogas A, Monteiro A, Pharoah PD, Gayther SA, Freedman ML.

Genome-wide association studies have reported 11 regions conferring risk of
high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer (HGSOC). Expression quantitative
trait locus (eQTL) analyses can identify candidate susceptibility genes at risk
loci. Here we evaluate cis-eQTL associations at 47 regions associated with HGSOC 
risk (P=10(-5)). For three cis-eQTL associations (P<1.4 × 10(-3), FDR<0.05) at
1p36 (CDC42), 1p34 (CDCA8) and 2q31 (HOXD9), we evaluate the functional role of
each candidate by perturbing expression of each gene in HGSOC precursor cells.
Overexpression of HOXD9 increases anchorage-independent growth, shortens
population-doubling time and reduces contact inhibition. Chromosome conformation 
capture identifies an interaction between rs2857532 and the HOXD9 promoter,
suggesting this SNP is a leading causal variant. Transcriptomic profiling after
HOXD9 overexpression reveals enrichment of HGSOC risk variants within HOXD9
target genes (P=6 × 10(-10) for risk variants (P<10(-4)) within 10<U+2009>kb of a HOXD9 
target gene in ovarian cells), suggesting a broader role for this network in
genetic susceptibility to HGSOC.

PMCID: PMC4580986
PMID: 26391404  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Med. 2015 Jul 21. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00071. [Epub ahead of print]

An EG-VEGF-dependent decrease in homeobox gene NKX3.1 contributes to
cytotrophoblast dysfunction: a possible mechanism in human fetal growth
restriction.

Murthi P(1,)(2), Brouillet S(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Pratt A(1), Borg A(1), Kalionis
B(7), Goffin F(7), Tsatsaris V(8), Munaut C(7), Feige J(3,)(4,)(5), Benharouga
M(9), Fournier T(10), Alfaidy N(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's 
Hospital and The University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. 
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 1036,
Grenoble. France. (4)Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, 38000, Grenoble, France.
(5)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), iRTSV-Biology of Cancer and
infection, Grenoble, France. (6)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble,
Hôpital Couple-Enfant, Centre Clinique et Biologique d'Assistance Médicale à la
Procréation, 38700, La Tronche, France. (7)Laboratory of Tumor and Developmental 
Biology University of Liège, Belgium. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Hôpital Cochin, Maternité Port-Royal, Université Rene Descartes, F-75014 Paris,
France. (9)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5249, Laboratoire de Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Grenoble, France. (10)INSERM,
U1139, Paris, F-75006, France, Universite Paris Descartes, UMR-S1139, Sorbonne
Paris Cite, Paris, F-75006, France, PremUp Foundation, Paris, F-75006, France.

Idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is frequently associated with placental
insufficiency. Previous reports have provided evidence that EG-VEGF (endocrine
gland derived-vascular endothelial growth factor), a placental secreted protein, 
is expressed during the first trimester of pregnancy, controls both trophoblast
proliferation and invasion, and its increased expression is associated with human
FGR. In this study, we hypothesise that EG-VEGF-dependent change in placental
homeobox gene expressions contribute to trophoblast dysfunction in idiopathic
FGR. The changes in EG-VEGF-dependent homeobox gene expressions were determined
using a Homeobox gene cDNA array on placental explants of 8-12 weeks' gestation
after stimulation with EG-VEGF in vitro for 24 hours. The Homeobox gene array
identified a >5-fold increase in HOXA9, HOXC8, HOXC10, HOXD1, HOXD8, HOXD9 and
HOXD11, while NKX 3.1 showed a >2 fold-decrease in mRNA expression compared to
untreated controls. Homeobox gene NKX3.1 was selected as a candidate because it
is a downstream target of EG-VEGF and its expression and functional role are
largely unknown in control and idiopathic FGR-affected placentae. Real-time PCR
and immunoblotting showed a significant decrease in NKX3.1 mRNA and protein
levels, respectively, in placentae from FGR compared to control pregnancies. Gene
inactivation in vitro using short-interference RNA specific for NKX3.1
demonstrated an increase in BeWo cell differentiation and a decrease in
HTR8-SVneo proliferation. We conclude that the decreased expression of homeobox
gene NKX3.1 down-stream of EG-VEGF may contribute to the trophoblast dysfunction 
associated with idiopathic FGR pregnancies.

PMCID: PMC4749495
PMID: 26208047  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 19;15:28. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0078-5.

Key pathways regulated by HoxA9,10,11/HoxD9,10,11 during limb development.

Raines AM(1), Magella B(2), Adam M(3), Potter SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 
Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. annaraines516@gmail.com. (2)Division of 
Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. bliss.magella@cchmc.org. (3)Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 
45229, USA. mike.adam@cchmc.org. (4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA.
steve.potter@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: The 39 mammalian Hox genes show problematic patterns of functional
overlap. In order to more fully define the developmental roles of Hox genes it is
necessary to remove multiple combinations of paralogous and flanking genes. In
addition, the downstream molecular pathways regulated by Hox genes during limb
development remain incompletely delineated.
RESULTS: In this report we examine limb development in mice with frameshift
mutations in six Hox genes, Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11. The mice were made with 
a novel recombineering method that allows the simultaneous targeting of
frameshift mutations into multiple flanking genes. The Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-)
/Hoxd9,10,11 (-/-) mutant mice show a reduced ulna and radius that is more severe
than seen in Hoxa11 (-/-)/Hoxd11 (-/-) mice, indicating a minor role for the
flanking Hox9,10 genes in zeugopod development, as well as their primary function
in stylopod development. The mutant mice also show severe reduction of Shh
expression in the zone of polarizing activity, and decreased Fgf8 expression in
the apical ectodermal ridge, thereby better defining the roles of these specific 
Hox genes in the regulation of critical signaling centers during limb
development. Importantly, we also used laser capture microdissection coupled with
RNA-Seq to characterize the gene expression programs in wild type and mutant
limbs. Resting, proliferative and hypertrophic compartments of E15.5 forelimb
zeugopods were examined. The results provide an RNA-Seq characterization of the
progression of gene expression patterns during normal endochondral bone
formation. In addition of the Hox mutants showed strongly altered expression of
Pknox2, Zfp467, Gdf5, Bmpr1b, Dkk3, Igf1, Hand2, Shox2, Runx3, Bmp7 and Lef1, all
of which have been previously shown to play important roles in bone formation.
CONCLUSIONS: The recombineering based frameshift mutation of the six flanking and
paralogous Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11 genes provides a resource for the analysis
of their overlapping functions. Analysis of the Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-) /Hoxd9,10,11
(-/-) mutant limbs confirms and extends the results of previous studies using
mice with Hox mutations in single paralogous groups or with entire Hox cluster
deletions. The RNA-Seq analysis of specific compartments of the normal and mutant
limbs defines the multiple key perturbed pathways downstream of these Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC4506574
PMID: 26186931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Genet. 2015 Aug;47(8):888-97. doi: 10.1038/ng.3336. Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Genome-wide significant risk associations for mucinous ovarian carcinoma.

Kelemen LE, Lawrenson K, Tyrer J, Li Q, Lee JM, Seo JH, Phelan CM, Beesley J,
Chen X, Spindler TJ, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N; Australian Cancer
Study; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group; Ovarian Cancer Association
Consortium.

Collaborators: Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean Y, Beckmann MW, Bisogna M, Bjorge L,
Bogdanova N, Brinton LA, Brooks-Wilson A, Bruinsma F, Butzow R, Campbell IG,
Carty K, Chang-Claude J, Chen YA, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer DW, Cunningham JM,
Cybulski C, Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du
Bois A, Dürst M, Eccles D, Easton DT, Edwards RP, Eilber U, Ekici AB, Engelholm
SA, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT, Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG, Glasspool R,
Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J, Harrington P, Harter P, Hasmad HN, Hein A,
Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E, Hogdall C, Hosono S, Iversen
ES, Jakubowska A, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan BY, Kellar M, Kelley JL, Kiemeney LA,
Krakstad C, Kjaer SK, Kupryjanczyk J, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, 
Lele S, Leminen A, Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J,
Lundvall L, Massuger LF, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, McNeish I, Menon U, 
Modugno F, Moes-Sosnowska J, Moysich KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB,
Nevanlinna H, Adenan NA, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I, Orsulic S, Weber RP, Paul
J, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ,
Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka
IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Shu XO, Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh
W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston L, Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ,
Tworoger SS, van Altena AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA,
Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C, Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR,
Sawicki W, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu AH, Yang H, Zheng W, Ziogas A, Sellers TA, Freedman
ML, Chenevix-Trench G, Pharoah PD, Gayther SA, Berchuck A, Green AC, Parsons PG, 
Hayward NK, Purdie DM, Webb PM, Whiteman DC, Bowtell D, Chenevix-Trench G, Green 
A, Webb P, deFazio A, Gertig D.

Genome-wide association studies have identified several risk associations for
ovarian carcinomas but not for mucinous ovarian carcinomas (MOCs). Our analysis
of 1,644 MOC cases and 21,693 controls with imputation identified 3 new risk
associations: rs752590 at 2q13 (P = 3.3 × 10(-8)), rs711830 at 2q31.1 (P = 7.5 × 
10(-12)) and rs688187 at 19q13.2 (P = 6.8 × 10(-13)). We identified significant
expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) associations for HOXD9 at 2q31.1 in
ovarian (P = 4.95 × 10(-4), false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.003) and colorectal (P
= 0.01, FDR = 0.09) tumors and for PAX8 at 2q13 in colorectal tumors (P = 0.03,
FDR = 0.09). Chromosome conformation capture analysis identified interactions
between the HOXD9 promoter and risk-associated SNPs at 2q31.1. Overexpressing
HOXD9 in MOC cells augmented the neoplastic phenotype. These findings provide the
first evidence for MOC susceptibility variants and insights into the underlying
biology of the disease.

PMCID: PMC4520768
PMID: 26075790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2015;56(1):107-13.

Histone acetylation regulates the expression of HoxD9 transcription factor in
endothelial progenitor cells.

Iordache F(1), Constantinescu A, Andrei E, Maniu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fetal and Adult Stem Cell Therapy, "Nicolae Simionescu"
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology of Romanian Academy, Bucharest,
Romania; floriniordache84@yahoo.com.

The homeobox (Hox) genes encode transcription factors that are involved in the
morphogenesis of body. Recent data showed that the HoxD transcription factors
control the cardiovascular system development, by modulation of endothelial cell 
proliferation and differentiation. For our knowledge, the role of histone
acetylation in expression of HoxD9 has not been studied to date; therefore, the
aim of this study was to investigate the expression of HoxD9 in endothelial
progenitor cells after treatment with valproic acid (VPA), a histone deacetylase 
inhibitor. Our results showed that VPA inhibits the histone deacetylases leaving 
chromatin in an acetylated state corresponding to a decondensate conformation.
qRT-PCR and Western blot assays showed that the expression of HoxD9 in
endothelial progenitor cells treated with VPA was increased at both gene and
protein level, suggesting that acetylation regulates HoxD9 expression.
Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis revealed that the expression of endothelial 
specific markers such as CD31, CD105, CD117 and VEGFR2 was decreased in the
presence of acetylating agent, VPA. The capacity of endothelial progenitor cells 
to form vascular networks on Matrigel was also reduced in the presence of VPA. In
conclusion, investigating the role of histone acetylation in the regulation of
accessibility of transcription factors to genes involved in differentiation can
contribute to understanding epigenetic mechanisms underlying the commitment of
stem cells.

PMID: 25826494  [PubMed - in process]


8. Biochemistry. 2015 Jan 20;54(2):538-45. doi: 10.1021/bi5012749. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Temperature dependence of internal motions of protein side-chain NH3(+) groups:
insight into energy barriers for transient breakage of hydrogen bonds.

Zandarashvili L(1), Iwahara J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch , Galveston,
Texas 77555-1068, United States.

Although charged side chains play important roles in protein function, their
dynamic properties are not well understood. Nuclear magnetic resonance methods
for investigating the dynamics of lysine side-chain NH3(+) groups were
established recently. Using this methodology, we have studied the temperature
dependence of the internal motions of the lysine side-chain NH3(+) groups that
form ion pairs with DNA phosphate groups in the HoxD9 homeodomain-DNA complex.
For these NH3(+) groups, we determined order parameters and correlation times for
bond rotations and reorientations at 15, 22, 28, and 35 °C. The order parameters 
were found to be virtually constant in this temperature range. In contrast, the
bond-rotation correlation times of the NH3(+) groups were found to depend
strongly on temperature. On the basis of transition state theory, the energy
barriers for NH3(+) rotations were analyzed and compared to those for CH3
rotations. Enthalpies of activation for NH3(+) rotations were found to be
significantly higher than those for CH3 rotations, which can be attributed to the
requirement of hydrogen bond breakage. However, entropies of activation
substantially reduce the overall free energies of activation for NH3(+) rotations
to a level comparable to those for CH3 rotations. This entropic reduction in
energy barriers may accelerate molecular processes requiring hydrogen bond
breakage and play a kinetically important role in protein function.

PMID: 25489884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Oct 15;136(41):14369-72. doi: 10.1021/ja5081585. Epub 2014
Oct 1.

Probing the rate-limiting step for intramolecular transfer of a transcription
factor between specific sites on the same DNA molecule by (15)Nz-exchange NMR
spectroscopy.

Ryu KS(1), Tugarinov V, Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0520, United States.

The kinetics of translocation of the homeodomain transcription factor HoxD9
between specific sites of the same or opposite polarities on the same DNA
molecule have been studied by (15)Nz-exchange NMR spectroscopy. We show that
exchange occurs by two facilitated diffusion mechanisms: a second-order
intermolecular exchange reaction between specific sites located on different DNA 
molecules without the protein dissociating into free solution that predominates
at high concentrations of free DNA, and a first-order intramolecular process
involving direct transfer between specific sites located on the same DNA
molecule. Control experiments using a mixture of two DNA molecules, each
possessing only a single specific site, indicate that transfer between specific
sites by full dissociation of HoxD9 into solution followed by reassociation is
too slow to measure by z-exchange spectroscopy. Intramolecular transfer with
comparable rate constants occurs between sites of the same and opposing polarity,
indicating that both rotation-coupled sliding and hopping/flipping (analogous to 
geminate recombination) occur. The half-life for intramolecular transfer (0.5-1
s) is many orders of magnitude larger than the calculated transfer time (1-100
µs) by sliding, leading us to conclude that the intramolecular transfer rates
measured by z-exchange spectroscopy represent the rate-limiting step for a
one-base-pair shift from the specific site to the immediately adjacent
nonspecific site. At zero concentration of added salt, the intramolecular
transfer rate constants between sites of opposing polarity are smaller than those
between sites of the same polarity, suggesting that hopping/flipping may become
rate-limiting at very low salt concentrations.

PMCID: PMC4210153
PMID: 25253516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genetics. 2014 Nov;198(3):1117-26. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.167460. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

Genetic interactions between Shox2 and Hox genes during the regional growth and
development of the mouse limb.

Neufeld SJ(1), Wang F(2), Cobb J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N
1N4, Canada. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada jacobb@ucalgary.ca.

The growth and development of the vertebrate limb relies on homeobox genes of the
Hox and Shox families, with their independent mutation often giving
dose-dependent effects. Here we investigate whether Shox2 and Hox genes function 
together during mouse limb development by modulating their relative dosage and
examining the limb for nonadditive effects on growth. Using double mRNA
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in single embryos, we first show that
Shox2 and Hox genes have associated spatial expression dynamics, with Shox2
expression restricted to the proximal limb along with Hoxd9 and Hoxa11
expression, juxtaposing the distal expression of Hoxa13 and Hoxd13. By generating
mice with all possible dosage combinations of mutant Shox2 alleles and HoxA/D
cluster deletions, we then show that their coordinated proximal limb expression
is critical to generate normally proportioned limb segments. These epistatic
interactions tune limb length, where Shox2 underexpression enhances, and Shox2
overexpression suppresses, Hox-mutant phenotypes. Disruption of either Shox2 or
Hox genes leads to a similar reduction in Runx2 expression in the developing
humerus, suggesting their concerted action drives cartilage maturation during
normal development. While we furthermore provide evidence that Hox gene function 
influences Shox2 expression, this regulation is limited in extent and is unlikely
on its own to be a major explanation for their genetic interaction. Given the
similar effect of human SHOX mutations on regional limb growth, Shox and Hox
genes may generally function as genetic interaction partners during the growth
and development of the proximal vertebrate limb.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4224156
PMID: 25217052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Proc Biol Sci. 2014 Apr 2;281(1783):20133133. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2013.3133. Print 
2014 May 22.

Unique expression patterns of multiple key genes associated with the evolution of
mammalian flight.

Wang Z(1), Dai M, Wang Y, Cooper KL, Zhu T, Dong D, Zhang J, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Ecology and Evolution (iAIR), East China Normal
University, , Shanghai 200062, People's Republic of China, Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California, , San Diego, CA 92093, USA, Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, , Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Bats are the only mammals capable of true flight. Critical adaptations for flight
include a pair of dramatically elongated hands with broad wing membranes. To
study the molecular mechanisms of bat wing evolution, we perform genomewide mRNA 
sequencing and in situ hybridization for embryonic bat limbs. We identify seven
key genes that display unique expression patterns in embryonic bat wings and
feet, compared with mouse fore- and hindlimbs. The expression of all 5'HoxD genes
(Hoxd9-13) and Tbx3, six known crucial transcription factors for limb and digit
development, is extremely high and prolonged in the elongating wing area. The
expression of Fam5c, a tumour suppressor, in bat limbs is bat-specific and
significantly high in all short digit regions (the thumb and foot digits). These 
results suggest multiple genetic changes occurred independently during the
evolution of bat wings to elongate the hand digits, promote membrane growth and
keep other digits short. Our findings also indicate that the evolution of limb
morphology depends on the complex integration of multiple gene regulatory
networks and biological processes that control digit formation and identity,
chondrogenesis, and interdigital regression or retention.

PMCID: PMC3996600
PMID: 24695426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e91334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091334. eCollection
2014.

Transcript analysis reveals a specific HOX signature associated with positional
identity of human endothelial cells.

Toshner M(1), Dunmore BJ(2), McKinney EF(2), Southwood M(3), Caruso P(2), Upton
PD(2), Waters JP(2), Ormiston ML(2), Skepper JN(4), Nash G(5), Rana AA(2),
Morrell NW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. (5)School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Birmingham
University, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

The endothelial cell has a remarkable ability for sub-specialisation, adapted to 
the needs of a variety of vascular beds. The role of developmental programming
versus the tissue contextual environment for this specialization is not well
understood. Here we describe a hierarchy of expression of HOX genes associated
with endothelial cell origin and location. In initial microarray studies,
differential gene expression was examined in two endothelial cell lines: blood
derived outgrowth endothelial cells (BOECs) and pulmonary artery endothelial
cells. This suggested shared and differential patterns of HOX gene expression
between the two endothelial lines. For example, this included a cluster on
chromosome 2 of HOXD1, HOXD3, HOXD4, HOXD8 and HOXD9 that was expressed at a
higher level in BOECs. Quantative PCR confirmed the higher expression of these
HOXs in BOECs, a pattern that was shared by a variety of microvascular
endothelial cell lines. Subsequently, we analysed publically available
microarrays from a variety of adult cell and tissue types using the whole "HOX
transcriptome" of all 39 HOX genes. Using hierarchical clustering analysis the
HOX transcriptome was able to discriminate endothelial cells from 61 diverse
human cell lines of various origins. In a separate publically available
microarray dataset of 53 human endothelial cell lines, the HOX transcriptome
additionally organized endothelial cells related to their organ or tissue of
origin. Human tissue staining for HOXD8 and HOXD9 confirmed endothelial
expression and also supported increased microvascular expression of these HOXs.
Together these observations suggest a significant involvement of HOX genes in
endothelial cell positional identity.

PMCID: PMC3961275
PMID: 24651450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Dec;6(12):1348-55. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0104. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Aberrant DNA methylation at genes associated with a stem cell-like phenotype in
cholangiocarcinoma tumors.

Sriraksa R(1), Zeller C, Dai W, Siddiq A, Walley AJ, Limpaiboon T, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, IRDB Building,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. Phone:
44-(0)-2075-941804; Fax: 44-(0)-2075-942129; b.brown@imperial.ac.uk; and Temduang
Limpaiboon, Centre for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic
Laboratories, Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon 
Kaen 40002, Thailand. temduang@kku.ac.th.

Genetic abnormalities of cholangiocarcinoma have been widely studied; however,
epigenomic changes related to cholangiocarcinogenesis have been less well
characterized. We have profiled the DNA methylomes of 28 primary
cholangiocarcinoma and six matched adjacent normal tissues using Infinium's
HumanMethylation27 BeadChips with the aim of identifying gene sets aberrantly and
epigenetically regulated in this tumor type. Using a linear model for microarray 
data, we identified 1610 differentially methylated autosomal CpG sites, with 809 
hypermethylated (representing 603 genes) and 801 hypomethylated (representing 712
genes) in cholangiocarcinoma versus adjacent normal tissues (false-discovery rate
= 0.05). Gene ontology and gene set enrichment analyses identified gene sets
significantly associated with hypermethylation at linked CpG sites in
cholangiocarcinoma including homeobox genes and target genes of PRC2, EED, SUZ12,
and histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27. We confirmed frequent
hypermethylation at the homeobox genes HOXA9 and HOXD9 by bisulfite
pyrosequencing in a larger cohort of cholangiocarcinoma (n = 102). Our findings
indicate a key role for hypermethylation of multiple CpG sites at genes
associated with a stem cell-like phenotype as a common molecular aberration in
cholangiocarcinoma. These data have implications for cholangiocarcinogenesis, as 
well as possible novel treatment options using histone methyltransferase
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3855864
PMID: 24089088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Vet Comp Oncol. 2015 Sep;13(3):322-36. doi: 10.1111/vco.12062. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Characterization of HOX gene expression in canine mammary tumour cell lines from 
spontaneous tumours.

DeInnocentes P(1,)(2), Perry AL(1), Graff EC(1,)(3), Lutful Kabir FM(1,)(2),
Curtis Bird R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(2)AURIC-Auburn University Research Initiative in Cancer, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Physiology and Pharmacology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.

Spatial/temporal controls of development are regulated by the homeotic (HOX) gene
complex and require integration with oncogenes and tumour suppressors regulating 
cell cycle exit. Spontaneously derived neoplastic canine mammary carcinoma cell
models were investigated to determine if HOX expression profiles were associated 
with neoplasia as HOX genes promote neoplastic potential in human cancers.
Comparative assessment of human and canine breast cancer expression profiles
revealed remarkable similarity for all four paralogous HOX gene clusters and
several unlinked HOX genes. Five canine HOX genes were overexpressed with
expression profiles consistent with oncogene-like character (HOXA1, HOXA13,
HOXD4, HOXD9 and SIX1) and three HOX genes with underexpressed profiles (HOXA11, 
HOXC8 and HOXC9) were also identified as was an apparent nonsense mutation in
HOXC6. This data, as well as a comparative analysis of similar data from human
breast cancers suggested expression of selected HOX genes in canine mammary
carcinoma could be contributing to the neoplastic phenotype.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 24034269  [PubMed - in process]


15. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jan 1;23(1):226-38. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt420. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Epigenome-wide DNA methylation landscape of melanoma progression to brain
metastasis reveals aberrations on homeobox D cluster associated with prognosis.

Marzese DM(1), Scolyer RA, Huynh JL, Huang SK, Hirose H, Chong KK, Kiyohara E,
Wang J, Kawas NP, Donovan NC, Hata K, Wilmott JS, Murali R, Buckland ME,
Shivalingam B, Thompson JF, Morton DL, Kelly DF, Hoon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology.

Melanoma brain metastasis (MBM) represents a frequent complication of cutaneous
melanoma. Despite aggressive multi-modality therapy, patients with MBM often have
a survival rate of <1 year. Alteration in DNA methylation is a major hallmark of 
tumor progression and metastasis; however, it remains largely unexplored in MBM. 
In this study, we generated a comprehensive DNA methylation landscape through the
use of genome-wide copy number, DNA methylation and gene expression data
integrative analysis of melanoma progression to MBM. A progressive genome-wide
demethylation in low CpG density and an increase in methylation level of CpG
islands according to melanoma progression were observed. MBM-specific partially
methylated domains (PMDs) affecting key brain developmental processes were
identified. Differentially methylated CpG sites between MBM and lymph node
metastasis (LNM) from patients with good prognosis were identified. Among the
most significantly affected genes were the HOX family members. DNA methylation of
HOXD9 gene promoter affected transcript and protein expression and was
significantly higher in MBM than that in early stages. A MBM-specific PMD was
identified in this region. Low methylation level of this region was associated
with active HOXD9 expression, open chromatin and histone modifications associated
with active transcription. Demethylating agent induced HOXD9 expression in
melanoma cell lines. The clinical relevance of this finding was verified in an
independent large cohort of melanomas (n = 145). Patients with HOXD9
hypermethylation in LNM had poorer disease-free and overall survival. This
epigenome-wide study identified novel methylated genes with functional and
clinical implications for MBM patients.

PMCID: PMC3857956
PMID: 24014427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nano Lett. 2013 Oct 9;13(10):4632-41. doi: 10.1021/nl401658c. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Focal amplification of HOXD-harboring chromosome region is implicated in
multiple-walled carbon nanotubes-induced carcinogenicity.

Wu P(1), Yuan SS, Ho CC, Hsieh WY, Hong QS, Yu SL, Chen W, Chen HY, Wang CD, Li
KC, Yang PC, Chen HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Institute of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University , Taipei, Taiwan 112.

Multiple-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) may cause carcinogenesis. We found that
long-term exposure to MWCNTs can induce irreversible oncogenic transformation of 
human bronchial epithelial cells and tumorigenicity in vivo. A genome-wide
array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) analysis revealed global
chromosomal aberration in MWCNTs-treated clones, predominantly at chromosome
2q31-32, where the potential oncogenes HOXD9 and HOXD13 are located. Functional
assays confirmed that this variation can modulate oncogenic signaling and plays a
part in MWCNTs-induced tumorigenesis, suggesting that MWCNTs are carcinogens that
act by altering genomic stability and oncogenic copy numbers.

PMID: 23984819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 2013 Jul;140(14):2942-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.092569. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Recombineering-based dissection of flanking and paralogous Hox gene functions in 
mouse reproductive tracts.

Raines AM(1), Adam M, Magella B, Meyer SE, Grimes HL, Dey SK, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Hox genes are key regulators of development. In mammals, the study of these genes
is greatly confounded by their large number, overlapping functions and
interspersed shared enhancers. Here, we describe the use of a novel
recombineering strategy to introduce simultaneous frameshift mutations into the
flanking Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 genes, as well as their paralogs on the HoxD
cluster. The resulting Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice displayed dramatic synergistic
homeotic transformations of the reproductive tracts, with the uterus anteriorized
towards oviduct and the vas deferens anteriorized towards epididymis. The
Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice also provided a genetic setting that allowed the
discovery of Hoxd9,10,11 redundant reproductive tract patterning function. Both
shared and distinct Hox functions were defined. Hoxd9,10,11 play a crucial role
in the regulation of uterine immune function. Non-coding non-polyadenylated RNAs 
were among the key Hox targets, with dramatic downregulation in mutants. We
observed Hox cross-regulation of transcription and splicing. In addition, we
observed a surprising anti-dogmatic apparent posteriorization of the uterine
epithelium. In caudal regions of the uterus, the normal simple columnar
epithelium flanking the lumen was replaced by a pseudostratified transitional
epithelium, normally found near the more posterior cervix. These results identify
novel molecular functions of Hox genes in the development of the male and female 
reproductive tracts.

PMCID: PMC3699281
PMID: 23760953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Mar 6;135(9):3613-9. doi: 10.1021/ja312314b. Epub 2013 Feb
25.

Direct observation of the ion-pair dynamics at a protein-DNA interface by NMR
spectroscopy.

Anderson KM(1), Esadze A, Manoharan M, Brüschweiler R, Gorenstein DG, Iwahara J.

Author information: 
(1)Sealy Center for Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas 77555, United States.

Ion pairing is one of the most fundamental chemical interactions and is essential
for molecular recognition by biological macromolecules. From an experimental
standpoint, very little is known to date about ion-pair dynamics in biological
macromolecular systems. Absorption, infrared, and Raman spectroscopic methods
were previously used to characterize dynamic properties of ion pairs, but these
methods can be applied only to small compounds. Here, using NMR (15)N relaxation 
and hydrogen-bond scalar (15)N-(31)P J-couplings ((h3)J(NP)), we have
investigated the dynamics of the ion pairs between lysine side-chain NH3(+) amino
groups and DNA phosphate groups at the molecular interface of the HoxD9
homeodomain-DNA complex. We have determined the order parameters and the
correlation times for C-N bond rotation and reorientation of the lysine NH3(+)
groups. Our data indicate that the NH3(+) groups in the intermolecular ion pairs 
are highly dynamic at the protein-DNA interface, which should lower the entropic 
costs for protein-DNA association. Judging from the C-N bond-rotation correlation
times along with experimental and quantum-chemically derived (h3)J(NP)
hydrogen-bond scalar couplings, it seems that breakage of hydrogen bonds in the
ion pairs occurs on a sub-nanosecond time scale. Interestingly, the
oxygen-to-sulfur substitution in a DNA phosphate group was found to enhance the
mobility of the NH3(+) group in the intermolecular ion pair. This can partially
account for the affinity enhancement of the protein-DNA association by the
oxygen-to-sulfur substitution, which is a previously observed but poorly
understood phenomenon.

PMCID: PMC3721336
PMID: 23406569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e40728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040728. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Functional dissection of HOXD cluster genes in regulation of neuroblastoma cell
proliferation and differentiation.

Zha Y(1), Ding E, Yang L, Mao L, Wang X, McCarthy BA, Huang S, Ding HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Retinoic acid (RA) can induce growth arrest and neuronal differentiation of
neuroblastoma cells and has been used in clinic for treatment of neuroblastoma.
It has been reported that RA induces the expression of several HOXD genes in
human neuroblastoma cell lines, but their roles in RA action are largely unknown.
The HOXD cluster contains nine genes (HOXD1, HOXD3, HOXD4, and HOXD8-13) that are
positioned sequentially from 3' to 5', with HOXD1 at the 3' end and HOXD13 the 5'
end. Here we show that all HOXD genes are induced by RA in the human
neuroblastoma BE(2)-C cells, with the genes located at the 3' end being activated
generally earlier than those positioned more 5' within the cluster. Individual
induction of HOXD8, HOXD9, HOXD10 or HOXD12 is sufficient to induce both growth
arrest and neuronal differentiation, which is associated with downregulation of
cell cycle-promoting genes and upregulation of neuronal differentiation genes.
However, induction of other HOXD genes either has no effect (HOXD1) or has
partial effects (HOXD3, HOXD4, HOXD11 and HOXD13) on BE(2)-C cell proliferation
or differentiation. We further show that knockdown of HOXD8 expression, but not
that of HOXD9 expression, significantly inhibits the differentiation-inducing
activity of RA. HOXD8 directly activates the transcription of HOXC9, a key
effector of RA action in neuroblastoma cells. These findings highlight the
distinct functions of HOXD genes in RA induction of neuroblastoma cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3413684
PMID: 22879880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Curr Biol. 2012 Sep 25;22(18):1676-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.06.067. Epub 2012 
Aug 2.

A genetic basis for altered sexual behavior in mutant female mice.

Zakany J(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre Frontiers in Genetics, Department of Genetics and
Evolution, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
jozsef.zakany@unige.ch

Although neural substrates of mammalian female mating behavior have been
described, the association between complex courtship activity and specific
underlying mechanisms remains elusive. We have isolated a mouse line that
unexpectedly shows altered female social behavior with increased investigation of
males and increased genital biting. We investigated adult individuals by
behavioral observation and genetic and molecular neuroanatomy methods. We report 
exacerbated inverse pursuits and incapacitating bites directed at the genitals of
stud males. This extreme deviation from wild-type female courtship segregates
with a deletion of the Hoxd1 to Hoxd9 genomic region. This dominant Atypical
female courtship allele (HoxD(Afc)) induces ectopic Hoxd10 gene expression in
several regions in newborn forebrain transitorily and stably in a sparse
subpopulation of cells in the cornu ammonis fields of adult hippocampus, which
may thus lead to an abnormal modulation in the sexual behavior of mutant females.
The resulting compulsive sexual solicitation behavior displayed by the most
affected individuals suggests new avenues to study the genetic and molecular
bases of normal and pathological mammalian affect and raises the potential
involvement of the hippocampus in the control of female courtship behavior. The
potential relevance to human 2q.31.1 microdeletion syndrome is discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22863319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2012 Apr 20;13:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-13-59.

Association analysis between HOXD9 genes and the development of developmental
dysplasia of the hip in Chinese female Han population.

Tian W(1), Zhao L, Wang J, Suo P, Wang J, Cheng L, Cheng Z, Jia J, Kan S, Wang B,
Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)1Tianjing medical University, Tianjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) is a congenital or acquired 
deformation or misalignment of the hip joint which affects mainly females. We
hypothesized that HOXD9 gene could be regulated in acetabular size or shape and
related in DDH developing.
METHODS: Two hundred and nine Chinese Han female DDH patients and 173 ethnic, age
matched healthy female controls were genotyped for HOXD9 two tag SNPs using
sequenom method.
RESULTS: One of the two tag SNPs, rs711822, was not shown significantly
differences in genotypic or allelic distribution between case and control group. 
Comparing the genotypic distribution of rs711819, there was significant
differences between DDH patients group and control group (<U+03C7>²<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.54, df =2, P
=0.023), and the association to DDH developing reached significance (P =0.045, OR
=1.79, 95<U+2009>% CI: 1.01-3.17 by dominant mode).
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the association between one tag SNP of HOXD9 gene and 
the development of DDH reach significant in our study population, this result
indicate the positive correlation between HOXD9 gene and DDH developing. Further 
study in larger sample size and different population as well as functional
studies will help to understand the pathogenesis of DDH.

PMCID: PMC3404944
PMID: 22520331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Dyn. 2012 Apr;241(4):792-802. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23756. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

A function for all posterior Hoxd genes during digit development?

Delpretti S(1), Zakany J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre Frontiers in Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Four posterior Hoxd genes, from Hoxd13 to Hoxd10, are collectively
regulated during the development of tetrapod digits. Besides the well-documented 
role of Hoxd13, the function of the neighboring genes has been difficult to
evaluate due to the close genetic linkage and potential regulatory interferences.
We used a combination of five small nested deletions in cis, involving from two
to four consecutive genes of the Hoxd13 to Hoxd9 loci, in mice, to evaluate their
combined functional importance.
RESULTS: We show that deletions leading to a gain of function of Hoxd13, via
regulatory re-allocation, generate abnormal phenotypes, in agreement with the
dominant negative role of this gene. We also show that Hoxd10, Hoxd11, and Hoxd12
all seem to play a genuine role in digit development, though less compelling than
that of Hoxd13. In contrast, the nearby Hoxd9 contributed no measurable function 
in digits.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that a slight and transient deregulation of Hoxd13
expression can readily affect the relative lengths of limb segments and that all 
posterior Hoxd genes likely contribute to the final limb morphology. We discuss
the difficulty to clearly assess the functional share of individual genes within 
such a gene family, where closely located neighbors, coding for homologous
proteins, are regulated by a unique circuitry and all contribute to shape the
distal parts of our appendages.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22374744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Cancer. 2011 May 22;10:60. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-60.

Functional analysis of HOXD9 in human gliomas and glioma cancer stem cells.

Tabuse M(1), Ohta S, Ohashi Y, Fukaya R, Misawa A, Yoshida K, Kawase T, Saya H,
Thirant C, Chneiweiss H, Matsuzaki Y, Okano H, Kawakami Y, Toda M.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research Group, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: HOX genes encode a family of homeodomain-containing transcription
factors involved in the determination of cell fate and identity during embryonic 
development. They also behave as oncogenes in some malignancies.
RESULTS: In this study, we found high expression of the HOXD9 gene transcript in 
glioma cell lines and human glioma tissues by quantitative real-time PCR. Using
immunohistochemistry, we observed HOXD9 protein expression in human brain tumor
tissues, including astrocytomas and glioblastomas. To investigate the role of
HOXD9 in gliomas, we silenced its expression in the glioma cell line U87 using
HOXD9-specific siRNA, and observed decreased cell proliferation, cell cycle
arrest, and induction of apoptosis. It was suggested that HOXD9 contributes to
both cell proliferation and/or cell survival. The HOXD9 gene was highly expressed
in a side population (SP) of SK-MG-1 cells that was previously identified as an
enriched-cell fraction of glioma cancer stem-like cells. HOXD9 siRNA treatment of
SK-MG-1 SP cells resulted in reduced cell proliferation. Finally, we cultured
human glioma cancer stem cells (GCSCs) from patient specimens found with high
expression of HOXD9 in GCSCs compared with normal astrocyte cells and neural
stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HOXD9 may be a novel marker of GCSCs and
cell proliferation and/or survival factor in gliomas and glioma cancer stem-like 
cells, and a potential therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3118386
PMID: 21600039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4888-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018161108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Axial Hox9 activity establishes the posterior field in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Current models hold that the early limb field becomes polarized into anterior and
posterior domains by the opposing activities of Hand2 and Gli3. This polarization
is essential for the initiation of Shh expression in the posterior margin of the 
limb bud, but how this polarity is established is not clear. Here we show that
initial anteroposterior polarization of the early forelimb field requires the
function of all four Hox9 paralogs (Hoxa9, Hoxb9, Hoxc9, and Hoxd9). This is
unexpected, given that only HoxA and HoxD AbdB group genes have been shown to
play a role in forelimb patterning, regulating the activation and maintenance of 
Shh expression and subsequent proximal-distal patterning of the forelimb. Our
analysis of Hox9 quadruple mutants demonstrates that Hox9 function is required
for the expression of Hand2 in the posterior limb field. Subsequently, Gli3
expression is not repressed posteriorly, Shh expression is not initiated, and
collinear expression of HoxA/D10-13 is not established, resulting in severely
malformed forelimbs lacking all posterior, Shh-regulated elements. This Hox9
mutant phenotype is restricted to the forelimbs; mutant hindlimbs are normal,
revealing fundamental differences in the patterning mechanisms governing the
establishment of forelimb and hindlimb fields.

PMCID: PMC3064354
PMID: 21383175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Genomics. 2010 Nov 6;11:619. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-619.

Digital gene expression tag profiling of bat digits provides robust candidates
contributing to wing formation.

Wang Z(1), Dong D, Ru B, Young RL, Han N, Guo T, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Ecology and Evolution, iAIR, East China Normal
University, Shanghai 200062, PR China.

BACKGROUND: As the only truly flying mammals, bats use their unique wing -
consisting of four elongated digits (digits II-V) connected by membranes - to
power their flight. In addition to the elongated digits II-V, the forelimb
contains one shorter digit (digit I) that is morphologically similar to the
hindlimb digits. Here, we capitalized on the morphological variation among the
bat forelimb digits to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying digit
elongation and wing formation. Using next generation sequencing technology, we
performed digital gene expression tag profiling (DGE-tag profiling) of developing
digits in a pooled sample of two Myotis ricketti and validated our sequencing
results using real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) of gene expression in the
developing digits of two Hipposideros armiger.
RESULTS: Among hundreds of genes exhibiting significant differences in expression
between the short and long digits, we highlight 14 genes most related to digit
elongation. These genes include two Tbx genes (Tbx3 and Tbx15), five BMP pathway 
genes (Bmp3, RGMB, Smad1, Smad4 and Nog), four Homeobox genes (Hoxd8, Hoxd9,
Hoxa1 and Satb1), and three other genes (Twist1, Tmeff2 and Enpp2) related to
digit malformations or cell proliferation. In addition, our results suggest that 
Tbx4 and Pitx2 contribute to the morphological similarity and five genes (Acta1, 
Tnnc2, Atp2a1, Hrc and Myoz1) contribute to the functional similarity between the
thumb and hindlimb digits.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study not only implicate many developmental genes as
robust candidates underlying digit elongation and wing formation in bats, but
also provide a better understanding of the genes involved in autopodial
development in general.

PMCID: PMC3017863
PMID: 21054883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochemistry. 2010 Sep 21;49(37):7998-8005. doi: 10.1021/bi100962h.

NMR studies of translocation of the Zif268 protein between its target DNA Sites.

Takayama Y(1), Sahu D, Iwahara J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas 77555-1068, USA.

Zif268 is a zinc-finger protein containing three Cys(2)-His(2)-type zinc-finger
domains that bind the target DNA sequence GCGTGGGCG in a cooperative manner. In
this work, we characterized translocation of the Zif268 protein between its
target DNA sites using NMR spectroscopy. The residual dipolar coupling data and
NMR chemical shift data suggested that the structure of the sequence-specific
complex between Zif268 and its target DNA in solution is the same as the crystal 
structure. Using two-dimensional heteronuclear (1)H-(15)N correlation spectra
recorded with the fast acquisition method, we analyzed the kinetics of the
process in which the Zif268 protein transfers from a target site to another on a 
different DNA molecule on a minute to hour time scale. By globally fitting the
time-course data collected at some different DNA concentrations, we determined
the dissociation rate constant for the specific complex and the second-order rate
constant for direct transfer of Zif268 from one target site to another.
Interestingly, direct transfer of the Zif268 protein between its target sites is 
>30000-fold slower than corresponding direct transfers of the HoxD9 and the Oct-1
proteins, although the affinities of the three proteins to their target DNA sites
are comparable. We also analyzed translocation of the Zif268 protein between two 
target sites on the same DNA molecules. The populations of the proteins bound to 
the target sites were found to depend on locations and orientations of the target
sites.

PMID: 20718505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 15;11:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-176.

The embryonic genes Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 identify muscle types in a
diet-independent and fiber-type unrelated way.

de Wilde J(1), Hulshof MF, Boekschoten MV, de Groot P, Smit E, Mariman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Nutrigenomics Consortium, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. j.dewilde@hb.unimaas.nl

BACKGROUND: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types
that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every
muscle type has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. 
To find novel genes involved in specifying muscle types, we used microarray
analysis to compare the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps from mice fed a low fat
diet (LFD) or high fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. Additional qPCR analysis were
performed in the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus muscle from mice fed an LFD
or HFD for 20 weeks.
RESULTS: In mice fed the 8-week LFD 162 genes were differentially expressed in
the gastrocnemius vs. the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest differences in
expression were markers for oxidative fiber types (e.g. Tnni1) and genes which
are known to be involved in embryogenesis (Dkk3, Hoxd8,Hoxd9 and Tbx1). Also
Dkk2, Hoxa5, Hoxa10, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Hoxc6 and Tbx15 were detectably, but not
differentially expressed in adult muscle tissue. Expression of differentially
expressed genes was not influenced by an 8-week or 20-week HFD. Comparing
gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus, expression of Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was not
related with expression of markers for the four different fiber types. We found
that the expression of both Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was much higher in the gastrocnemius 
than in the quadriceps or soleus, whereas the expression of Dkk3 was high in
quadriceps, but low in both gastrocnemius and soleus. Finally, expression of Tbx1
was high in quadriceps, intermediate in soleus and low in gastrocnemius.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that genes from the Dkk family, Hox family and Tbx family
are detectably expressed in adult mouse muscle. Interestingly, expression of
Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 was highly different between gastrocnemius,
quadriceps and soleus. In fact, every muscle type showed a unique combination of 
expression of these four genes which was not influenced by diet. Altogether, we
conclude that genes important for embryogenesis identify mouse muscle types in a 
diet-independent and fiber type-unrelated manner.

PMCID: PMC2847971
PMID: 20230627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. BMC Cancer. 2010 Mar 10;10:89. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-89.

Targeting HOX and PBX transcription factors in ovarian cancer.

Morgan R(1), Plowright L, Harrington KJ, Michael A, Pandha HS.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Medical School, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.
r.morgan@surrey.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer still has a relatively poor prognosis due to the
frequent occurrence of drug resistance, making the identification of new
therapeutic targets an important goal. We have studied the role of HOX genes in
the survival and proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. These are a family of
homeodomain-containing transcription factors that determine cell and tissue
identity in the early embryo, and have an anti-apoptotic role in a number of
malignancies including lung and renal cancer.
METHODS: We used QPCR to determine HOX gene expression in normal ovary and in the
ovarian cancer cell lines SK-OV3 and OV-90. We used a short peptide, HXR9, to
disrupt the formation of HOX/PBX dimers and alter transcriptional regulation by
HOX proteins.
RESULTS: In this study we show that the ovarian cancer derived line SK-OV3, but
not OV-90, exhibits highly dysregulated expression of members of the HOX gene
family. Disrupting the interaction between HOX proteins and their co-factor PBX
induces apoptosis in SK-OV3 cells and retards tumour growth in vivo.
CONCLUSION: HOX/PBX binding is a potential target in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2846885
PMID: 20219106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Mol Biol. 2010 Feb 26;396(3):674-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.11.056. Epub 2009 
Dec 1.

Searching DNA via a "Monkey Bar" mechanism: the significance of disordered tails.

Vuzman D(1), Azia A, Levy Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

The search through nonspecific DNA for a specific site by proteins is known to be
facilitated by sliding, hopping, and intersegment transfer between separate DNA
strands, yet the driving forces of these protein dynamics from the molecular
perspective are unclear. In this study, molecular features of the DNA search
mechanism were explored for three homologous proteins (the HoxD9, Antp, and NK-2 
homeodomains) using a simple computational model in which protein-DNA
interactions are represented solely by electrostatic forces. In particular, we
studied the impact that disordered N-terminal tails (N-tails), which are more
common in DNA-binding proteins than in other proteins, have on the efficiency of 
DNA search. While the three homeodomain proteins were found to use similar
binding interfaces in specific and nonspecific interactions with DNAs, their
different electrostatic potentials affect the nature of their sliding dynamics.
The different lengths and net charges of the N-tails of the homeodomains affect
their motion along the DNA. The presence of an N-tail increases sliding
propensity but slows linear diffusion along the DNA. When the search is performed
in the presence of two parallel DNA molecules, a direct transfer, which is
facilitated by the protein tail, from one nonspecific DNA to another occurs. The 
tailed proteins jump between two DNA molecules through an intermediate in which
the recognition helix of the protein is adsorbed to one DNA fragment and the
N-tail is adsorbed to the second, suggesting a "monkey bar" mechanism. Our study 
illustrates how the molecular architecture of proteins controls the efficiency of
DNA scanning.

Copyright (c) 2009. Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19958775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Tissue Res. 2009 Sep;337(3):381-91. doi: 10.1007/s00441-009-0827-5. Epub
2009 Jul 8.

Plasticity and regulatory mechanisms of Hox gene expression in mouse neural crest
cells.

Ishikawa S(1), Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka
University, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan.

In amniotes, the developmental potentials of neural crest cells differ between
the cranium and the trunk. These differences may be attributable to the different
expression patterns of Hox genes between cranial and trunk neural crest cells.
However, little is known about the factors that control Hox genes expression in
neural crest cells. The present data demonstrate that retinoic acid (RA)
treatment and the activation of Wnt signaling induce Hoxa2 and Hoxd9 expression, 
respectively, in mouse mesencephalic neural crest cells, which never express Hox 
genes in vivo. Furthermore, Wnt signaling suppresses the induction of Hoxa2. We
also demonstrate that these factors participate in the maintenance of Hoxa2 and
Hoxd9 expression in mouse trunk neural crest cells. Our results suggest that RA
and Wnt signaling function as environmental factors that regulate the expression 
of Hoxa2 and Hoxd9 in mouse neural crest cells.

PMID: 19585150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int Surg. 2007 Sep-Oct;92(5):287-95.

Novel mutations of the HOXD13 gene in hand and foot malformations.

Nakano K(1), Sakai N, Yamazaki Y, Watanabe H, Yamada N, Sezaki K, Susami T,
Tokunaga K, Takato T, Uchinuma E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Aesthetic Surgery, Kitasato University School of
Medicine, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Homeobox genes encode a set of transcription factors of fundamental importance
for body patterning during embryogenesis. Hoxa9-a13 and Hoxd9-d13 play an
especially important part in vertebrate limb development. Synpolydactyly (SPD) is
characterized by various malformations of the limbs. The expansion of the
polyalanine tract in 1OXD13 is one of its major causes. Recently, there have been
many analysis studies of HOXD13 in patients with SPD and limb malformations. We
analyzed HOXD13 in 100 patients with limb malformations, which affects the limbs 
in the distal parts of the metacarpal and/or metatarsal bones. Seven mutations in
the coding region and two mutations in the 5'-untranslated region were
identified. All were novel mutations. In this study, the mutations were located
upstream in the homeobox. Thus, translation of the homeobox was affected by
upstream mutations. Consequently, this suggested the possibility that
abnormalities in the hands and feet could be caused by novel HOXD13 gene
mutations.

PMID: 18399101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS Genet. 2007 Dec;3(12):e232.

Distinct roles and regulations for HoxD genes in metanephric kidney development.

Di-Poï N(1), Zákány J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Swizerland.

Hox genes encode homeodomain-containing proteins that control embryonic
development in multiple contexts. Up to 30 Hox genes, distributed among all four 
clusters, are expressed during mammalian kidney morphogenesis, but functional
redundancy between them has made a detailed functional account difficult to
achieve. We have investigated the role of the HoxD cluster through comparative
molecular embryological analysis of a set of mouse strains carrying targeted
genomic rearrangements such as deletions, duplications, and inversions. This
analysis allowed us to uncover and genetically dissect the complex role of the
HoxD cluster. Regulation of metanephric mesenchyme-ureteric bud interactions and 
maintenance of structural integrity of tubular epithelia are differentially
controlled by some Hoxd genes during renal development, consistent with their
specific expression profiles. We also provide evidence for a kidney-specific form
of colinearity that underlies the differential expression of two distinct sets of
genes located on both sides and overlapping at the Hoxd9 locus. These insights
further our knowledge of the genetic control of kidney morphogenesis and may
contribute to understanding certain congenital kidney malformations, including
polycystic kidney disease and renal hypoplasia.

PMCID: PMC2151092
PMID: 18159948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Oct 31;129(43):13232-7. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

TROSY-based z-exchange spectroscopy: application to the determination of the
activation energy for intermolecular protein translocation between specific sites
on different DNA molecules.

Sahu D(1), Clore GM, Iwahara J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Sealy Center for
Structural Biology and Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas 77555-0647, USA.

A two-dimensional TROSY-based z-exchange 1H-15N correlation experiment for the
quantitative analysis of kinetic processes in the slow exchange regime is
presented. The pulse scheme converts the product operator terms Nz into 2NzHz and
2NzHz into -Nz in the middle of the z-mixing period, thereby suppressing the
buildup of spurious semi-TROSY peaks arising from the different relaxation rates 
for the Nz and 2NzHz terms and simplifying the behavior of longitudinal
magnetization for an exchanging system during the mixing period. Theoretical
considerations and experimental data demonstrate that the TROSY-based z-exchange 
experiment permits quantitative determination of rate constants using the same
procedure as that for the conventional non-TROSY 15Nz-exchange experiment. Line
narrowing as a consequence of the use of the TROSY principle makes the method
particularly suitable for kinetic studies at low temperature, thereby permitting 
activation energies to be extracted from data acquired over a wider temperature
range. We applied this method to the investigation of the process whereby the
HoxD9 homeodomain translocates between specific target sites on different DNA
molecules via a direct transfer mechanism without going through the intermediary 
of free protein. The activation enthalpy for intermolecular translocation was
determined to be 17 kcal/mol.

PMID: 17918842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 15;310(2):430-41. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Hoxd and Gli3 interactions modulate digit number in the amniote limb.

Sheth R(1), Bastida MF, Ros M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011, 
Santander, Spain.

During limb development, Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and HOX proteins are considered
among the most important factors regulating digit number and identity. SHH
signaling prevents the processing of GLI3 into a short form that functions as a
strong transcriptional repressor. Gli3 mutant limbs are characterized by a severe
polydactyly and associated ectopic anterior expression of 5'Hoxd genes. To
genetically determine the involvement of 5'Hoxd genes in the polydactyly of Gli3 
mutants, we have generated a compound mutant that simultaneously removes the
three most 5'-located Hoxd genes and Gli3. Remarkably, the limbs that form in the
absence of all four of these genes show the most severe polydactyly so far
reported in the mouse. The analysis of gene expression performed in compound
mutants allows us to propose that the increase in the number of digits is
mediated by the gain in function of Hoxd10 and Hoxd9. Our results also support
the notion that an adequate balance between positive and negative effects of
different Hoxd genes is required for pentadactyly.

PMID: 17714700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2007 Aug 15;2(8):e754.

Biphasic Hoxd gene expression in shark paired fins reveals an ancient origin of
the distal limb domain.

Freitas R(1), Zhang G, Cohn MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Cancer/Genetics Research Complex, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United Sates of America.

The evolutionary transition of fins to limbs involved development of a new suite 
of distal skeletal structures, the digits. During tetrapod limb development,
genes at the 5' end of the HoxD cluster are expressed in two spatiotemporally
distinct phases. In the first phase, Hoxd9-13 are activated sequentially and form
nested domains along the anteroposterior axis of the limb. This initial phase
patterns the limb from its proximal limit to the middle of the forearm. Later in 
development, a second wave of transcription results in 5' HoxD gene expression
along the distal end of the limb bud, which regulates formation of digits.
Studies of zebrafish fins showed that the second phase of Hox expression does not
occur, leading to the idea that the origin of digits was driven by addition of
the distal Hox expression domain in the earliest tetrapods. Here we test this
hypothesis by investigating Hoxd gene expression during paired fin development in
the shark Scyliorhinus canicula, a member of the most basal lineage of jawed
vertebrates. We report that at early stages, 5'Hoxd genes are expressed in
anteroposteriorly nested patterns, consistent with the initial wave of Hoxd
transcription in teleost and tetrapod paired appendages. Unexpectedly, a second
phase of expression occurs at later stages of shark fin development, in which
Hoxd12 and Hoxd13 are re-expressed along the distal margin of the fin buds. This 
second phase is similar to that observed in tetrapod limbs. The results indicate 
that a second, distal phase of Hoxd gene expression is not uniquely associated
with tetrapod digit development, but is more likely a plesiomorphic condition
present the common ancestor of chondrichthyans and osteichthyans. We propose that
a temporal extension, rather than de novo activation, of Hoxd expression in the
distal part of the fin may have led to the evolution of digits.

PMCID: PMC1937022
PMID: 17710153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Am Chem Soc. 2007 Mar 14;129(10):2971-80. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy for lysine NH(3) groups in proteins: unique effect
of water exchange on (15)N transverse relaxation.

Iwahara J(1), Jung YS, Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0520,
USA.

In this paper, we present a series of heteronuclear NMR experiments for the
direct observation and characterization of lysine NH3 groups in proteins. In the 
context of the HoxD9 homeodomain bound specifically to DNA we were able to
directly observe three cross-peaks, arising from lysine NH3 groups, with 15N
chemical shifts around approximately 33 ppm at pH 5.8 and 35 degrees C.
Measurement of water-exchange rates and various types of 15N transverse
relaxation rates for these NH3 groups, reveals that rapid water exchange
dominates the 15N relaxation for antiphase coherence with respect to 1H through
scalar relaxation of the second kind. As a consequence of this phenomenon, 15N
line shapes of NH3 signals in a conventional 1H-15N heteronuclear single quantum 
coherence (HSQC) correlation experiment are much broader than those of backbone
amide groups. A 2D 1H-15N correlation experiment that exclusively observes
in-phase 15N transverse coherence (termed HISQC for heteronuclear in-phase single
quantum coherence spectroscopy) is independent of scalar relaxation in the t(1)
(15N) time domain and as a result exhibits strikingly sharper 15N line shapes and
higher intensities for NH3 cross-peaks than either HSQC or heteronuclear multiple
quantum coherence (HMQC) correlation experiments. Coherence transfer through the 
relatively small J-coupling between 15Nzeta and 13Cepsilon (4.7-5.0 Hz) can be
achieved with high efficiency by maintaining in-phase 15N coherence owing to its 
slow relaxation. With the use of a suite of triple resonance experiments based on
the same design principles as the HISQC, all the NH3 cross-peaks observed in the 
HISQC spectrum could be assigned to lysines that directly interact with DNA
phosphate groups. Selective observation of functional NH3 groups is feasible
because of hydrogen bonding or salt bridges that protect them from rapid water
exchange. Finally, we consider the potential use of lysine NH3 groups as an
alternative probe for larger systems as illustrated by data obtained on the
128-kDa enzyme I dimer.

PMID: 17300195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 10;103(41):15062-7. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

NMR structural and kinetic characterization of a homeodomain diffusing and
hopping on nonspecific DNA.

Iwahara J(1), Zweckstetter M, Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0520, USA.

Nonspecific protein-DNA interactions are inherently dynamic and involve both
diffusion of the protein along the DNA and hopping of the protein from one DNA
molecule or segment to another. Understanding how gene regulatory proteins
interact nonspecifically with DNA in terms of both structure and dynamics is
challenging because the experimental observables are an ensemble average of many 
rapidly exchanging states. By using a variety of NMR spectroscopic techniques,
including relaxation analysis, paramagnetic relaxation enhancement, and residual 
dipolar couplings, we have characterized structural and kinetic aspects of the
interaction of the HoxD9 homeodomain with a nonspecific, 24-bp DNA duplex in a
system in which the protein is not constrained to any particular site. The data
reveal that HoxD9 binds to nonspecific DNA with the same binding mode and
orientation as that observed in the specific complex. The mobility, however, of
Arg side-chains contacting the DNA is increased in the nonspecific complex
relative to the specific one. The kinetics of intermolecular translocation
between two different nonspecific DNA molecules have also been analyzed and
reveal that at high DNA concentrations (such as those present in vivo) direct
transfer from one nonspecific complex to another nonspecific DNA molecule occurs 
without going through the intermediary of free protein. This finding provides a
simple mechanism for accelerating the target search in vivo for the specific site
in a sea of nonspecific sites by permitting more effective sampling of available 
DNA sites as the protein jumps from one segment to another.

PMCID: PMC1622777
PMID: 17008406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nature. 2006 Apr 27;440(7088):1227-30.

Detecting transient intermediates in macromolecular binding by paramagnetic NMR.

Iwahara J(1), Clore GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-0520, USA.

Macromolecular complex formation is governed by two opposing constraints of
specificity and speed. Kinetic and theoretical considerations suggest that
significant rate enhancement can be achieved either by reducing the
dimensionality of the search process or by the creation of a short-range
attractive potential around the target site. This implies the existence of
transient intermediates involving non-specific binding modes. Here we show that
intermolecular paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) provides a means of
directly detecting the presence of, and investigating the nature of, low
population transient intermediates under equilibrium conditions. Applying this
approach, we characterize the search process whereby a sequence-specific
transcription factor (the homeodomain of HOXD9) binds to non-cognate DNA sites as
a means of enhancing the rate of specific association. The PRE data in the fast
exchange regime reveal the presence of transient intermediates formed in a
stochastic manner at non-cognate sites whose structure is similar to that of the 
specific complex. Two distinct search processes involving intra- as well as
intermolecular translocations can be delineated. The intermolecular PRE method is
general and can be readily applied to investigations of transient intermediates
in many other macromolecular binding processes.

PMID: 16642002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Orthop Res. 2005 Jul;23(4):882-90. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Reactivation of Hox gene expression during bone regeneration.

Gersch RP(1), Lombardo F, McGovern SC, Hadjiargyrou M.

Collaborators: Hadjiargyrou M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Psychology A
Building, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2580, USA.

Previous studies have explored the link between bone regeneration and
skeletogenesis. Although a great deal is known regarding tissue and cell based
events, especially those involving ossification and chondrogenesis, much remains 
unknown about the molecular similarity of repair and development. Since the
functional significance of Homeobox (Hox) genes in embryonic skeletogenesis has
been well documented through knockout and deficiency studies, we chose to
investigate whether members of this family are reactivated during fracture
repair. Specifically, we examined the temporal and spatial expression of Msx-1,
Msx-2, rHox, Hoxa-2 and Hoxd-9, because of their involvement in limb development.
Utilizing quantitative reverse transcriptase RT-PCR (qPCR), mRNA levels from all 
five genes were shown to be upregulated during fracture repair at all times
tested (post-fracture day 3-21), as compared to intact bone. Further, using in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, spatial expression of these genes
was localized to osteoblasts, chondrocytes and periosteal osteoprogenitor cells
found within the fracture callus, the foremost cells responsible for the
reparative phase of the healing process. Given the contribution of Hox genes in
skeletal development, our results suggest that these genes are involved in either
the patterning or formation of the fracture callus, further supporting the notion
that bone regeneration recapitulates skeletal development.

PMID: 16023004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):227-39.

Developmental genetic basis for the evolution of pelvic fin loss in the
pufferfish Takifugu rubripes.

Tanaka M(1), Hale LA, Amores A, Yan YL, Cresko WA, Suzuki T, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Paired appendages were a key developmental innovation among vertebrates and they 
eventually evolved into limbs. Ancient developmental control systems for paired
fins and limbs are broadly conserved among gnathostome vertebrates. Some lineages
including whales, some salamanders, snakes, and many ray-fin fish, independently 
lost the pectoral, pelvic, or both appendages over evolutionary time. When
different taxa independently evolve similar developmental morphologies, do they
use the same molecular genetic mechanisms? To determine the developmental genetic
basis for the evolution of pelvis loss in the pufferfish Takifugu rubripes
(fugu), we isolated fugu orthologs of genes thought to be essential for limb
development in tetrapods, including limb positioning (Hoxc6, Hoxd9), limb bud
initiation (Pitx1, Tbx4, Tbx5), and limb bud outgrowth (Shh, Fgf10), and studied 
their expression patterns during fugu development. Results showed that bud
outgrowth and initiation fail to occur in fugu, and that pelvis loss is
associated with altered expression of Hoxd9a, which we show to be a marker for
pelvic fin position in three-spine stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus. These
results rule out changes in appendage outgrowth and initiation genes as the
earliest developmental defect in pufferfish pelvic fin loss and suggest that
altered Hoxd9a expression in the lateral mesoderm may account for pelvis loss in 
fugu. This mechanism appears to be different from the mechanism for pelvic loss
in stickleback, showing that different taxa can evolve similar phenotypes by
different mechanisms.

PMID: 15893975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Reprod Toxicol. 2005 May-Jun;20(1):39-45.

Vertebral malformations induced by sodium salicylate correlate with shifts in
expression domains of Hox genes.

Wéry N(1), Foulon O, Blacker A, Picard JJ, Gofflot F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Several embryotoxic agents, which includes sodium salicylate, were reported to
induce vertebral variations in the form of supernumerary ribs (SNR) when
administered to pregnant rodents. Because the biological significance of SNR in
toxicological studies is still a matter of debate, we investigated the molecular 
basis of this defect by analyzing the possible involvement of Hox genes, known to
specify vertebrae identity. Sodium salicylate (300mg/kg) was administered to
pregnant rats on gestational day 9 (GD 9). On GD 13, the expression of several
Hox genes, selected according to the position of their anterior limit of
expression, namely upstream (Hoxa9), at the level (Hoxa10) and downstream (Hoxd9)
to the morphological alteration, were analyzed. Posterior shifts in the anterior 
limit of expression of Hoxa10 and Hoxd9 were observed following exposure to
salicylate, which could explain an effect at the level of the axial skeleton.
This finding suggests that the appearance of ectopic ribs can be attributed to an
anterior transformation of lumbar vertebrae identity into thoracic vertebrae
identity. Whether this transformation occurs with all compounds inducing SNR in
rats remains to be determined.

PMID: 15808784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Mar 14;11(10):1562-6.

Immunocytochemical detection of HoxD9 and Pbx1 homeodomain protein expression in 
Chinese esophageal squamous cell carcinomas.

Liu DB(1), Gu ZD, Cao XZ, Liu H, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.
dbliumd@sohu.com

AIM: To evaluate the expression pattern of two novel oncofetal antigens, the
HoxD9 and Pbx1 homeoproteins in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs) to
determine what role they would play in the carcinogenesis of ESCC.
METHODS: We obtained tissue samples of ESCC from 56 patients who underwent
esophagectomy but not preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The diagnosis of
ESCC was established and confirmed by staff pathologists. We used a highly
sensitive, indirect, immunocytochemical method to detect HoxD9 and PbX1 proteins.
We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluated cells that exhibited and staining
using a light microscope.
RESULTS: In all observed carcinoma tissue samples, more than 60% of neoplastic
cells stained lightly or strongly for HoxD9, and more than 50% of neoplastic
cells stained lightly or strongly for Pbx1.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that HoxD9 and Pbx1 are inappropriately expressed in
most human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Understanding the role of Hox
genes in esophageal epithelial cell carcinogenesis may not only augment early
detection but also offer new avenues for treatment of this disease.

PMCID: PMC4305705
PMID: 15770739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Evol Dev. 2005 Mar-Apr;7(2):130-41.

Hoxd13 expression in the developing limbs of the short-tailed fruit bat, Carollia
perspicillata.

Chen CH(1), Cretekos CJ, Rasweiler JJ 4th, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Bat forelimbs are highly specialized for sustained flight, providing a unique
model to explore the genetic programs that regulate vertebrate limb diversity.
Hoxd9-13 genes are important regulators of stylopodium, zeugopodium, and
autopodium development and thus evolutionary changes in their expression profiles
and biochemical activities may contribute to divergent limb morphologies in
vertebrates. We have isolated the genomic region that includes Hoxd12 and Hoxd13 
from Carollia perspicillata, the short-tailed fruit bat. The bat Hoxd13 gene
encodes a protein that shares 95% identity with human and mouse HOXD13. The
expression pattern of bat Hoxd13 mRNA during limb development was compared with
that of mouse. In bat and mouse hindlimbs, the expression patterns of Hoxd13 are 
relatively similar. However, although the forelimb Hoxd13 expression patterns in 
both organisms during early limb bud stages are similar, at later stages they
diverge; the anterior expression boundary of bat Hoxd13 is posterior-shifted
relative to the mouse. These findings, compared with the Hoxd13 expression
profiles of other vertebrates, suggest that divergent Hoxd13 expression patterns 
may contribute to limb morphological variation.

PMID: 15733311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nature. 2003 Oct 30;425(6961):926-33.

Motor neuron columnar fate imposed by sequential phases of Hox-c activity.

Dasen JS(1), Liu JP, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, 701 West
168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA. jd2009@columbia.edu

The organization of neurons into columns is a prominent feature of central
nervous system structure and function. In many regions of the central nervous
system the grouping of neurons into columns links cell-body position to axonal
trajectory, thus contributing to the establishment of topographic neural maps.
This link is prominent in the developing spinal cord, where columnar sets of
motor neurons innervate distinct targets in the periphery. We show here that
sequential phases of Hox-c protein expression and activity control the columnar
differentiation of spinal motor neurons. Hox expression in neural progenitors is 
established by graded fibroblast growth factor signalling and translated into a
distinct motor neuron Hox pattern. Motor neuron columnar fate then emerges
through cell autonomous repressor and activator functions of Hox proteins. Hox
proteins also direct the expression of genes that establish motor topographic
projections, thus implicating Hox proteins as critical determinants of spinal
motor neuron identity and organization.

PMID: 14586461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 2002 Dec;26(12):1110-7.

[Increased expression of HOXA9 gene in Hirschsprung disease].

[Article in French]

Méchine-Neuville A(1), Lefebvre O, Bellocq JP, Kedinger M, Simon-Assmann P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 381, Ontogenèse et Pathologie du Système Digestif, 3, avenue
Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

OBJECTIVE: Hirschsprung disease is characterized by segmental aganglionosis of
the terminal bowel. Neurons of the enteric nervous system arise from neural
crest, migrate and colonize intestinal muscle coat where they proliferate and
differentiate. The first pathophysiologic hypothesis suggests an absence of
neural cell migration. The most recent hypothesis involves disorders of their
homing and/or their differentiation due to an altered intestinal
microenvironment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed the expression of muscle markers and laminin
isoforms by immunocytochemistry and of homeotic genes involved in the
regionalization of the intestinal mesenchyme during development (HOXA4, HOXA9,
HOXD9) by RT-PCR, in colon specimens from two children with Hirschsprung disease 
(pathological and transition regions) and from healthy adult controls.
RESULTS: We showed an increase in HOXA9 gene expression in Hirschsprung disease
specimens while HOXA4 and HOXD9 mRNA expressions were unchanged. No significant
differences in the muscle markers nor in the laminin isoforms were noted.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that intrinsic dysregulation of the intestinal
wall microenvironment could account for the pathophysiology of Hirschsprung
disease.

PMID: 12520199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Jul;10(1):41-8.

Expression of HOXD9 in fibroblast-like synoviocytes from rheumatoid arthritis
patients.

Nguyen NC(1), Hirose T, Nakazawa M, Kobata T, Nakamura H, Nishioka K, Nakajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology, Immunology and Genetics Program, Institute of Medical Science,
St. Marianna University, School of Medicine, Kawasaki 216-8512, Japan.

The proteins of homeobox (HOX) genes are transcription regulators involved in
cell type-specific differentiation and patterning of the body plan in
vertebrates. Particularly, the HOXD family is involved in limb formation in mice 
and chicks. There is also some evidence that the HOXD9 gene, a member of the HOXD
family, is involved in the pathology of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The purpose of
the present study was to determine if the HOXD9 protein was expressed in RA
synovium and then to characterize the HOXD9-expressing cell. Western blotting and
immunohistochemical analysis showed that the HOXD9 protein was expressed in the
synovium from patients with RA, but not in those from patients with
osteoarthritis or healthy individuals. The HOXD9-positive cells were localized in
both the lining and sublining areas of the synovium. Furthermore, fluorescent
double-staining showed that the HOXD9 protein was expressed in fibroblast-like
synoviocytes (FLS). These findings not only indicate that the HOXD9 gene is
exclusively expressed in the RA synovium but also suggest that the HOXD9 gene
contributes to the pathology of rheumatoid arthritis through the FLS.

PMID: 12060849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Gynecol Oncol. 2002 Feb;84(2):216-21.

Expression of homeobox genes in cervical cancer.

Li H(1), Huang CJ, Choo KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Members of the homeobox (HB) gene superfamily encode transcription
factors crucial for development and may be associated with tumorigenesis. In this
study, we aimed to develop a procedure to survey the expression of the
dispersed-type HB genes in cervical cancer cells.
METHODS: Nineteen sets of degenerate primers were designed based on conserved
homeodomains of known dispersed-type HB genes. A cDNA library derived from HeLa, 
a cervical cancer cell line, was used. Two successive rounds of PCR were
performed using a combination of the HB degenerate primers and a primer
recognizing the flanking sequence of the vector used in the cDNA library
construction.
RESULTS: On cloning and sequence analysis of the PCR fragments generated, 10
known and 3 putative novel HB genes were detected in HeLa. RT-PCR expression
analysis further showed that HOXD9 and ATBF1 were differentially expressed in
cancer cells and not in normal cervix.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate the feasibility of using degenerate primers in 
PCR experiments in a collective analysis of complex gene families. Our data
indicate that HOXD9 and ATBF1 are expressed in cervical cancer, but not in normal
cervix.

©2002 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11812077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 Feb;70(2):547-55. Epub 2002 Jan 3.

A 117-kb microdeletion removing HOXD9-HOXD13 and EVX2 causes synpolydactyly.

Goodman FR(1), Majewski F, Collins AL, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
fgoodman@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

Studies in mouse and chick have shown that the 5' HoxD genes play major roles in 
the development of the limbs and genitalia. In humans, mutations in HOXD13 cause 
the dominantly inherited limb malformation synpolydactyly (SPD).
Haploinsufficiency for the 5' HOXD genes has recently been proposed to underlie
the monodactyly and penoscrotal hypoplasia in two children with chromosomal
deletions encompassing the entire HOXD cluster. Similar deletions, however, have 
previously been associated with split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM), including
monodactyly. Here we report a father and daughter with SPD who carry a 117-kb
microdeletion at the 5' end of the HOXD cluster. By sequencing directly across
the deletion breakpoint, we show that this microdeletion removes only
HOXD9-HOXD13 and EVX2. We also report a girl with bilateral split foot and a
chromosomal deletion that includes the entire HOXD cluster and extends
approximately 5 Mb centromeric to it. Our findings indicate that
haploinsufficiency for the 5' HOXD genes causes not SHFM but SPD and point to the
presence of a novel locus for SHFM in the interval between EVX2 and D2S294. They 
also suggest that there is a regulatory region, upstream of the HOXD cluster,
that is responsible for activating the cluster as a whole.

PMCID: PMC384929
PMID: 11778160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 1;15(17):2209-14.

Large scale transgenic and cluster deletion analysis of the HoxD complex separate
an ancestral regulatory module from evolutionary innovations.

Spitz F(1), Gonzalez F, Peichel C, Vogt TF, Duboule D, Zákány J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The ancestral role of the Hox gene family is specifying morphogenetic differences
along the main body axis. In vertebrates, HoxD genes were also co-opted along
with the emergence of novel structures such as limbs and genitalia. We propose
that these functional recruitments relied on the appearance, or implementation,
of regulatory sequences outside of the complex. Whereas transgenic human and
murine HOXD clusters could function during axial patterning, in mice they were
not expressed outside the trunk. Accordingly, deletion of the entire cluster
abolished axial expression, whereas recently acquired regulatory controls were
preserved.

PMCID: PMC312772
PMID: 11544178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Arthritis Rheum. 2001 May;44(5):1013-21.

Potential role of HOXD9 in synoviocyte proliferation.

Khoa ND(1), Nakazawa M, Hasunuma T, Nakajima T, Nakamura H, Kobata T, Nishioka K.

Author information: 
(1)St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of HOXD9 in the proliferation activity of
cultured synoviocytes as well as the mechanisms that regulate HOXD9
transcription.
METHODS: Synoviocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and
osteoarthritis (OA) were transfected with HOXD9 complementary DNA to establish
stable transformants that overexpressed HOXD9. HOXD9 expression was detected by
Western blotting with anti-HOXD9 antibody. The growth properties of the
transformants were investigated by proliferation and colony formation assays. The
expression of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNFalpha), interleukin-1beta, c-Fos, and c-Myc was examined by Western blotting.
Transcriptional regulation of HOXD9 was examined by transient cotransfection.
RESULTS: HOXD9 protein was highly expressed in RA synoviocytes, but there was no 
expression in OA synoviocytes. HOXD9 transfection induced stable HOXD9 protein
expression in synoviocytes and showed an increased proliferation rate under both 
normal and serum-starved conditions, as well as an enhanced capacity to
proliferate anchorage independently to form colonies in soft agar cultures,
compared with control transfectants. Higher levels of bFGF and c-Fos were
detected in HOXD9 transformants than in controls. Transient cotransfection assays
of NIH3T3 fibroblasts and synoviocytes showed that HOXD9 activated the luciferase
reporter construct containing the highly conserved region (HCR), an
autoregulatory element of HOXD9 promoter. This activation was significantly
increased by bFGF, suppressed by TNFalpha, and unchanged by transforming growth
factor beta in synoviocytes. Human T lymphotropic virus type I tax also activated
the luciferase reporter construct containing the HCR and had a synergistic effect
with HOXD9 on HCR promoter activation.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that HOXD9 plays a potential role in synovial
proliferation. In addition, they suggest that the involvement of HOXD9 in the
regulation of cellular growth might be mediated, at least in part, by
up-regulation of growth-related factors such as bFGF and c-Fos and/or might
result from increased transcription activity by its regulators.

PMID: 11352232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genes Dev. 2000 Jan 15;14(2):198-211.

Mechanisms of Hox gene colinearity: transposition of the anterior Hoxb1 gene into
the posterior HoxD complex.

Kmita M(1), van Der Hoeven F, Zákány J, Krumlauf R, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Transposition of Hoxd genes to a more posterior (5') location within the HoxD
complex suggested that colinearity in the expression of these genes was due, in
part, to the existence of a silencing mechanism originating at the 5' end of the 
cluster and extending towards the 3' direction. To assess the strength and
specificity of this repression, as well as to challenge available models on
colinearity, we inserted a Hoxb1/lacZ transgene within the posterior HoxD
complex, thereby reconstructing a cluster with a copy of the most anterior gene
inserted at the most posterior position. Analysis of Hoxb1 expression after
ectopic relocation revealed that Hoxb1-specific activity in the fourth rhombomere
was totally abolished. Treatment with retinoic acid, or subsequent relocations
toward more 3' positions in the HoxD complex, did not release this silencing in
hindbrain cells. In contrast, however, early and anterior transgene expression in
the mesoderm was unexpectedly not suppressed. Furthermore, the transgene induced 
a transient ectopic activation of the neighboring Hoxd13 gene, without affecting 
other genes of the complex. Such a local and transient break in colinearity was
also observed after transposition of the Hoxd9/lacZ reporter gene, indicating
that it may be a general property of these transgenes when transposed at an
ectopic location. These results are discussed in the context of existing models, 
which account for colinear activation of vertebrate Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC316340
PMID: 10652274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 15;216(2):595-610.

Targeted disruption of Hoxd9 and Hoxd10 alters locomotor behavior, vertebral
identity, and peripheral nervous system development.

de la Cruz CC(1), Der-Avakian A, Spyropoulos DD, Tieu DD, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California at Los Angeles School of
Medicine 90024, USA.

The five most 5' HoxD genes, which are related to the Drosophila Abd-B gene, play
an important role in patterning axial and appendicular skeletal elements and the 
nervous system of developing vertebrate embryos. Three of these genes, Hoxd11,
Hoxd12, and Hoxd13, act synergistically to pattern the hindlimb autopod. In this 
study, we examine the combined effects of two additional 5' HoxD genes, Hoxd9 and
Hoxd10. Both of these genes are expressed posteriorly in overlapping domains in
the developing neural tube and axial mesoderm as well as in developing limbs.
Locomotor behavior in animals carrying a double mutation in these two genes was
altered; these alterations included changes in gait, mobility, and adduction.
Morphological analysis showed alterations in axial and appendicular skeletal
structure, hindlimb peripheral nerve organization and projection, and distal
hindlimb musculature. These morphological alterations are likely to provide the
substrate for the observed alterations in locomotor behavior. The alterations
observed in double-mutant mice are distinct from the phenotypes observed in mice 
carrying single mutations in either gene, but exhibit most of the features of
both individual phenotypes. This suggests that the combined activity of two
adjacent Hox genes provides more patterning information than activity of each
gene alone. These observations support the idea that adjacent Hox genes with
overlapping expression patterns may interact functionally to provide patterning
information to the same regions of developing mouse embryos.

PMID: 10642795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;19(11):7577-88.

PBX and MEIS as non-DNA-binding partners in trimeric complexes with HOX proteins.

Shanmugam K(1), Green NC, Rambaldi I, Saragovi HU, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

HOX, PBX, and MEIS transcription factors bind DNA through a homeodomain. PBX
proteins bind DNA cooperatively as heterodimers with MEIS family members and also
with HOX proteins from paralog groups 1 to 10. MEIS proteins cooperatively bind
DNA with ABD-B class HOX proteins of groups 9 and 10. Here, we examine aspects of
dimeric and higher-order interactions between these three homeodomain classes.
The most significant results can be summarized as follows. (i) Most of PBX N
terminal to the homeodomain is required for efficient cooperative binding with
HOXD4 and HOXD9. (ii) MEIS and PBX proteins form higher-order complexes on a
heterodimeric binding site. (iii) Although MEIS does not cooperatively bind DNA
with ANTP class HOX proteins, it does form a trimer as a non-DNA-binding partner 
with DNA-bound PBX-HOXD4. (iv) The N terminus of HOXD4 negatively regulates
trimer formation. (v) MEIS forms a similar trimer with DNA-bound PBX-HOXD9. (vi) 
A related trimer (where MEIS is a non-DNA-binding partner) is formed on a
transcriptional promoter within the cell. (vii) We observe an additional trimer
class involving non-DNA-bound PBX and DNA-bound MEIS-HOXD9 or MEIS-HOXD10
heterodimers that is enhanced by mutation of the PBX homeodomain. (viii) In this 
latter trimer, PBX is likely to contact both MEIS and HOXD9/D10. (ix) The
stability of DNA binding by all trimers is enhanced relative to the heterodimers.
These findings suggest novel functions for PBX and MEIS in modulating the
function of DNA-bound MEIS-HOX and PBX-HOX heterodimers, respectively.

PMCID: PMC84774
PMID: 10523646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Arthritis Rheum. 1999 Apr;42(4):686-96.

Expression of murine HOXD9 during embryonic joint patterning and in human T
lymphotropic virus type I tax transgenic mice with arthropathy resembling
rheumatoid arthritis.

Khoa ND(1), Hasunuma T, Kobata T, Kato T, Nishioka K.

Author information: 
(1)St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the expression of murine HOXD9 during normal joint
development and in arthritic joints of human T lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I)
tax transgenic mice and the role of HTLV-I tax in HOXD9 expression.
METHODS: Expression of HOXD9, HOXD1O, HOXD11, HOXD12, and HOXD13 genes in joint
tissues at the ankle/foot regions of mouse embryos at day 10 to day 18 of
gestation (E10-E18) and neonates within 10 days after birth was determined by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and in situ reverse transcription
methods. Adult synovial tissues from 5 HTLV-I tax transgenic mice with chronic
polyarthritis and 4 nontransgenic (normal) mice were also examined for expression
of these HOXD genes. The effect of HTLV-I on HOXD9 expression in cultured
synoviocytes was studied by in vitro infection and transfection experiments.
RESULTS: Expression of HOXD9 was detected in embryonic joints, preferentially on 
articular cartilage, only during the early stages of joint development (up to
E15), whereas other HOXD genes were expressed throughout the embryonic and
neonatal stages. In adult mice, transcripts of HOXD9 were specifically detected
in synovial tissues from 4 of 5 arthritic mice, especially in the lining and
sublining synovial cells, but not in synovial tissues of normal mice. Activation 
of HOXD9 was observed in cultured synoviocytes infected with HTLV-I in vitro as
well as in those transfected with HTLV-I tax.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HOXD9 is involved not only in the early
stages of normal joint development, but may also be involved in the pathologic
process of arthritis. HTLV-I tax appeared as an activator of this HOX gene in
cultured synoviocytes.

PMID: 10211882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jan 19;96(2):541-6.

Paralogous mouse Hox genes, Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9, function together to control
development of the mammary gland in response to pregnancy.

Chen F(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Although the role of Hox genes in patterning the mammalian body plan has been
studied extensively during embryonic and fetal development, relatively little is 
known concerning Hox gene function in adult animals. Analysis of mice with mutant
Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9 genes shows that these paralogous genes are required for 
mediating the expansion and/or differentiation of the mammary epithelium ductal
system in response to pregnancy. Mothers with these three mutant genes cannot
raise their own pups, but the pups can be rescued by fostering by wild-type
mothers. Histologically, the mammary glands of the mutant mothers seem normal
before pregnancy but do not develop properly in response to pregnancy and
parturition. Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9 are expressed normally in adult mammary
glands, suggesting a direct role for these genes in the development of mammary
tissue after pregnancy. Because loss-of-function mutations in these Hox genes
cause hypoplasia of the mammary gland after pregnancy, it may be productive to
look for misexpression of these genes in mammary carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC15172
PMID: 9892669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6201-12.

Definition of the transcriptional activation domains of three human HOX proteins 
depends on the DNA-binding context.

Viganò MA(1), Di Rocco G, Zappavigna V, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)TIGET, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.

Hox proteins control developmental patterns and cell differentiation in
vertebrates by acting as positive or negative regulators of still unidentified
downstream target genes. The homeodomain and other small accessory sequences
encode the DNA-protein and protein-protein interaction functions which ultimately
dictate target recognition and functional specificity in vivo. The effector
domains responsible for either positive or negative interactions with the cell
transcriptional machinery are unknown for most Hox proteins, largely due to a
lack of physiological targets on which to carry out functional analysis. We
report the identification of the transcriptional activation domains of three
human Hox proteins, HOXB1, HOXB3, and HOXD9, which interact in vivo with the
autoregulatory and cross-regulatory enhancers of the murine Hoxb-1 and human
HOXD9 genes. Activation domains have been defined both in a homologous context,
i.e., within a HOX protein binding as a monomer or as a HOX-PBX heterodimer to
the specific target, and in a heterologous context, after translocation to the
yeast Gal4 DNA-binding domain. Transfection analysis indicates that activation
domains can be identified in different regions of the three HOX proteins
depending on the context in which they interact with the DNA target. These
results suggest that Hox proteins may be multifunctional transcriptional
regulators, interacting with different cofactors and/or components of the
transcriptional machinery depending on the structure of their target regulatory
elements.

PMCID: PMC109207
PMID: 9774637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Jul;42(5):723-31.

Neural development in the marsupial frog Gastrotheca riobambae.

Del Pino EM(1), Medina A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica del
Ecuador, Quito. edelpino@puceuio.puce.edu.ec

The expression pattern of the tyrosine kinase gene Pag in whole-mount
preparations of Gastrotheca riobambae embryos and the immunostaining of embryos
against the proteins vimentin, NCAM, Pax-2, Hoxd9, and antigen 2G9 allowed
detection of migrating streams of cranial neural crest (NC) cells, the isthmus,
the hindbrain boundaries, rhombomeres, cranial nerves, and the developing spinal 
cord. Expression patterns of these genes and the basic neural morphology of
Gastrotheca have been conserved in comparison with other vertebrates. However, as
in Xenopus, a prominent stream of migrating cranial NC cells from rhombomere 5
was found in Gastrotheca embryos. By contrast, in chick embryos, premigratory NC 
cells from rhombomeres 3 and 5 undergo extensive apoptosis, which suggests that
in anurans, apoptosis of the cranial NC may deviate from the chick pattern. The
branchial-anterior and branchial-posterior masses of cranial NC cells, that
populate the gill arches, are very large in G. riobambae. We cannot distinguish
whether this feature corresponds to an anuran trait related to development of the
tadpole pharyngeal skeleton, or is related to development of the peculiar
external bell gills of this frog. This work provides the descriptive groundwork
for lineage studies of the NC in G. riobambae embryos. Gastrotheca embryos are
large and flat, have prominent streams of cranial NC cells, and develop very
large external bell gills. These unique characteristics may facilitate future
comparative analysis of the role of apoptosis in patterning the amphibian NC cell
streams, and the contribution of the NC to development of the gills.

PMID: 9712527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 21;272(47):29904-10.

High mobility group I proteins interfere with the homeodomains binding to DNA.

Arlotta P(1), Rustighi A, Mantovani F, Manfioletti G, Giancotti V, Tell G,
Damante G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e Chimica delle Macromolecole,
Università di Trieste, 34100 Trieste, Italy.

Homeodomains (HDs) constitute the DNA binding domain of several transcription
factors that control cell differentiation and development in a wide variety of
organisms. Most HDs recognize sequences that contain a 5'-TAAT-3' core motif.
However, the DNA binding specificity of HD-containing proteins does not solely
determine their biological effects, and other molecular mechanisms should be
responsible for their ultimate functional activity. Interference by other factors
in the HD/DNA interaction could be one of the processes by which HD-containing
proteins achieve the functional complexity required for their effects on the
expression of target genes. Using gel-retardation assay, we demonstrate that two 
members of the high mobility group I (HMGI) family of nuclear proteins (HMGI-C
and HMGY) can bind to a subset of HD target sequences and inhibit HDs from
binding to the same sequences. The inhibition of the HD/DNA interaction occurs
while incubating HMGI-C with DNA either before or after the addition of the HD.
The reduced half-life of the HD.DNA complex in the presence of HMGI-C, and the
shift observed in the CD spectra recorded upon HMGI-C binding to DNA, strongly
suggest that structural modifications of the DNA are responsible for the
inhibition of the HD.DNA complex formation. Moreover, by co-transfection
experiments we provide evidence that this inhibition can occur also in vivo. The 
data reported here would suggest that HMGI proteins may be potential regulators
of the function of HD-containing proteins and that they are able to interfere
with the access of the HD to their target genes.

PMID: 9368066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Arthritis Rheum. 1997 Sep;40(9):1628-35.

Transcriptional regulation of the HOX4C gene by basic fibroblast growth factor on
rheumatoid synovial fibroblasts.

Xue C(1), Hasunuma T, Asahara H, Yin W, Maeda T, Fujisawa K, Dong Y, Sumida T,
Nishioka K.

Author information: 
(1)St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the expression of genes of the HOX D cluster in the
synovial tissue of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and to determine
whether basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) influences the expression and
transcriptional regulation of the gene.
METHODS: The expression of genes of the HOX D cluster, including HOX4C, HOX4D,
HOX4H, and HOX4I, was determined in the synovium of 4 patients with RA and 4 with
osteoarthritis (OA) by in situ reverse transcription (RT) and RT-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). The induction of HOX4C messenger RNA (mRNA) by bFGF was
determined by RT-PCR. The binding activity of a transcriptional regulator of the 
HOX4C gene, C2, was analyzed by the mobility shift assay. NIH-3T3 cells
transfected with a construct containing C2 binding sequence were incubated with
bFGF, and the activity of the reporter was measured by luciferase assay.
RESULTS: Using an in situ RT assay, specific expression of HOX4C mRNA was
detected in 3 of 4 RA synovial samples, whereas none of the OA synovia expressed 
HOX4C. HOX4D, HOX4H, and HOX4I genes were expressed in all synovial samples from 
RA and OA patients. The presence of HOX4C mRNA was also confirmed by RT-PCR and
Southern blotting. Treatment with bFGF increased the expression of HOX4C mRNA in 
RA fibroblasts. The mobility shift assay and luciferase assay showed that bFGF
enhanced C2 binding activity and significantly increased the transcriptional
activity on RA fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that HOX4C is involved in synovial hyperplasia, 
and that the transcriptional regulation of HOX4C genes by bFGF may play a crucial
role in the pathogenesis of RA.

PMID: 9324017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8635-43.

Distinct HOX N-terminal arm residues are responsible for specificity of DNA
recognition by HOX monomers and HOX.PBX heterodimers.

Phelan ML(1), Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Dimerization with extradenticle or PBX homeoproteins dramatically improves DNA
binding by HOX transcription factors, indicating that recognition by such
complexes is important for HOX specificity. For HOX monomeric binding, a major
determinant of specificity is the flexible N-terminal arm. It makes base-specific
contacts via the minor groove, including one to the 1st position of a 5'-TNAT-3' 
core by a conserved arginine (Arg-5). Here we show that Arg-5 also contributes to
the stability of HOX.PBX complexes, apparently by forming the same DNA contact.
We further show that heterodimers of PBX with HOXA1 or HOXD4 proteins have
different specificities at another position recognized by the N-terminal arm (the
2nd position in the TNAT core). Importantly, N-terminal arm residues 2 and 3,
which distinguish the binding of HOXA1 and HOXD4 monomers, play no role in the
specificity of their complexes with PBX. In addition, HOXD9 and HOXD10, which are
capable of binding both TTAT and TAAT sites as monomers, can cooperate with PBX1A
only on a TTAT site. These data suggest that some DNA contacts made by the
N-terminal arm are altered by interaction with PBX.

PMID: 9079695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. EMBO J. 1996 Sep 16;15(18):4981-91.

HMG1 interacts with HOX proteins and enhances their DNA binding and
transcriptional activation.

Zappavigna V(1), Falciola L, Helmer-Citterich M, Mavilio F, Bianchi ME.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT, Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, Milano, Italy.

High mobility group protein 1 (HMG1) is a non-histone, chromatin-associated
nuclear protein with a proposed role in the regulation of eukaryotic gene
expression. We show that HMG1 interacts with proteins encoded by the HOX gene
family by establishing protein-protein contacts between the HMG box domains and
the HOX homeodomain. The functional role of these interactions was studied using 
the transcriptional activity of the human HOXD9 protein as a model. HMG1
enhances, in a dose-dependent fashion, the sequence-specific DNA binding activity
in vitro, and the transcriptional activation in a co-transfection assay in vivo, 
of the HOXD9 protein. Functional interaction between HMG1 and HOXD9 is dependent 
on the DNA binding activity of the homeodomain, and requires the HOXD9
transcriptional activation domain. HMG1 enhances activation by HOXD9, but not by 
HOXD8, of the HOXD9-controlled element. Specific target recognition and
functional interaction with HMG1 can be transferred to HOXD8 by homeodomain
swapping. We propose that HMG1-like proteins might be general co-factors in
HOX-mediated transcriptional activation, which facilitate access of HOX proteins 
to specific DNA targets, and/or introduce architectural constraints in the
assembly of HOX-containing transcriptional complexes.

PMCID: PMC452236
PMID: 8890171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):461-72.

Specific and redundant functions of the paralogous Hoxa-9 and Hoxd-9 genes in
forelimb and axial skeleton patterning.

Fromental-Ramain C(1), Warot X, Lakkaraju S, Favier B, Haack H, Birling C,
Dierich A, Doll e P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg.

Using gene targeting, we have produced mice with a disruption of Hoxa-9 or
Hoxd-9, two paralogous Abdominal B-related genes. During embryogenesis, these
genes are expressed in limb buds and along the vertebral axis with anterior
expression boundaries at the level of prevertebra #20 for Hoxa-9 and #23 for
Hoxd-9. Skeletal analysis revealed homeotic transformations corresponding to
anteriorisations of vertebrae #21 to #25 (L1 to L5) in the lumbar region of
Hoxa-9-/- mutants; vertebrae #23 to #25 (L3 to L5) in the lumbar region together 
with vertebrae #28, #30 and #31 (S2, S4 and Ca1) in the sacrum and tail were
anteriorized in Hoxd-9-/- mutants. Thus, anteriorisation of vertebrae #23 to #25 
were common to both phenotypes. Subtle forelimb (but not hindlimb) defects,
corresponding to a reduction of the humerus length and malformation of its
deltoid crest, were also observed in Hoxd-9-/-, but not in Hoxa-9-/-, mutant
mice. By intercrosses between these two lines of mutant mice, we have produced
Hoxa-9/Hoxd-9 double mutants which exhibit synergistic limb and axial
malformations consisting of: (i) an increase of penetrance and expressivity of
abnormalities present in the single mutants, and (ii) novel limb alterations at
the level of the forelimb stylopod and additional axial skeleton transformations.
These observations demonstrate that the two paralogous genes Hoxa-9 and Hoxd-9
have both specific and redundant functions in lumbosacral axial skeleton
patterning and in limb morphogenesis at the stylopodal level. Taken all together,
the present and previously reported results show that disruption of different Hox
genes can produce similar vertebral transformations, thus supporting a
combinatorial code model for specification of vertebral identity by Hox genes.

PMID: 8625797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Tumour Biol. 1996;17(1):34-47.

Up-regulation of HOXC6, HOXD1, and HOXD8 homeobox gene expression in human
neuroblastoma cells following chemical induction of differentiation.

Manohar CF(1), Salwen HR, Furtado MR, Cohn SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, Chicago, Ill 60611, USA.

An early event in the pathogenesis of neuroblastoma (NB), a tumor derived from
embryonal neural crest tissue, appears to be the arrested differentiation of
neuroblasts. However, NB cells can be induced to differentiate in vitro with
numerous chemicals including retinoic acid (RA) and dibutyryl cyclic AMP
(db-cAMP). One family of transcription factors, encoded by the homeobox (HOX)
genes, plays a crucial role in Drosophila, Xenopus, and mammalian embryonic
differentiation and development. We have previously identified six HOX genes
(HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXD1, HOXD4, HOXD8, and HOXD9), by a sensitive PCR-based
approach, in a cDNA library prepared from the human LA-N-5 NB cell line induced
to differentiate with RA. In this report, we studied the regulation of these six 
HOX genes in a series of NB cell lines chemically induced to differentiate.
Untreated NB cells express low or undetectable levels of HOX mRNA, and HOXC8
remains undetectable in the induced cells. However, a significant induction of
HOXC6, HOXD1, and HOXD8 expression is seen in the RA-treated NB cell lines,
albeit with different patterns and degree of up-regulation. db-cAMP treatment
also induced HOXC6 and HOXD8 expression in two of the three NB cell lines
analyzed. Low levels of HOXD4 and HOXD9 induction were observed in two and one
RA-treated NB cell line, respectively. Up-regulation of HOXC6, HOXD1, and HOXD8
expression in human NB cells, chemically induced to differentiate, appears to be 
associated with maturation toward a differentiated neuronal phenotype.

PMID: 7501971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. FEBS Lett. 1995 Jul 17;368(2):311-4.

Promoter-specific regulation of gene expression by an exogenously added
homedomain that promotes neurite growth.

Le Roux I(1), Duharcourt S, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Ronchi E.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1414, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

pAntp, a 60 amino acid long peptide corresponding to the homeodomain of the
Drosophila Antennapedia protein, translocates through neuronal membranes when
added exogenously to neurons in culture, where it accumulates in the nucleus and 
promotes neurite outgrowth. We proposed that the peptide, once internalized, may 
compete for homeoprotein DNA binding sites. To investigate this point, we have
produced a permanent fibroblast cell line which carries a luciferase reporter
gene under the control of a 93 bp genomic region of the HOXD9 promoter with
binding sites for homeoproteins. Externally added pAntp specifically
down-regulates the expression of the reporter gene, suggesting that the
neurotrophic effects observed previously are mediated by direct binding of pAntp 
to homeoprotein target sites.

PMID: 7628628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Int J Dev Biol. 1994 Dec;38(4):633-40.

Differential expression of two different homeobox gene families during mouse
tegument morphogenesis.

Kanzler B(1), Viallet JP, Le Mouellic H, Boncinelli E, Duboule D, Dhouailly D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie de la Différenciation Epithéliale, Université Joseph
Fourier, Grenoble, France.

The expression of six genes belonging to two different homeobox gene families was
studied during the embryonic and postnatal morphogenesis of head and body regions
of the mouse integument. The first family included the Otx1 and Otx2 genes, both 
related to the orthodenticle Drosophila gene and the second was represented by
four members of the Antennapedia class HOX genes: Hoxc8 and three Hoxd genes, d9,
d11 and d13. In situ hybridizations with 35S labeled antisense RNA probes were
performed on head serial frontonasal sections, as well as entire embryo and
postnatal tail longitudinal sections. The expression of these genes shows a
differential spatiotemporal pattern along the cephalo-caudal axis. In 12.5-day
and 15.5-day embryos, the Otx2 gene expression is restricted to the nasal
epithelium and its associated glands, while the Otx1 transcripts are present in
both nasal and facial integuments, including nasal glands and hair vibrissa
follicles. The Hoxc8 expression first appears in skin at 14.5 days of gestation
in the sternal region and is extended at 16.5 days to the thoracic ventral and
lumbar dorsal regions. The Hoxd9 and Hoxd11 genes are only expressed in the
caudal skin from 14.5 days of gestation. The Hoxd13 transcripts are the last to
appear, 2 days after birth, and are limited to the last epidermal cells to
differentiate, i.e. those of the hair matrix of the caudal pelage hair follicles.
Taken together, these observations strengthen the hypothesis that different
homeobox gene families specify the regional identity of the skin in the cephalic 
and body regions.

PMID: 7779685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 16;91(17):7985-9.

Regulation in vitro of an L-CAM enhancer by homeobox genes HoxD9 and HNF-1.

Goomer RS(1), Holst BD, Wood IC, Jones FS, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Previous studies have shown that in vitro expression of the neural cell adhesion 
molecule (N-CAM) can be regulated by the products of homeobox genes HoxB9, -B8,
and -C6. N-CAM is a Ca(2+)-independent immunoglobulin-related CAM that plays an
important role in neural development. In the present study, we investigated
whether the liver cell adhesion molecule (L-CAM) a member of the Ca(2+)-dependent
CAM family (cadherins) is also regulated by homeobox-containing genes. In
transient cotransfection experiments of NIH 3T3 cells, we observed that both
HoxD9 and liver-enriched POU-homeodomain transcription factor, HNF-1, activated
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene reporter constructs containing the L-CAM
promoter and an enhancer present in the second intron of the chicken L-CAM gene. 
Using electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, we found that components of cell
extracts from NIH 3T3 cells transfected with HoxD9 bound to a small region of the
L-CAM enhancer having a consensus sequence that is a putative binding site for
HNF-1. Components of extracts from the chicken hepatoma cell line LMH that had
been transfected with an HNF-1 expression vector also bound to this same site. In
nuclear run-on experiments with nuclei from LMH cells that were transfected with 
expression vectors for HoxD9 or HNF-1, L-CAM RNA levels were increased 33-fold
and 4-fold respectively. Using the same run-on procedure, it was confirmed that
nuclei prepared from normal embryonic chicken liver cells expressed the RNAs for 
HoxD9, HNF-1, and L-CAM. Taken together with previous observations, these data
raise the possibility that homeobox-containing genes will have a widespread role 
in the place-dependent expression of CAMs belonging both to
immunoglobulin-related and to cadherin families.

PMCID: PMC44529
PMID: 7914699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genes Dev. 1994 Mar 15;8(6):732-44.

Specificity of HOX protein function depends on DNA-protein and protein-protein
interactions, both mediated by the homeo domain.

Zappavigna V(1), Sartori D, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Technology (DIBIT), Istituto Scientifico H.S.
Raffaele, Milan, Italy.

Transcription of human HOX gene promoters in cultured cells is positively and
negatively regulated by HOX proteins interacting with specific target sequences. 
The human HOXD9 protein activates transcription of the HOXD9 promoter by
interacting with the HCR sequence and is antagonized by the HOXD8 protein. HOXD8 
is not intrinsically a repressor, since it can activate transcription on
different targets. Complete or partial HOXD8/HOXD9 homeo domain swapping
indicates that the ability to recognize, and activate transcription from, the HCR
target in vivo depends on the amino terminus and helix 1 of the homeo domain. The
inhibitory activity of HOXD8 is not affected by deletion of the homeo domain
helix 2/3 region, whereas it requires the amino terminus/helix 1 region and an
additional, effector domain located at the protein amino-terminal end. This
activity is therefore DNA-binding independent, and possibly mediated by
protein-protein interactions. Affinity chromatography experiments show that the
homeo domain amino terminus/helix 1 region is able to mediate direct interactions
between HOX proteins in solution. These data indicate that specificity of HOX
protein function in vivo depends on both DNA-protein and protein-protein
interactions, mediated by the same sub region of the homeo domain.

PMID: 7926763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1993 Jul;30(4):733-41.

Hox gene expression in differentiating human neuroblastoma cells.

Manohar CF(1), Furtado MR, Salwen HR, Cohn SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, Chicago IL 60611.

Neuroblastoma, a malignancy of early childhood arises in the embryonal neural
crest. Neuroblastoma cells are in a state of arrested differentiation; however,
they can be induced to differentiate in vitro by retinoic acid. As a first step
toward understanding the molecular mechanisms of neuroblastoma differentiation we
analyzed the expression pattern of the developmentally important Homeobox genes
in cells treated with retinoic acid. The strategy employed involved rapid
screening of a cDNA library prepared from retinoic acid treated human LA-N-5
neuroblastoma cells for Homeobox genes by the polymerase chain reaction. Multiple
Homeobox genes were amplified from recombinant phage DNA using degenerate primers
directed against the conserved homeobox. To date 6 Homeobox genes (HoxC6, HoxC8, 
HoxD1, HoxD4, HoxD8, and HoxD9) have been identified in the cDNA library prepared
from LA-N-5 cells treated with retinoic acid. HoxD1 and HoxC8 are being reported 
for the first time to be expressed in neuroblastoma cells. Preliminary studies
indicate that there is an induction of Homeobox gene expression in
differentiating LA-N-5 neuroblastoma cells.

PMID: 8104620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


