
1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Oct;24(10):1574-84. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-1270. Epub 2015 Jul 24.

Network-Based Integration of GWAS and Gene Expression Identifies a HOX-Centric
Network Associated with Serous Ovarian Cancer Risk.

Kar SP, Tyrer JP, Li Q, Lawrenson K, Aben KK, Anton-Culver H, Antonenkova N,
Chenevix-Trench G; Australian Cancer Study; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study
Group, Baker H, Bandera EV, Bean YT, Beckmann MW, Berchuck A, Bisogna M, Bjørge
L, Bogdanova N, Brinton L, Brooks-Wilson A, Butzow R, Campbell I, Carty K,
Chang-Claude J, Chen YA, Chen Z, Cook LS, Cramer D, Cunningham JM, Cybulski C,
Dansonka-Mieszkowska A, Dennis J, Dicks E, Doherty JA, Dörk T, du Bois A, Dürst
M, Eccles D, Easton DF, Edwards RP, Ekici AB, Fasching PA, Fridley BL, Gao YT,
Gentry-Maharaj A, Giles GG, Glasspool R, Goode EL, Goodman MT, Grownwald J,
Harrington P, Harter P, Hein A, Heitz F, Hildebrandt MA, Hillemanns P, Hogdall E,
Hogdall CK, Hosono S, Iversen ES, Jakubowska A, Paul J, Jensen A, Ji BT, Karlan
BY, Kjaer SK, Kelemen LE, Kellar M, Kelley J, Kiemeney LA, Krakstad C,
Kupryjanczyk J, Lambrechts D, Lambrechts S, Le ND, Lee AW, Lele S, Leminen A,
Lester J, Levine DA, Liang D, Lissowska J, Lu K, Lubinski J, Lundvall L, Massuger
L, Matsuo K, McGuire V, McLaughlin JR, McNeish IA, Menon U, Modugno F, Moysich
KB, Narod SA, Nedergaard L, Ness RB, Nevanlinna H, Odunsi K, Olson SH, Orlow I,
Orsulic S, Weber RP, Pearce CL, Pejovic T, Pelttari LM, Permuth-Wey J, Phelan CM,
Pike MC, Poole EM, Ramus SJ, Risch HA, Rosen B, Rossing MA, Rothstein JH, Rudolph
A, Runnebaum IB, Rzepecka IK, Salvesen HB, Schildkraut JM, Schwaab I, Shu XO,
Shvetsov YB, Siddiqui N, Sieh W, Song H, Southey MC, Sucheston-Campbell LE,
Tangen IL, Teo SH, Terry KL, Thompson PJ, Timorek A, Tsai YY, Tworoger SS, van
Altena AM, Van Nieuwenhuysen E, Vergote I, Vierkant RA, Wang-Gohrke S, Walsh C,
Wentzensen N, Whittemore AS, Wicklund KG, Wilkens LR, Woo YL, Wu X, Wu A, Yang H,
Zheng W, Ziogas A, Sellers TA, Monteiro AN, Freedman ML, Gayther SA, Pharoah PD.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have so far reported 12 loci
associated with serous epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk. We hypothesized that
some of these loci function through nearby transcription factor (TF) genes and
that putative target genes of these TFs as identified by coexpression may also be
enriched for additional EOC risk associations.
METHODS: We selected TF genes within 1 Mb of the top signal at the 12 genome-wide
significant risk loci. Mutual information, a form of correlation, was used to
build networks of genes strongly coexpressed with each selected TF gene in the
unified microarray dataset of 489 serous EOC tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas.
Genes represented in this dataset were subsequently ranked using a gene-level
test based on results for germline SNPs from a serous EOC GWAS meta-analysis
(2,196 cases/4,396 controls).
RESULTS: Gene set enrichment analysis identified six networks centered on TF
genes (HOXB2, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXB7 at 17q21.32 and HOXD1, HOXD3 at 2q31) that were
significantly enriched for genes from the risk-associated end of the ranked list 
(P < 0.05 and FDR < 0.05). These results were replicated (P < 0.05) using an
independent association study (7,035 cases/21,693 controls). Genes underlying
enrichment in the six networks were pooled into a combined network.
CONCLUSION: We identified a HOX-centric network associated with serous EOC risk
containing several genes with known or emerging roles in serous EOC development.
IMPACT: Network analysis integrating large, context-specific datasets has the
potential to offer mechanistic insights into cancer susceptibility and prioritize
genes for experimental characterization.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4592449
PMID: 26209509  [PubMed - in process]


2. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:358125. doi: 10.1155/2015/358125. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Novel candidate key drivers in the integrative network of genes, microRNAs,
methylations, and copy number variations in squamous cell lung carcinoma.

Huang T(1), Yang J(2), Cai YD(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China ;
Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for 
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)College of Life
Science, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, China.

The mechanisms of lung cancer are highly complex. Not only mRNA gene expression
but also microRNAs, DNA methylation, and copy number variation (CNV) play roles
in tumorigenesis. It is difficult to incorporate so much information into a
single model that can comprehensively reflect all these lung cancer mechanisms.
In this study, we analyzed the 129 TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) squamous cell
lung carcinoma samples with gene expression, microRNA expression, DNA
methylation, and CNV data. First, we used variance inflation factor (VIF)
regression to build the whole genome integrative network. Then, we isolated the
lung cancer subnetwork by identifying the known lung cancer genes and their
direct regulators. This subnetwork was refined by the Bayesian method, and the
directed regulations among mRNA genes, microRNAs, methylations, and CNVs were
obtained. The novel candidate key drivers in this refined subnetwork, such as the
methylation of ARHGDIB and HOXD3, microRNA let-7a and miR-31, and the CNV of
AGAP2, were identified and analyzed. On three large public available lung cancer 
datasets, the key drivers ARHGDIB and HOXD3 demonstrated significant associations
with the overall survival of lung cancer patients. Our results provide new
insights into lung cancer mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4352729
PMID: 25802847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 1;24(9):2700-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv028. Epub 2015 Jan
26.

Genetic variants associated with motion sickness point to roles for inner ear
development, neurological processes and glucose homeostasis.

Hromatka BS(1), Tung JY(2), Kiefer AK(2), Do CB(2), Hinds DA(2), Eriksson N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Product Science, 23andMe, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA bhromatka@23andme.com. 
(2)Product Science, 23andMe, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA.

Roughly one in three individuals is highly susceptible to motion sickness and yet
the underlying causes of this condition are not well understood. Despite high
heritability, no associated genetic factors have been discovered. Here, we
conducted the first genome-wide association study on motion sickness in 80 494
individuals from the 23andMe database who were surveyed about car sickness.
Thirty-five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were associated with motion
sickness at a genome-wide-significant level (P < 5 × 10(-8)). Many of these SNPs 
are near genes involved in balance, and eye, ear and cranial development (e.g.
PVRL3, TSHZ1, MUTED, HOXB3, HOXD3). Other SNPs may affect motion sickness through
nearby genes with roles in the nervous system, glucose homeostasis or hypoxia. We
show that several of these SNPs display sex-specific effects, with up to three
times stronger effects in women. We searched for comorbid phenotypes with motion 
sickness, confirming associations with known comorbidities including migraines,
postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), vertigo and morning sickness and
observing new associations with altitude sickness and many gastrointestinal
conditions. We also show that two of these related phenotypes (PONV and
migraines) share underlying genetic factors with motion sickness. These results
point to the importance of the nervous system in motion sickness and suggest a
role for glucose levels in motion-induced nausea and vomiting, a finding that may
provide insight into other nausea-related phenotypes like PONV. They also
highlight personal characteristics (e.g. being a poor sleeper) that correlate
with motion sickness, findings that could help identify risk factors or
treatments.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4383869
PMID: 25628336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Brain Struct Funct. 2016 Apr;221(3):1223-43. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0965-8. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Systematic expression analysis of Hox genes at adulthood reveals novel patterns
in the central nervous system.

Hutlet B(1), Theys N(1), Coste C(1,)(2), Ahn MT(1), Doshishti-Agolli K(1), Lizen 
B(1), Gofflot F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology,
GIGA-Neurosciences Research Center, University of Liège, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. francoise.gofflot@uclouvain.be.

Hox proteins are key regulators of animal development, providing positional
identity and patterning information to cells along the rostrocaudal axis of the
embryo. Although their embryonic expression and function are well characterized, 
their presence and biological importance in adulthood remains poorly
investigated. We provide here the first detailed quantitative and neuroanatomical
characterization of the expression of the 39 Hox genes in the adult mouse brain. 
Using RT-qPCR we determined the expression of 24 Hox genes mainly in the
brainstem of the adult brain, with low expression of a few genes in the
cerebellum and the forebrain. Using in situ hybridization (ISH) we have
demonstrated that expression of Hox genes is maintained in territories derived
from the early segmental Hox expression domains in the hindbrain. Indeed, we show
that expression of genes belonging to paralogy groups PG2-8 is maintained in the 
hindbrain derivatives at adulthood. The spatial colinearity, which characterizes 
the early embryonic expression of Hox genes, is still observed in sequential
antero-posterior boundaries of expression. Moreover, the main mossy and climbing 
fibres precerebellar nuclei express PG2-8 Hox genes according to their migration 
origins. Second, ISH confirms the presence of Hox gene transcripts in territories
where they are not detected during development, suggesting neo-expression in
these territories in adulthood. Within the forebrain, we have mapped Hoxb1,
Hoxb3, Hoxb4, Hoxd3 and Hoxa5 expression in restricted areas of the sensory
cerebral cortices as well as in specific thalamic relay nuclei. Our data thus
suggest a requirement of Hox genes beyond their role of patterning genes,
providing a new dimension to their functional relevance in the central nervous
system.

PMID: 25527350  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cancer Lett. 2014 Dec 1;355(1):159-67. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.044. Epub
2014 Sep 1.

Cyclin D1b splice variant promotes avß3-mediated adhesion and invasive migration 
of breast cancer cells.

Wu FH(1), Luo LQ(2), Liu Y(1), Zhan QX(1), Luo C(2), Luo J(2), Zhang GM(2), Feng 
ZH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Hubei University of Chinese Medcine, Wuhan 430065,
China. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. (3)Department
of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science & Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. Electronic address:
fengzhg@public.wh.hb.cn.

Cyclin D1b, a splice variant of the cell cycle regulator cyclin D1, holds
oncogenic functions in human cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying cyclin
D1b function remain poorly understood. Here we introduced wild-type cyclin D1a or
cyclin D1b variant into non-metastatic MCF-7 cells. Our results show that ectopic
expression of cyclin D1b promotes invasiveness of the cancer cells in a cyclin
D1a independent manner. Specifically, cyclin D1b is found to modulate the
expression of avß3, which characterizes the metastatic phenotype, and enhance
tumor cell invasive potential in cooperating with HoxD3. Notably, cyclin D1b
promotes avß3-mediated adhesion and invasive migration, which are associated with
invasive potential of breast cancer cells. Further exploration indicates that
cyclin D1b makes breast cancer cells more sensitive to toll-like receptor 4
ligand released from damaged tumor cells. These findings reveal a role of cyclin 
D1b as a possible mediator of avß3 transcription to promote tumor metastasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25193465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov;140(11):1849-61. doi:
10.1007/s00432-014-1738-8. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Methylation of PITX2, HOXD3, RASSF1 and TDRD1 predicts biochemical recurrence in 
high-risk prostate cancer.

Litovkin K(1), Joniau S, Lerut E, Laenen A, Gevaert O, Spahn M, Kneitz B,
Isebaert S, Haustermans K, Beullens M, Van Eynde A, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignaling and Therapeutics, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, k.litovkin@yahoo.com.

PURPOSE: To explore differential methylation of HAAO, HOXD3, LGALS3, PITX2,
RASSF1 and TDRD1 as a molecular tool to predict biochemical recurrence (BCR) in
patients with high-risk prostate cancer (PCa).
METHODS: A multiplexed nested methylation-specific PCR was applied to quantify
promoter methylation of the selected markers in five cell lines, 42 benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and 71 high-risk PCa tumor samples. Uni- and
multivariate Cox regression models were used to assess the importance of the
methylation level in predicting BCR.
RESULTS: A PCa-specific methylation marker HAAO in combination with HOXD3 and a
hypomethylation marker TDRD1 distinguished PCa samples (>90 % of tumor cells
each) from BPH with a sensitivity of 0.99 and a specificity of 0.95. High
methylation of PITX2, HOXD3 and RASSF1, as well as low methylation of TDRD1,
appeared to be significantly associated with a higher risk for BCR (HR 3.96,
3.44, 2.80 and 2.85, correspondingly) after correcting for established risk
factors. When DNA methylation was treated as a continuous variable, a two-gene
model PITX2 × 0.020677 + HOXD3 × 0.0043132 proved to be the best predictor of BCR
(HR 4.85) compared with the individual markers. This finding was confirmed in an 
independent set of 52 high-risk PCa tumor samples (HR 11.89).
CONCLUSIONS: Differential promoter methylation of HOXD3, PITX2, RASSF1 and TDRD1 
emerges as an independent predictor of BCR in high-risk PCa patients. A two-gene 
continuous DNA methylation model "PITX2 × 0.020677 + HOXD3 × 0.0043132" is a
better predictor of BCR compared with individual markers.

PMID: 24938434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Prostate. 2014 May;74(7):714-21.

Correlation of HOXD3 promoter hypermethylation with clinical and pathologic
features in screening prostate biopsies.

Chen LN, Rubin RS, Othepa E, Cer C, Yun E, Agarwal RP, Collins BT, McGeagh K,
Pahira J, Bandi G, Kowalczyk K, Kumar D, Dritschilo A, Collins SP, Bostwick DG,
Lynch JH, Suy S.

BACKGROUND: Molecular markers that can discriminate indolent cancers from
aggressive ones may improve the management of prostate cancer and minimize
unnecessary treatment.Aberrant DNA methylation is a common epigenetic event in
cancers and HOXD3 promoter hypermethylation (H3PH) has been found in prostate
cancer. Our objective was to evaluate the relationship between H3PH and
clinicopathologic features in screening prostate biopsies.
METHODS: Ninety-two patients who underwent a prostate biopsy at our institution
between October 2011 and May 2012 were included in this study. The core with the 
greatest percentage of the highest grade disease was analyzed for H3PH by
methylation-specific PCR. Correlational analysis was used to analyze the
relationship between H3PH and various clinical parameters. Chi-square analysis
was used to compare H3PH status between benign and malignant disease.
RESULTS: Of the 80 biopsies with HOXD3 methylation status assessable, 66 sets
were confirmed to have cancer. In the 14 biopsies with benign disease there was
minimal H3PH with the mean percentage of methylation reference (PMR) of 0.7%. In 
contrast, the HOXD3 promoter was hypermethylated in 16.7% of all cancers and in
50% of high risk tumors with an average PMR of 4.3% (P=0.008). H3PH was
significantly correlated with age (P=0.013), Gleason score (P=0.031) and the
maximum involvement of the biopsy core (P=0.035).
CONCLUSIONS: H3PH is associated with clinicopathologic features. The data
indicate that H3PH is more common in older higher risk patients. More research is
needed to determine the role of this marker in optimizing management strategies
in men with newly diagnosed prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4285328
PMID: 24847526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014 Jul;23(7):1331-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-1000. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Validation study of genes with hypermethylated promoter regions associated with
prostate cancer recurrence.

Stott-Miller M(1), Zhao S(1), Wright JL(2), Kolb S(1), Bibikova M(3), Klotzle
B(3), Ostrander EA(4), Fan JB(3), Feng Z(5), Stanford JL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center; (2)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Public Health
Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Department of Urology,
University of Washington School of Medicine; Departments of. (3)Illumina, Inc.,
San Diego, California; and. (4)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (5)Authors' Affiliations: Division
of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Biostatistics 
and. (6)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Epidemiology, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington; jstanfor@fhcrc.org.

BACKGROUND: One challenge in prostate cancer is distinguishing indolent from
aggressive disease at diagnosis. DNA promoter hypermethylation is a frequent
epigenetic event in prostate cancer, but few studies of DNA methylation in
relation to features of more aggressive tumors or prostate cancer recurrence have
been completed.
METHODS: We used the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip to assess DNA
methylation in tumor tissue from 407 patients with clinically localized prostate 
cancer who underwent radical prostatectomy. Recurrence status was determined by
follow-up patient surveys, medical record review, and linkage with the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) registry. The methylation
status of 14 genes for which promoter hypermethylation was previously correlated 
with advanced disease or biochemical recurrence was evaluated. Average
methylation level for promoter region CpGs in patients who recurred compared with
those with no evidence of recurrence was analyzed. For two genes with
differential methylation, time to recurrence was examined.
RESULTS: During an average follow-up of 11.7 years, 104 (26%) patients recurred. 
Significant promoter hypermethylation in at least 50% of CpG sites in two genes, 
ABHD9 and HOXD3, was found in tumors from patients who recurred compared with
those without recurrence. Evidence was strongest for HOXD3 (lowest P = 9.46 ×
10(-6)), with higher average methylation across promoter region CpGs associated
with reduced recurrence-free survival (P = 2 × 10(-4)). DNA methylation profiles 
did not differ by recurrence status for the other genes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results validate the association between promoter
hypermethylation of ADHB9 and HOXD3 and prostate cancer recurrence.
IMPACT: Tumor DNA methylation profiling may help to distinguish patients with
prostate cancer at higher risk for disease recurrence.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4082437
PMID: 24718283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e91334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091334. eCollection
2014.

Transcript analysis reveals a specific HOX signature associated with positional
identity of human endothelial cells.

Toshner M(1), Dunmore BJ(2), McKinney EF(2), Southwood M(3), Caruso P(2), Upton
PD(2), Waters JP(2), Ormiston ML(2), Skepper JN(4), Nash G(5), Rana AA(2),
Morrell NW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom; Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. (5)School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Birmingham
University, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

The endothelial cell has a remarkable ability for sub-specialisation, adapted to 
the needs of a variety of vascular beds. The role of developmental programming
versus the tissue contextual environment for this specialization is not well
understood. Here we describe a hierarchy of expression of HOX genes associated
with endothelial cell origin and location. In initial microarray studies,
differential gene expression was examined in two endothelial cell lines: blood
derived outgrowth endothelial cells (BOECs) and pulmonary artery endothelial
cells. This suggested shared and differential patterns of HOX gene expression
between the two endothelial lines. For example, this included a cluster on
chromosome 2 of HOXD1, HOXD3, HOXD4, HOXD8 and HOXD9 that was expressed at a
higher level in BOECs. Quantative PCR confirmed the higher expression of these
HOXs in BOECs, a pattern that was shared by a variety of microvascular
endothelial cell lines. Subsequently, we analysed publically available
microarrays from a variety of adult cell and tissue types using the whole "HOX
transcriptome" of all 39 HOX genes. Using hierarchical clustering analysis the
HOX transcriptome was able to discriminate endothelial cells from 61 diverse
human cell lines of various origins. In a separate publically available
microarray dataset of 53 human endothelial cell lines, the HOX transcriptome
additionally organized endothelial cells related to their organ or tissue of
origin. Human tissue staining for HOXD8 and HOXD9 confirmed endothelial
expression and also supported increased microvascular expression of these HOXs.
Together these observations suggest a significant involvement of HOX genes in
endothelial cell positional identity.

PMCID: PMC3961275
PMID: 24651450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Sci Rep. 2014 Mar 21;4:4432. doi: 10.1038/srep04432.

Novel multiplex MethyLight protocol for detection of DNA methylation in patient
tissues and bodily fluids.

Olkhov-Mitsel E(1), Zdravic D(1), Kron K(2), van der Kwast T(3), Fleshner N(4),
Bapat B(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, 
Canada [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret
Cancer Center-University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)1] Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 
[2] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Urology, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada. (5)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada [3] Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Aberrant DNA methylation is a hallmark of cancer and is an important potential
biomarker. Particularly, combined analysis of a panel of hypermethylated genes
shows the most promising clinical performance. Herein, we developed, optimized
and standardized a multiplex MethyLight assay to simultaneously detect
hypermethylation of APC, HOXD3 and TGFB2 in DNA extracted from prostate cancer
(PCa) cell lines, archival tissue specimens, and urine samples. We established
that the assay is capable of discriminating between fully methylated and
unmethylated alleles with 100% specificity and demonstrated the assay as highly
accurate and reproducible as the singleplex approach. For proof of principle, we 
analyzed the methylation status of these genes in tissue and urine samples of PCa
patients as well as PCa-free controls. These data show that the multiplex
MethyLight assay offers a significant advantage when working with limited
quantities of DNA and has potential applications in research and clinical
settings.

PMCID: PMC3961737
PMID: 24651255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;27(3-4):317-22. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0289.

The absence of mutations in homeobox candidate genes HOXA3, HOXB3, HOXD3 and
PITX2 in familial and sporadic thyroid hemiagenesis.

Kizys MM, Nesi-França S, Cardoso MG, Harada MY, Melo MC, Chiamolera MI,
Dias-da-Silva MR, Maciel RM.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms leading to the formation of the two thyroid 
symmetrical lobes, which are impaired in thyroid hemiagenesis (TH), are little
known.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this work was to search for mutations in thyroid
developmental candidate genes HOXA3, HOXB3, HOXD3 and PITX2.
METHODS: Total DNA from peripheral blood was extracted and then the entire coding
region of all these genes was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: Herein we describe familial cases of TH in two generations (proband and 
his father), in addition to other two sporadic cases. We have found polymorphisms
in the HOXB3 (rs2229304), HOXD3 (rs34729309, rs1051929, c.543-199G>T and
c.543-34G>A; and a new synonymous variant, NP_008829.3:p.314;C>G) and PITX2
(c.45+76C>T) genes, but no deleterious mutations.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest the existence of other left-right thyroid
asymmetry candidate genes in humans such as classical Mendelian mutation-causing 
disease, as well as other etiopathogenic mechanisms such as epigenetic
modifications, especially for sporadic hemiagenesis.

PMID: 24127533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048401. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

DNA hypomethylation affects cancer-related biological functions and genes
relevant in neuroblastoma pathogenesis.

Mayol G(1), Martín-Subero JI, Ríos J, Queiros A, Kulis M, Suñol M, Esteller M,
Gómez S, Garcia I, de Torres C, Rodríguez E, Galván P, Mora J, Lavarino C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Fundación
Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.

Neuroblastoma (NB) pathogenesis has been reported to be closely associated with
numerous genetic alterations. However, underlying DNA methylation patterns have
not been extensively studied in this developmental malignancy. Here, we generated
microarray-based DNA methylation profiles of primary neuroblastic tumors.
Stringent supervised differential methylation analyses allowed us to identify
epigenetic changes characteristic for NB tumors as well as for clinical and
biological subtypes of NB. We observed that gene-specific loss of DNA methylation
is more prevalent than promoter hypermethylation. Remarkably, such
hypomethylation affected cancer-related biological functions and genes relevant
to NB pathogenesis such as CCND1, SPRR3, BTC, EGF and FGF6. In particular,
differential methylation in CCND1 affected mostly an evolutionary conserved
functionally relevant 3' untranslated region, suggesting that hypomethylation
outside promoter regions may play a role in NB pathogenesis. Hypermethylation
targeted genes involved in cell development and proliferation such as RASSF1A,
POU2F2 or HOXD3, among others. The results derived from this study provide new
candidate epigenetic biomarkers associated with NB as well as insights into the
molecular pathogenesis of this tumor, which involves a marked gene-specific
hypomethylation.

PMCID: PMC3492354
PMID: 23144874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2013 Feb;30(2):155-63. doi: 10.1007/s10585-012-9524-y. Epub 
2012 Aug 31.

Expression of HOXD3 correlates with shorter survival in patients with invasive
breast cancer.

Shaoqiang C(1), Yue Z, Yang L, Hong Z, Lina Z, Da P, Qingyuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Hapin Street 150, Harbin, China.

Hox genes encode a family of homeodomain-containing transcription factors that
determine cellular identity during development and which are also expressed in
some types of cancer. The HOXD3 gene, a member of the Hox gene family, has been
demonstrated to be expressed in several tumor cell lines, which exhibit enhanced 
invasion and metastasis through coordinate expression of metastasis-associated
factors. However, the clinical impact of HOXD3 in breast cancer remains unclear. 
In the current study, we examined the expression of HOXD3 and integrin ß3 by
immunohistochemical staining in patients with invasive breast cancer. We found
that HOXD3 expression was significantly frequent in high histopathological grade 
and hormone-receptor negative breast cancer patients. The expression of HOXD3 was
closely associated with integrin ß3 expression. Furthermore, patients with high
HOXD3 expression levels in their breast tumors had significantly shorter survival
times than patients in which HOXD3 was weakly expressed in breast tumors.
Univariate and multivariate analyses confirmed that increased HOXD3-expression
was an independent and significant factor in predicting poor prognosis for
patients with breast cancer. In conclusion, HOXD3 expression is a significant
unfavorable prognostic factor for patients with invasive breast cancer and as
such is a potentially useful prognostic marker for breast cancer.

PMID: 22935821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e40728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040728. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Functional dissection of HOXD cluster genes in regulation of neuroblastoma cell
proliferation and differentiation.

Zha Y(1), Ding E, Yang L, Mao L, Wang X, McCarthy BA, Huang S, Ding HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Retinoic acid (RA) can induce growth arrest and neuronal differentiation of
neuroblastoma cells and has been used in clinic for treatment of neuroblastoma.
It has been reported that RA induces the expression of several HOXD genes in
human neuroblastoma cell lines, but their roles in RA action are largely unknown.
The HOXD cluster contains nine genes (HOXD1, HOXD3, HOXD4, and HOXD8-13) that are
positioned sequentially from 3' to 5', with HOXD1 at the 3' end and HOXD13 the 5'
end. Here we show that all HOXD genes are induced by RA in the human
neuroblastoma BE(2)-C cells, with the genes located at the 3' end being activated
generally earlier than those positioned more 5' within the cluster. Individual
induction of HOXD8, HOXD9, HOXD10 or HOXD12 is sufficient to induce both growth
arrest and neuronal differentiation, which is associated with downregulation of
cell cycle-promoting genes and upregulation of neuronal differentiation genes.
However, induction of other HOXD genes either has no effect (HOXD1) or has
partial effects (HOXD3, HOXD4, HOXD11 and HOXD13) on BE(2)-C cell proliferation
or differentiation. We further show that knockdown of HOXD8 expression, but not
that of HOXD9 expression, significantly inhibits the differentiation-inducing
activity of RA. HOXD8 directly activates the transcription of HOXC9, a key
effector of RA action in neuroblastoma cells. These findings highlight the
distinct functions of HOXD genes in RA induction of neuroblastoma cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3413684
PMID: 22879880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3478-85. doi: 10.1002/art.34573.

Methylation alterations of WT1 and homeobox genes in inflamed muscle biopsy
samples from patients with untreated juvenile dermatomyositis suggest
self-renewal capacity.

Wang M(1), Xie H, Shrestha S, Sredni S, Morgan GA, Pachman LM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Chicago Research Center and Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of methylation alteration in inflamed muscles 
from children with juvenile dermatomyositis (DM) and other idiopathic
inflammatory myopathies (IIMs).
METHODS: Magnetic resonance imaging-directed diagnostic muscle biopsies yielded
samples from 20 children with juvenile DM, which were used for genome-wide DNA
methylation profiling, as were muscle biopsy samples from 4 healthy controls.
Bisulfite treatment followed by pyrosequencing confirmed methylation status in
juvenile DM and other IIMs. Immunohistochemistry defined localization and
expression levels of WT1.
RESULTS: Comparison of genome-wide DNA methylation profiling between juvenile DM 
muscle and normal control muscle revealed 27 genes with a significant methylation
difference between the groups. These genes were enriched with transcription
factors and/or cell cycle regulators and were unrelated to duration of untreated 
disease. Six homeobox genes were among them; ALX4, HOXC11, HOXD3, and HOXD4 were 
hypomethylated, while EMX2 and HOXB1 were hypermethylated. WT1 was significantly 
hypomethylated in juvenile DM (<U+0394>ß = -0.41, P < 0.001). Bisulfite pyrosequencing
verification in samples from 56 patients with juvenile DM confirmed the
methylation alterations of these genes. Similar methylation alterations were
observed in juvenile polymyositis (n = 5) and other IIMs (n = 9). Concordant with
the other findings, WT1 protein was increased in juvenile DM muscle, with average
positive staining of 11.6%, but was undetectable in normal muscle (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that affected muscles of children with juvenile
DM and IIMs have the capacity to be repaired, and that homeobox and WT1 genes are
epigenetically marked to facilitate this repair process, potentially suggesting
new avenues of therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3462248
PMID: 22674142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 May 15;18(10):2896-904. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-2901.
Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Correlation of ERG expression and DNA methylation biomarkers with adverse
clinicopathologic features of prostate cancer.

Kron K(1), Liu L, Trudel D, Pethe V, Trachtenberg J, Fleshner N, Bapat B, van der
Kwast T.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

PURPOSE: Fusion of the TMPRSS2 gene with the ERG oncogene and aberrant DNA
methylation patterns are commonly found in prostate cancer. The aim of this study
was to analyze the relationship between ERG expression, DNA methylation of three 
biomarkers, and clinicopathologic features of prostate cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Immunohistochemistry for ERG protein was conducted as a
surrogate for TMPRSS2-ERG fusions. We analyzed methylation of CYP26A1, TBX15, and
HOXD3 in 219 prostatectomy specimens by the quantitative MethyLight assay. DNA
methylation was compared between ERG-positive and -negative cases and
correlations of ERG and DNA methylation with clinicopathologic features were
analyzed using <U+03C7>(2), Spearman correlation, logistic regression, and Cox
regression.
RESULTS: ERG expression varied according to Gleason pattern (almost absent in
pattern II, highest in pattern III, and lower in pattern IV/V) and showed a
strong positive correlation with methylation levels of CYP26A1, TBX15, and HOXD3 
(Spearman P < 0.005). TBX15 and HOXD3 methylation were significantly associated
with pathologic stage, Gleason score, and Gleason pattern (P = 0.015). In
multivariate regression analysis, PSA, TBX15 high methylation, and HOXD3 high
methylation were significantly associated with stage (P < 0.05), whereas ERG
expression was negatively correlated with Gleason score (P = 0.003). In
univariate time-to-recurrence analysis, a combination of HOXD3/TBX15 high
methylation predicted recurrence in ERG-positive and -negative cases (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: CYP26A1, TBX15, and HOXD3 are methylation markers of prostate cancer
associated with ERG expression and clinicopathologic variables, suggesting that
incorporation of these markers may be useful in a pre- and posttreatment clinical
setting.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22452941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2012 Jan;41(1):69-74.

[Expression pattern of hoxd3 gene during early development of wild-type zebrafish
embryos].

[Article in Chinese]

Shu LP(1), He ZX, Yao DJ, Ma JJ, Li T, Ye ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering and Stem Cell Research Center, Guiyang Medical University, 
Guiyang 550004, China. gyslp456@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression pattern of hoxd3 gene during early
embryogenesis and angiogenesis of wild-type zebrafish.
METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from embryos of zebrafish in different
development stages by trizol. The cDNA of hoxd3 gene was amplified by RT-PCR. The
RT-PCR product was ligated to pCS(2+) vector by T4 DNA ligatase polymerase and
sequenced. T3 RNA polymerase in vitro transcription system was used to obtain the
probe of digoxin-labeled anti-sense mRNA of hoxd3 gene. The expression pattern of
hoxd3 was detected by whole embryo in situ hybridization (WISH) with anti-sense
mRNA probe.
RESULTS: pCS(2+)-hoxd3 plasmid was successfully constructed, which was used to
prepare anti-sense mRNA probe of hoxd3 in vitro. Expression pattern of hoxd3 gene
was detected by WISH during zebrafish early embryogenesis and angiogenesis. It
was observed that hoxd3 mRNA was expressed at the junction region of midbrain and
hindbrain in wild-type zebrafish in embryos at 24 <U+224A>72h postfertilization(hpf).
CONCLUSION: hoxd3 gene is mainly expressed in nervous system of wide-type
zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 22419467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(3):853-63. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1844-0. 
Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Triggering of Toll-like receptor 4 on metastatic breast cancer cells promotes
avß3-mediated adhesion and invasive migration.

Liao SJ(1), Zhou YH, Yuan Y, Li D, Wu FH, Wang Q, Zhu JH, Yan B, Wei JJ, Zhang
GM, Feng ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, The People's
Republic of China.

Triggering of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) on tumor cells has been found to
promote tumor progression by promoting tumor cell proliferation and survival. So 
far, however, the effect of TLR4 signaling on tumor metastasis has not been well 
elucidated. Here, we report that triggering of TLR4 on metastatic breast cancer
cells could reciprocally regulate the expression of avß3 and the expressions of
TPM1 and maspin, and promote avß3-mediated adhesion and invasive migration of the
cells. In metastatic breast cancer cells, TLR4 signaling increased the expression
of integrin avß3 by activating NF-<U+03BA>B, resulting in the increased adhesion
capacity of tumor cells to the ligand for avß3, and the increased polymerization 
of actin and production of MMP-9 in tumor cells in response to ECM. HoxD3 was
required for the up-regulation of av and ß3 expressions by NF-<U+03BA>B. Moreover, TLR4 
signaling increased the expression of miR-21 in breast cancer cells by activating
NF-<U+03BA>B. Accordingly, the expressions of TPM1 and maspin were decreased at protein 
level, whereas the transcription activity of these genes was not influenced.
Consistent with the promoting effect on avß3-mediated adhesion and invasive
migration, TLR4 signaling promoted the arrest of metastatic breast cancer cells
in circulation and following invasion. The effect of TLR4 signaling could be
abrogated by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B. These findings suggest that metastatic breast
cancer cells could acquire higher metastatic potential due to triggering of TLR4 
and activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in the cells, and that both TLR4 and NF-<U+03BA>B could be
therapeutic targets for preventing metastasis of breast cancer cells.

PMID: 22042369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25215. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025215. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Dopamine regulates angiogenesis in normal dermal wound tissues.

Shome S(1), Rana T, Ganguly S, Basu B, Chaki Choudhury S, Sarkar C, Chakroborty
D, Dasgupta PS, Basu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Signal Transduction and Biogenic Amines, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, Kolkata, India.

Cutaneous wound healing is a normal physiological process and comprises different
phases. Among these phases, angiogenesis or new blood vessel formation in wound
tissue plays an important role. Skin is richly supplied by sympathetic nerves and
evidences indicate the significant role of the sympathetic nervous system in
cutaneous wound healing. Dopamine (DA) is an important catecholamine
neurotransmitter released by the sympathetic nerve endings and recent studies
have demonstrated the potent anti-angiogenic action of DA, which is mediated
through its D(2) DA receptors. We therefore postulate that this endogenous
catecholamine neurotransmitter may have a role in the neovascularization of
dermal wound tissues and subsequently in the process of wound healing. In the
present study, the therapeutic efficacy of D(2) DA receptor antagonist has been
investigated for faster wound healing in a murine model of full thickness dermal 
wound. Our results indicate that treatment with specific D(2) DA receptor
antagonist significantly expedites the process of full thickness normal dermal
wound healing in mice by inducing angiogenesis in wound tissues. The underlined
mechanisms have been attributed to the up-regulation of homeobox transcription
factor HoxD3 and its target a5ß1 integrin, which play a pivotal role in wound
angiogenesis. Since D(2) DA receptor antagonists are already in clinical use for 
other disorders, these results have significant translational value from the
bench to the bedside for efficient wound management along with other conventional
treatment modalities.

PMCID: PMC3176820
PMID: 21949884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Anat. 2011 Nov;219(5):589-600. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2011.01425.x. Epub 2011
Sep 16.

Enforced expression of the transcription factor HOXD3 under the control of the
Wnt1 regulatory element modulates cell adhesion properties in the developing
mouse neural tube.

Taniguchi Y(1), Tanaka O, Sekiguchi M, Takekoshi S, Tsukamoto H, Kimura M, Imai
K, Inoko H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Molecular Science and Molecular Medicine, School of
Medicine, Tokai University, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
ytanigu@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

HOX genes expressed in a specific spatial and temporal manner play a crucial role
in determining the body plan during the early development of vertebrates. In
adult tissues, many HOX genes participate in normal hematopoiesis and
carcinogenesis. We previously found that overexpression of the homeobox gene
HOXD3 alters expression levels of cell adhesion molecules in human cancer cell
lines. Here, we have investigated whether HOXD3 expression is related to the cell
adhesion processes during mouse development focusing on dorsal midline cells or
roof-plate cells of the neural tube and neural crest cells. We created transgenic
mouse embryos, in which HOXD3 is expressed in the dorsal midline under the
control of the Wnt1 regulatory element, and analyzed these embryos at embryonic
day 10.5-13.5. In HOXD3-expressing transgenic embryos, although neural
crest-derived structures in the trunk region appeared to be normal, striking
abnormalities were found in the neural tube. In transgenic embryos expressing the
lacZ gene under the control of the Wnt1 regulatory element, expression of lacZ
was restricted to roof-plate cells within the neural tube. By contrast, in
HOXD3-expressing transgenic embryos, expression of HOXD3 was not only located in 
the dorsal neural tube, but also had spread inside the ventricular zone in more
ventral regions of the neural tube. These findings show that the HOXD3 transgene 
is expressed more broadly than the Wnt1 gene is normally expressed. Expression of
both Wnt1 and Msx1, marker genes in the roof plate, was further extended
ventrally in HOXD3-expressing embryos than in normal embryos, suggesting that
expression of the HOXD3 transgene expands the roof plate ventrally within the
neural tube. In the ventricular zone of HOXD3-expressing embryos at embryonic day
10.5, we observed an increase in the number of mitotic cells and failure of
interkinetic nuclear migration of progenitor cells. Furthermore, in
HOXD3-expressing embryos at embryonic day 12.5, the ventricular zone, in which
progenitor cells became more loosely connected to each other, was composed of a
large number of cells that did not express N-cadherin. Our results indicate that 
expression of HOXD3 is closely associated with modulation of cell-adhesive
properties during embryonic development.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Anatomy © 2011 Anatomical Society of Great Britain
and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3222838
PMID: 21929743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Cancer. 2011 Nov 15;129(10):2454-62. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25908. Epub 2011 Apr 
13.

Association of tissue promoter methylation levels of APC, TGFß2, HOXD3 and
RASSF1A with prostate cancer progression.

Liu L(1), Kron KJ, Pethe VV, Demetrashvili N, Nesbitt ME, Trachtenberg J, Ozcelik
H, Fleshner NE, Briollais L, van der Kwast TH, Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Aberrant promoter methylation is known to silence tumor-suppressor genes in
prostate cancer (PCa). We correlated quantitative promoter methylation levels of 
APC, TGFß2 and RASSF1A in 219 radical prostatectomies diagnosed between 1998 and 
2001 with clinicopathological follow-up data available including Gleason Pattern 
(GP), Gleason Score (GS) and pathological stage and explored their potential in
predicting biochemical recurrence using univariate and multivariate analyses. We 
observed that the average methylation levels of APC increased significantly from 
GS = 6 to GS7, and pT2 to pT3a, and that of TGFß2 increased from GS = 6 to GS7,
but not for RASSF1A. PCa samples were also stratified into high methylation (HM) 
and low methylation (LM) groups based on the PMR scores of all cases analyzed for
each marker. The HM frequency of APC was greater in pT3a than pT2, and in GS = 8 
than GS = 6. The HM frequency also increased significantly from GP3 to GP4 for
APC, TGFß2 and RASSF1A. APC methylation level was a significant predictor of
biochemical recurrence in univariate analysis (p-value = 0.028). Finally, we
combined methylation data of these three genes with the previously reported novel
methylation biomarker HOXD3. Quantitative methylation assessment of a multiplex
panel of markers, consisting of APC, HOXD3 and TGFß2, outperforms any single
marker for the prediction of biochemical recurrence (p-value = 0.017). Our study 
demonstrated that quantitative increase in promoter methylation levels of APC,
HOXD3 and TGFß2 are associated with PCa progression.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21207416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Cell Adh Migr. 2011 Mar-Apr;5(2):133-41. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Temporal changes in Hox gene expression accompany endothelial cell
differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Bahrami SB(1), Veiseh M, Dunn AA, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; University of California-San Francisco, CA, USA.

In pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs), expression of the Hox master
regulatory transcription factors that play essential roles in organogenesis,
angiogenesis, and maintenance of differentiated tissues, is globally suppressed. 
We investigated whether differentiation of endothelial cells (ECs) from mouse
ESCs was accompanied by activation of distinct Hox gene expression profiles.
Differentiation was observed within 3 days, as indicated by the appearance of
cells expressing specific endothelial marker genes (Flk-1+ /VE-Cadherin+ ).
Expression of HoxA3 and HoxD3, which drive adult endothelial cell invasion and
angiogenesis, peaked at day 3 and declined thereafter, whereas expression of
HoxA5 and HoxD10, which maintain a mature quiescent EC phenotype, was low at day 
3, but increased over time. The temporal and reciprocal changes in HoxD3 and
HoxA5 expression were accompanied by corresponding changes in expression of
established downstream target genes including integrin ß3 and Thrombospondin-2.
Our results indicate that differentiation and maturation of ECs derived from
cultured ESCs mimic changes in Hox gene expression that accompany maturation of
immature angiogenic endothelium into differentiated quiescent endothelium in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC3084978
PMID: 21200152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):H837-46. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00002.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Environment and vascular bed origin influence differences in endothelial
transcriptional profiles of coronary and iliac arteries.

Burridge KA(1), Friedman MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 
27708, USA.

Atherosclerotic plaques tend to form in the major arteries at certain predictable
locations. As these arteries vary in atherosusceptibility, interarterial
differences in endothelial cell biology are of considerable interest. To explore 
the origin of differences observed between typical atheroprone and
atheroresistant arteries, we used DNA microarrays to compare gene expression
profiles of harvested porcine coronary (CECs) and iliac artery endothelial cells 
(IECs) grown in static culture out to passage 4. Fewer differences were observed 
between the transcriptional profiles of CECs and IECs in culture compared with in
vivo, suggesting that most differences observed in vivo were due to distinct
environmental cues in the two arteries. One-class significance of microarrays
revealed that most in vivo interarterial differences disappeared in culture, as
fold differences after passaging were not significant for 85% of genes identified
as differentially expressed in vivo at 5% false discovery rate. However, the
three homeobox genes, HOXA9, HOXA10, and HOXD3, remained underexpressed in
coronary endothelium for all passages by at least nine-, eight-, and twofold,
respectively. Continued differential expression, despite removal from the in vivo
environment, suggests that primarily heritable or epigenetic mechanism(s)
influences transcription of these three genes. Quantitative real-time polymerase 
chain reaction confirmed expression ratios for seven genes associated with
atherogenesis and over- or underexpressed by threefold in CECs relative to IECs. 
The present study provides evidence that both local environment and vascular bed 
origin modulate gene expression in arterial endothelium. The transcriptional
differences observed here may provide new insights into pathways responsible for 
coronary artery susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2944485
PMID: 20543076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Lab Invest. 2010 Jul;90(7):1060-7. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.57. Epub 2010 Mar 
8.

DNA methylation of HOXD3 as a marker of prostate cancer progression.

Kron KJ(1), Liu L, Pethe VV, Demetrashvili N, Nesbitt ME, Trachtenberg J, Ozcelik
H, Fleshner NE, Briollais L, van der Kwast TH, Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

DNA methylation in gene promoters causes gene silencing and is a common event in 
cancer development and progression. The ability of aberrant methylation events to
serve as diagnostic and prognostic markers is being appreciated for many cancers,
including prostate cancer. Using quantitative MethyLight technology, we evaluated
the relationship between HOXD3 methylation and clinicopathological parameters
including biochemical recurrence, pathological stage, Gleason score (GS), and
Gleason pattern in a series of 232 radical prostatectomies performed between 1998
and 2001. HOXD3 methylation was significantly greater in GS 7 cancers vs GS < or 
= 6 cancers (P-value <0.001) as well as pT3/pT4 vs pT2 cancers (P-value <0.001). 
The proportion of cases with high methylation in GS 7 vs < or = GS 6 and pT3/pT4 
vs pT2 were also significantly different (P-values=0.002 and 0.005,
respectively). There were also significant increases in methylation from Gleason 
pattern 2-3 and from pattern 3 to 4/5 (paired t-test P-values=0.01 and <0.001,
respectively), whereas methylation from lymph node metastases was decreased when 
compared with matched tumor tissue (P-value=0.029). HOXD3 methylation was
associated with biochemical recurrence in univariate analysis (P-value=0.043) and
showed evidence for interaction with pathological stage as a predictor variable
in Cox regression analysis (P-value=0.028). The results indicate that HOXD3
methylation distinguishes low-grade prostate cancers from intermediate and
high-grade ones and may also have prognostic value when considered together with 
pathological stage.

PMID: 20212450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Cancer. 2009 Oct 14;9:363. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-363.

Establishment of canine hemangiosarcoma xenograft models expressing endothelial
growth factors, their receptors, and angiogenesis-associated homeobox genes.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Matsuura S, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Kimura T,
Masegi T, Yanai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Gifu
University, Gifu, Japan. l5102402@edu.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Human hemangiosarcoma (HSA) tends to have a poor prognosis; its
tumorigenesis has not been elucidated, as there is a dearth of HSA clinical
specimens and no experimental model for HSA. However, the incidence of
spontaneous HSA is relatively high in canines; therefore, canine HSA has been
useful in the study of human HSA. Recently, the production of angiogenic growth
factors and their receptors in human and canine HSA has been reported. Moreover, 
the growth-factor environment of HSA is very similar to that of
pathophysiological angiogenesis, which some homeobox genes regulate in the
transcription of angiogenic molecules. In the present study, we established 6
xenograft canine HSA tumors and detected the expression of growth factors, their 
receptors, and angiogenic homeobox genes.
METHODS: Six primary canine HSAs were xenografted to nude mice subcutaneously and
serially transplanted. Subsequently, the expressions of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-A, basic fibroblast growth factors (bFGF), flt-1 and flk-1
(receptors of VEGF-A), FGFR-1, and angiogenic homeobox genes HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7,
HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 were investigated in original and xenograft tumors by
histopathology, immunostaining, and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), using canine-specific primer sets.
RESULTS: Histopathologically, xenograft tumors comprised a proliferation of
neoplastic cells that were varied in shape, from spindle-shaped and polygonal to 
ovoid; some vascular-like structures and vascular clefts of channels were
observed, similar to those in the original tumors. The expression of endothelial 
markers (CD31 and vWF) was detected in xenograft tumors by immunohistochemistry
and RT-PCR. Moreover, the expression of VEGF-A, bFGF, flt-1, flk-1, FGFR-1,
HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7, HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 was detected in xenograft tumors.
Interestingly, expressions of bFGF tended to be higher in 3 of the xenograft HSA 
tumors than in the other tumors.
CONCLUSION: We established 6 xenograft canine HSA tumors in nude mice and found
that the expressions of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors in
xenograft HSAs were similar to those in spontaneous HSA. Furthermore, we detected
the expression of angiogenic homeobox genes; therefore, xenograft models may be
useful in analyzing malignant growth in HSA.

PMCID: PMC2768746
PMID: 19825192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Comp Pathol. 2009 Aug-Oct;141(2-3):199-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2009.04.004.
Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Immunohistochemical demonstration of angiogenesis-associated homeobox proteins in
canine vascular tumours.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Yanai T, Masegi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty
of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193,
Japan.

Angiogenic homeobox genes regulate the behaviour of endothelial cells (ECs)
during angiogenesis, so the aim of this study was to determine whether expression
of these genes may be a determinant of malignancy in canine haemangiosarcoma
(HSA). Homeobox proteins were evaluated immunohistochemically in tissue samples
from canine HSAs (n=78), haemangiomas (HAs; n=30) and samples of granulation
tissue (n=8). Active ECs in granulation tissue were positively labelled by
antisera specific for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3, HoxB7, Pbx1 and Meis1. Quiescent ECs
in granulation tissue did not express HoxD3 and Pbx1. There were significantly
more neoplastic cells positively labelled for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3 and Pbx1 in HSA
compared with HA. Almost all tumours were positive for HoxB7 and Meis1. HoxB3,
HoxD3, Pbx1 and Meis1 proteins were detected in 80-90% of the HSAs, but in <20%
of the HAs. Overall, homeobox protein expression in HSA appears to have a
phenotype similar to that of active ECs in angiogenesis. The expression of
homeobox genes associated with angiogenesis might be associated with the
malignant growth of HSA.

PMID: 19505696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. IUBMB Life. 2009 Jun;61(6):670-8. doi: 10.1002/iub.212.

p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent regulation of SRC-3 and
involvement in retinoic acid receptor alpha signaling in embryonic cortical
neurons.

Chai Z(1), Yang L, Yu B, He Q, Li WI, Zhou R, Zhang T, Zheng X, Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan, China.

Appropriate retinoic acid (RA) signaling is essential in the development of the
central nervous system (CNS). Previous studies have shown that RA activates p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-3 
in tumor cells in vitro. It is unknown whether the activation of p38 MAPK and
SRC-3 is involved in RA-mediated CNS development. The current study investigated 
a possible role for p38 MAPK in the regulation of (SRC)-3
phosphorylation/degradation and in retinoic acid receptor (RAR)alpha signaling in
mouse fetal cortical neurons treated with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Results
showed that ATRA treatment rapidly activated p38 MAPK, which in turn resulted in 
phosphorylation with subsequent degradation of SRC-3. Inhibition of p38 MAPK by
SB203580 blocked the phosphorylation and degradation of SRC-3. The binding of
RARalpha to retinoic acid responsive element (RARE) was rapidly increased in
neurons following ATRA treatment. Inhibition of p38 MAPK significantly enhanced
the RARalpha-RARE binding activity, but had no effects on ATRA-induced decrease
of RARalpha. Treatment of the fetal cortical neurons with ATRA significantly
increased the expression of HOXd3, a retinoid-target gene. The increase of HOXd3 
expression was augmented when p38 MAPK activity was inhibited by a specific
inhibitor, SB203580. Results suggest that ATRA activates the p38 MAPK signal
pathway with resultant degradation of SRC-3, and that p38 MAPK is involved in the
regulation of RARalpha-mediated signaling in developing neurons.

(c) 2009 IUBMB.

PMID: 19472184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004830. Epub 2009 Mar 13.

Discovery of novel hypermethylated genes in prostate cancer using genomic CpG
island microarrays.

Kron K(1), Pethe V, Briollais L, Sadikovic B, Ozcelik H, Sunderji A,
Venkateswaran V, Pinthus J, Fleshner N, van der Kwast T, Bapat B.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Promoter and 5' end methylation regulation of tumour suppressor genes
is a common feature of many cancers. Such occurrences often lead to the silencing
of these key genes and thus they may contribute to the development of cancer,
including prostate cancer.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to identify methylation changes in
prostate cancer, we performed a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation using
Agilent human CpG island arrays. Using computational and gene-specific validation
approaches we have identified a large number of potential epigenetic biomarkers
of prostate cancer. Further validation of candidate genes on a separate cohort of
low and high grade prostate cancers by quantitative MethyLight analysis has
allowed us to confirm DNA hypermethylation of HOXD3 and BMP7, two genes that may 
play a role in the development of high grade tumours. We also show that promoter 
hypermethylation is responsible for downregulated expression of these genes in
the DU-145 PCa cell line.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study identifies novel epigenetic biomarkers of
prostate cancer and prostate cancer progression, and provides a global assessment
of DNA methylation in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2653233
PMID: 19283074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2441-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813002106. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Systems-level analysis of cell-specific AQP2 gene expression in renal collecting 
duct.

Yu MJ(1), Miller RL, Uawithya P, Rinschen MM, Khositseth S, Braucht DW, Chou CL, 
Pisitkun T, Nelson RD, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We used a systems biology-based approach to investigate the basis of
cell-specific expression of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal
collecting duct. Computational analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the AQP2
gene (Genomatix) revealed 2 conserved clusters of putative transcriptional
regulator (TR) binding elements (BEs) centered at -513 bp (corresponding to the
SF1, NFAT, and FKHD TR families) and -224 bp (corresponding to the AP2, SRF,
CREB, GATA, and HOX TR families). Three other conserved motifs corresponded to
the ETS, EBOX, and RXR TR families. To identify TRs that potentially bind to
these BEs, we carried out mRNA profiling (Affymetrix) in mouse mpkCCDc14
collecting duct cells, revealing expression of 25 TRs that are also expressed in 
native inner medullary collecting duct. One showed a significant positive
correlation with AQP2 mRNA abundance among mpkCCD subclones (Ets1), and 2 showed 
a significant negative correlation (Elf1 and an orphan nuclear receptor Nr1h2).
Transcriptomic profiling in native proximal tubules (PT), medullary thick
ascending limbs (MTAL), and IMCDs from kidney identified 14 TRs (including Ets1
and HoxD3) expressed in the IMCD but not PT or MTAL (candidate AQP2 enhancer
roles), and 5 TRs (including HoxA5, HoxA9 and HoxA10) expressed in PT and MTAL
but not in IMCD (candidate AQP2 repressor roles). In luciferase reporter assays, 
overexpression of 3 ETS family TRs transactivated the mouse proximal AQP2
promoter. The results implicate ETS family TRs in cell-specific expression of
AQP2 and point to HOX, RXR, CREB and GATA family TRs as playing likely additional
roles.

PMCID: PMC2650175
PMID: 19190182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Surg Res. 2008 Jul;148(1):45-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.02.053. Epub 2008 Mar
25.

Homeobox genes Hoxd3 and Hoxd8 are differentially expressed in fetal mouse
excisional wounds.

Jain K(1), Sykes V, Kordula T, Lanning D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Virginia Commonwealth
University Health System, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cell signaling pathways underlying wound repair are under extensive
investigation; however, there is still a poor understanding of the mechanisms
orchestrating these processes. Hox genes, which are a subgroup of homeobox genes,
encode for a family of transcription factors that play a critical role in tissue 
migration and cell differentiation during embryogenesis and may also serve as
master regulatory genes of postnatal wound repair. We have developed a fetal
excisional wound healing model whereby mid-gestational wounds heal in a
regenerative manner while late-gestational wounds display scar formation. We
theorize that Hoxd3 and Hoxd8 will be differentially expressed in mid- and
late-gestational wounds compared with normal skin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pregnant FVB mice underwent hysterotomy at mid (E15)- or
late (E18)-gestational time points, and 3-mm excisional wounds were made on the
dorsum of each fetus. Wound samples (w) were collected at the site of injury as
well as near wound normal skin (nwc) on the same fetus. Control (c) skin samples 
were also obtained from unwounded adjacent fetuses. Samples were harvested at 3
and 6 h and real-time polymerase chain reaction was performed for Hoxd3 and Hoxd8
and normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Data were analyzed by
analysis of variance with statistical significance of P < 0.05.
RESULTS: Hoxd3 levels were increased in all of the mid-gestational groups, with a
significant increase at 3 h compared with late-gestational control groups. In the
3-h time group, Hoxd8 is increased in mid-gestational wounds compared with
late-gestational control skin. This is repeated in the 6-h time group, where
Hoxd8 is increased in mid-gestational wounds compared with all groups. Also,
Hoxd8 in the mid-gestational near wound controls is significantly greater than
that in the late-gestational near wound control and control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that Hoxd3 is constitutively expressed in the
skin of mid-gestational mice. However, Hoxd8 expression is increased in the
mid-gestational wounds compared with normal control groups and late gestational
wounds, suggesting that it may play a role in scarless wound repair.

PMID: 18570930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cir Pediatr. 2007 Oct;20(4):223-8.

[The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: the Hox 
genes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez L(1), Martínez-Calonge W, Matesanz R, Fernández-Dumont V, Pederiva F,
Vallejo MT, Salinas J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid.
lmartinezm.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Prenatal administration of adriamycin or nitrofen to pregnant mice
produce in the embryos, respectively, esophageal atresia/VACTERL association (EA)
or congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Various genes and signalling pathways
like sonic hedgehog, Gli family, retinoic acid and homeotic genes have been
pointed out in the origin of these malformations. Hox genes are master regulatory
genes involved in embryo segmentation and other main development processes.
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 knock-out mice show cardiac, tracheal, lung 
and diaphragmatic malformations, EA and phenotypes that resemble that of VACTERL 
syndrome. We present herein some of our findings in the expression of these genes
in both experimental models.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin 
or vehicle on embryonic days 7,5 and 8,5; embryos were recovered at four
endpoints (E13 to 16). On the other hand, nitrofen was given to pregnant mice on 
embryonic day 8th and embryos were recovered at E14, E16 and E19. The embryos or,
separately, their lungs and hearts, were randomly processed for
immunohistochemical or molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). We used antibodies for
Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins and specific primers for Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxb3,
Hoxb5, Hoxc4 and Hoxd3 genes.
RESULTS: EA: Upon immunohistochemistry, adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a
severe decrease in expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxb3 proteins in heart, skin, 
foregut but not in the heart. RT-PCR studies showed a statistically significant
decrease of the four genes studied in the lungs of OA mice when compared to
controls. CDH: Upon RT-PCR assessment the expression of Hoxa5 and Hoxb3 were
higher in nitrofen-exposed mice than in controls on E14 and E19 and weaker on
E16. As regards immunohistochemical localization, expression of the three genes
was similar in nitrofen and control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Both experimental models exhibit an alteration in the expression of 
several proximal Hox genes, specially in lung and car- diac tissues. The
malformations in these organs associated with CDH and EA could be in part caused 
by these alterations. Due to their specific participation in lung and foregut
morphogenesis, their study could let us to better understand the mechanisms of
CDH and EA.

PMID: 18351244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 15;316(2):171-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.10.018. Epub 2007 
Oct 23.

A nutritional model of late embryonic vitamin A deficiency produces defects in
organogenesis at a high penetrance and reveals new roles for the vitamin in
skeletal development.

See AW(1), Kaiser ME, White JC, Clagett-Dame M.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Nutritional Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706-1544, USA.

Vitamin A plays an essential role in vertebrate embryogenesis. In the present
study, pregnant vitamin A-deficient (VAD) rats were maintained during early
pregnancy on the short half-life vitamin A metabolite, all-trans retinoic acid
(atRA), in an amount sufficient to support normal development to E10.5, with a
higher level of atRA (250 microg atRA/g diet) provided from embryonic day (E)
8.5-10.5 to prevent mid-gestational resorption. When limiting amounts of atRA
(1.5 or 12 microg/g diet) were provided after E10.5, a highly reproducible and
penetrant state of late fetal vitamin A deficiency (late VAD) was induced in the 
organs of developing fetuses. In addition, late VAD fetuses displayed both
anteriorization of cervical regions and novel posteriorization events at the
thoracic and sacral levels of the skeleton, and showed sternal and pelvic
malformations not previously observed in early VAD or genetic models. The
expression of several Hox genes (Hoxd3 and Hoxb4) was altered in late VAD
embryos, with a reduction in Hoxd3 noted as early as 1 day after instituting
deficiency. All late VAD-induced malformations were prevented by the addition of 
retinol starting at E10.5, whereas provision of a high level of atRA throughout
pregnancy improved but could not completely rescue the development of all organ
systems. This work defines a nutritional model in which vitamin A deficiency can 
be induced during fetal development, and reveals new functions for the vitamin in
the development of the axial and appendicular skeleton.

PMID: 18321479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2006;23(7-8):381-90. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

HOXD3-overexpression increases integrin alpha v beta 3 expression and deprives
E-cadherin while it enhances cell motility in A549 cells.

Ohta H(1), Hamada J, Tada M, Aoyama T, Furuuchi K, Takahashi Y, Totsuka Y,
Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

We have previously shown that transduction of HOXD3, one of homeobox genes, into 
human lung cancer A549 cells enhances cell motility, invasion and metastasis. In 
the present study, we examined the roles of integrin beta3 which was up-regulated
by HOXD3-overexpression in the HOXD3-induced motility of A549 cells. We first
established integrin beta3-transfectants and compared their motile activity to
those of the HOXD3-transfected, control-transfected and parental cells by three
different assays. The integrin beta3-transfectants as well as the
HOXD3-transfectants formed heterodimer with integrin alphav subunit, and showed
highly motile activities assessed by haptotaxis or phagokinetic track assay
compared to the control transfectants or parental cells. In vitro wound-healing
assay revealed that migratory activities were graded as the HOXD3-transfectants >
the integrin beta3-transfectants > the control transfectants or parental cells.
E-cadherin was expressed in the integrin beta3-transfectants but not expressed in
the HOXD3-transfectants. An addition of function-blocking antibody to E-cadherin 
into the wound-healing assay promoted the migratory activity of the integrin
beta3-transfectants, suggesting that E-cadherin prevented the cells from
dissociating from the wound edges. These results indicate that increased
expression of integrin alphav beta3 and loss of E-cadherin by
HOXD3-overexpression are responsible for the enhanced motility and dissociation.

PMID: 17187229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1472-8. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

The histone methyltransferase MLL is an upstream regulator of endothelial-cell
sprout formation.

Diehl F(1), Rössig L, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S, Urbich C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Germany.

Posttranslational histone modification by acetylation or methylation regulates
gene expression. Here, we investigated the role of the histone lysine
methyltransferase MLL for angiogenic functions in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Suppression of MLL expression by siRNA or incubation with the 
pharmacologic methyltransferase inhibitor 5'-deoxy-5'-(methylthio)adenosine
significantly decreased endothelial-cell migration and capillary sprout
formation, indicating that methyltransferase activity is required for
proangiogenic endothelial-cell functions. Because the expression of homeodomain
transcription factors (Hox) is regulated by MLL, we elucidated the role of Hox
gene expression. MLL silencing was associated with reduced mRNA and protein
expression of HoxA9 and HoxD3, whereas HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxB5, and HoxB9 were not
altered. Overexpression of HoxA9 or HoxD3 partially compensated for impaired
migration in MLL siRNA-transfected endothelial cells, suggesting that HoxA9 and
HoxD3 both contribute to MLL-dependent migration. As a potential underlying
mechanism, MLL siRNA down-regulated mRNA and protein levels of the
HoxA9-dependent axon guidance factor EphB4. In contrast, MLL knockdown effects on
capillary sprouting were not rescued by HoxA9 or HoxD3 overexpression, indicating
that MLL affects additional targets required for 3-dimensional sprout formation. 
We conclude that MLL regulates endothelial-cell migration via HoxA9 and EphB4,
whereas sprout formation requires MLL-dependent signals beyond HoxA9 and HoxD3.

PMID: 17047146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 15;66(16):7939-47.

MIRA-assisted microarray analysis, a new technology for the determination of DNA 
methylation patterns, identifies frequent methylation of homeodomain-containing
genes in lung cancer cells.

Rauch T(1), Li H, Wu X, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010, USA.

We present a straightforward and comprehensive approach for DNA methylation
analysis in mammalian genomes. The methylated-CpG island recovery assay (MIRA),
which is based on the high affinity of the MBD2/MBD3L1 complex for methylated
DNA, has been used to detect cell type-dependent differences in DNA methylation
on a microarray platform. The procedure has been verified and applied to identify
a series of novel candidate lung tumor suppressor genes and potential DNA
methylation markers that contain methylated CpG islands. One gene of particular
interest was DLEC1, located at a commonly deleted area on chromosome 3p22-p21.3, 
which was frequently methylated in primary lung cancers and melanomas. Among the 
identified methylated genes, homeodomain-containing genes were unusually frequent
(11 of the top 50 hits) and were targeted on different chromosomes. These genes
included LHX2, LHX4, PAX7, HOXB13, LBX1, SIX2, HOXD3, DLX1, HOXD1, ONECUT2, and
PAX9. The data show that MIRA-assisted microarray analysis has a low
false-positive rate and has the capacity to catalogue methylated CpG islands on a
genome-wide basis. The results support the hypothesis that cancer-associated DNA 
methylation events do not occur randomly throughout the genome but at least some 
are targeted by specific mechanisms.

PMID: 16912168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):301-12.

Abnormalities of caudal pharyngeal pouch development in Pbx1 knockout mice mimic 
loss of Hox3 paralogs.

Manley NR(1), Selleri L, Brendolan A, Gordon J, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Life Sciences, B 420A, Athens, 
GA 30602, USA. nmanley@uga.edu

Pbx1 is a TALE-class homeodomain protein that functions in part as a cofactor for
Hox class homeodomain proteins. Previous analysis of the in vivo functions of
Pbx1 by targeted mutagenesis in mice has revealed roles for this gene in skeletal
patterning and development and in the organogenesis of multiple systems. Both RNA
expression and protein localization studies have suggested a possible role for
Pbx1 in pharyngeal region development. As several Hox mutants have distinct
phenotypes in this region, we investigated the potential requirement for Pbx1 in 
the development of the pharyngeal arches and pouches and their organ derivatives.
Pbx1 homozygous mutants exhibited delayed or absent formation of the caudal
pharyngeal pouches, and disorganized patterning of the third pharyngeal pouch.
Formation of the third pouch-derived thymus/parathyroid primordia was also
affected, with absent or hypoplastic primordia, delayed expression of
organ-specific differentiation markers, and reduced proliferation of thymic
epithelium. The fourth pouch and the fourth pouch-derived ultimobranchial bodies 
were usually absent. These phenotypes are similar to those previously reported in
Hoxa3(-/-) single mutants and Hoxa1(-/-);Hoxb1(-/-) or
Hoxa3(+/-);Hoxb3(-/-);Hoxd3(-/-) compound mutants, suggesting that Pbx1 acts
together with multiple Hox proteins in the development of the caudal pharyngeal
region. However, some aspects of the Pbx1 mutant phenotype included specific
defects that were less severe than those found in known Hox mutant mice,
suggesting that some functions of Hox proteins in this region are
Pbx1-independent.

PMID: 15581866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2004 Nov;24(11):1280-7.

Retroviral delivery of homeobox D3 gene induces cerebral angiogenesis in mice.

Chen Y(1), Xu B, Arderiu G, Hashimoto T, Young WL, Boudreau N, Yang GY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, The Center for
Cerebrovascular Research, University of California, San Francisco, California
94410, USA.

Angiogenesis is regulated by concerted actions of angiogenic and angiostatic
factors. Homeobox D3 gene (HOXD3) is a potent proangiogenic transcription factor 
that promotes angiogenesis by modulating the expression of matrix-degrading
proteinases, integrins, and extracellular matrix components. Application of HOXD3
can promote angiogenesis in the skin, but its role in other vascular beds has not
been examined. The authors examined HOXD3 expression in human brain vessels by in
situ hybridization. Although little or no HOXD3 mRNA was detected in normal brain
vessels, increased levels of HOXD3 and its target gene, alpha V beta 3, were
found in angiogenic vessels in human brain arteriovenous malformations. The
authors further investigated whether HOXD3 plays a role in cerebral angiogenesis 
in a murine model. Expression of HOXD3 in mouse brain was achieved through
retroviral vector-mediated HOXD3 gene transfer. HOXD3 expression lead to a
significant induction of cerebral angiogenesis as shown by quantitative
microvessel counting (HOXD3: 241 +/- 19 vessels/mm2 vs. saline: 150 +/- 14
vessels/mm2, P < 0.05). The data also showed that focal cerebral blood flow was
increased in the angiogenic region with less vascular leakage. Moreover,
expression of HOXD3 led to an increase in the expression of a direct downstream
target gene alpha V beta 3 integrin. The data suggest that HOXD3 may play an
important role in regulating cerebral angiogenesis, and that gene transfer of
HOXD3 may provide a novel and potent means to stimulate angiogenesis.

PMID: 15545924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Pathol. 2003 Dec;163(6):2421-31.

HoxD3 accelerates wound healing in diabetic mice.

Hansen SL(1), Myers CA, Charboneau A, Young DM, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California 94143, USA.

Poorly healing diabetic wounds are characterized by diminished collagen
production and impaired angiogenesis. HoxD3, a homeobox transcription factor that
promotes angiogenesis and collagen synthesis, is up-regulated during normal wound
repair whereas its expression is diminished in poorly healing wounds of the
genetically diabetic (db/db) mouse. To determine whether restoring expression of 
HoxD3 would accelerate diabetic wound healing, we devised a novel method of gene 
transfer, which incorporates HoxD3 plasmid DNA into a methylcellulose film that
is placed on wounds created on db/db mice. The HoxD3 transgene was expressed in
endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and keratinocytes of the wounds for up to 10
days. More importantly, a single application of HoxD3 to db/db mice resulted in a
statistically significant acceleration of wound closure compared to
control-treated wounds. Furthermore, we also observed that the HoxD3-mediated
improvement in diabetic wound repair was accompanied by increases in mRNA
expression of the HoxD3 target genes, Col1A1 and beta 3-integrin leading to
enhanced angiogenesis and collagen deposition in the wounds. Although
HoxD3-treated wounds also show improved re-epithelialization as compared to
control db/db wounds, this effect was not due to direct stimulation of
keratinocyte migration by HoxD3. Finally, we show that despite the dramatic
increase in collagen synthesis and deposition in HoxD3-treated wounds, these
wounds showed normal remodeling and we found no evidence of abnormal wound
healing. These results indicate that HoxD3 may provide a means to directly
improve collagen deposition, angiogenesis and closure in poorly healing diabetic 
wounds.

PMCID: PMC1892363
PMID: 14633614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Wound Repair Regen. 2003 Nov-Dec;11(6):474-80.

HoxD3 expression and collagen synthesis in diabetic fibroblasts.

Hansen SL(1), Young DM, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory at San Francisco General Hospital, Department of 
Surgery, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94143, USA.

Diabetic wound healing is characterized by deficiencies in both growth factor and
collagen production. We have observed that expression of homeobox D3 (HoxD3), a
collagen-inducing transcription factor, and expression of collagen are reduced in
an established animal model of diabetic wound repair, the leptin-deficient
diabetic (db/db) mouse. We sought to evaluate whether the diminished expression
of collagen and HoxD3 would be maintained once fibroblasts were removed from the 
diabetic wound environment. Fibroblasts were isolated from both wild-type and
diabetic animals and expression of HoxD3 and collagen assessed. We found that
when removed from the diabetic wound environment, HoxD3 and type I collagen
expression are increased in diabetic fibroblasts when compared to wild-type
fibroblasts. The increase in type I collagen is not related to increased
production or activation of transforming growth factor-beta1. However, when the
diabetic fibroblasts are cultured in a 3D collagen matrix, expression of type I
collagen and HoxD3 is markedly reduced and reflects the pattern of gene
expression observed in the in vivo diabetic wound environment. Thus, although
diabetic fibroblasts can regain the capacity to express high levels of collagen
and HoxD3 once removed from the diabetic wound environment, culturing cells in
the presence of a 3D collagen matrix is sufficient to revert these fibroblasts to
their previous nonsynthetic state.

PMID: 14617289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Leukemia. 2003 Dec;17(12):2454-9.

B-cell development in the presence of the MLL/AF4 oncoprotein proceeds in the
absence of HOX A7 and HOX A9 expression.

Bertrand FE(1), Spengeman JD, Shah N, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is frequently characterized by the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) cytogenetic abnormality encoding the MLL/AF4 oncogene, increased
HOX gene expression and a pro-B/monocytoid phenotype. We have previously
established a novel MLL/AF4-positive cell line, B-lineage 3 (BLIN-3), which
retains several features of normal B-lineage development (functional Ig gene
rearrangement and apoptotic sensitivity to stromal cell withdrawal) not generally
observed in infant ALL. We now use microarray analysis to identify patterns of
gene expression in BLIN-3 that may modulate MLL/AF4 oncogenesis and contribute to
the retention of normal B-lineage developmental characteristics. Comparison of
6815 expressed genes in BLIN-3 with published microarray data on leukemic blasts 
from t(4;11) patients indicated that BLIN-3 was unique in lacking the expression 
of certain HOX-A cluster genes. These results were validated by RT-PCR showing no
expression of HOX A7 or HOX A9 in BLIN-3. A HOX C8 promoter reporter was active
in BLIN-3, indicating that lack of HOX gene expression in BLIN-3 was not due to a
nonfunctional MLL/AF4. Our results suggest that B-lineage development can proceed
in t(4;11) leukemic blasts in the absence of HOX-A gene expression.

PMID: 14562113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5191-201. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Hox3 genes coordinate mechanisms of genetic suppression and activation in the
generation of branchial and somatic motoneurons.

Gaufo GO(1), Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

In the developing hindbrain, the functional loss of individual Hox genes has
revealed some of their roles in specifying rhombomere (r) identity. However, it
is unclear how Hox genes act in concert to confer the unique identity to multiple
rhombomeres. Moreover, it remains to be elucidated how these genes interact with 
other transcriptional programs to specify distinct neuronal lineages within each 
rhombomere. We demonstrate that in r5, the combined mutation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
result in a loss of Pax6- and Olig2-expressing progenitors that give rise to
somatic motoneurons of the abducens nucleus. In r6, the absence of any
combination of the Hox3 paralogous genes results in ectopic expression of the
r4-specific determinant Hoxb1. This ectopic expression in turn results in the
differentiation of r4-like facial branchiomotoneurons within this rhombomere.
These studies reveal that members of the Hox1 and Hox3 paralogous groups
participate in a 'Hox code' that is necessary for coordinating both suppression
and activation mechanisms that ensure distinction between the multiple
rhombomeres in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 12954718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Clin Invest. 2003 Jul;112(1):30-41.

Neovascularization of ischemic tissues by gene delivery of the extracellular
matrix protein Del-1.

Zhong J(1), Eliceiri B, Stupack D, Penta K, Sakamoto G, Quertermous T, Coleman M,
Boudreau N, Varner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093-0912, USA.

The ECM protein Del-1 is one of several novel ECM proteins that accumulate around
angiogenic blood vessels in embryonic and tumor tissue and promote angiogenesis
in the absence of exogenous growth factors. Del-1 expressed in mouse or rabbit
ischemic hind-limb muscle by gene transfer rapidly promotes new blood vessel
formation and restores muscle function. This angiogenic ECM protein initiates
angiogenesis by binding to integrin alphavbeta5 on resting endothelium, thereby
resulting in expression of the transcription factor Hox D3 and integrin
alphavbeta3. Hox D3 converts resting endothelium to angiogenic endothelium by
inducing expression of proangiogenic molecules such as integrin alphavbeta3.
These findings provide evidence for an angiogenic switch that can be initiated in
the absence of exogenous growth factors and indicate that the angiogenic matrix
protein Del-1 may be a useful tool for the therapy of ischemic disease.

PMCID: PMC162283
PMID: 12840057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2001;(1):43-4.

HOXD3 regulates expression of JAGGED1, a ligand for Notch receptors.

Taniguchi Y(1), Sato M, Tanaka O, Sekiguchi M, Inoko H, Kimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Information, School of Medicine, Tokai University,
Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193, Japan.

We generated transgenic mouse embryos expressing the human HOXD3 homeobox gene in
the central nervous system (CNS) utilizing the Wnt1 expression vector. Whole
mount in situ hybridization analysis revealed that the transgenic embryos at 10.5
days post coitum (dpc) expressed the HOXD3 gene in dorsal aspects of the CNS from
the diencephalon to the spinal cord. Histological observation of sections showed 
that, in the spinal cord of the transgenic embryos at 10.5 dpc, there were few
neuronal progenitor cells stretching from a luminal to basal side. This implies
that Notch signaling which is involved in determining the courses of
differentiation in the progenitors was disturbed within the CNS of the transgenic
embryos. To elucidate what effects HOXD3 has on Notch signaling, we examined gene
expression of Notch receptors and ligands using human erythroleukemia HEL and
K562 cells transfected with the HOXD3 gene. Consequently, HOXD3 promoted
expression of JAGGED1, a ligand for Notch receptors, in both the transfectants,
suggesting that the JAGGED1 gene is a downstream target of HOXD3.

PMID: 12836255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Thromb Haemost. 2003 Mar;89(3):530-7.

Insights in the molecular mechanisms of the anti-angiogenic effect of an
inhibitor of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase.

Vincent L(1), Albanese P, Bompais H, Uzan G, Vannier JP, Steg PG, Soria J, Soria 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire DIFEMA, Faculté de Médecine et Pharmacie, 22 Boulevard Gambetta,
76183 Rouen, France.

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) reduce the
risk of coronary event by cholesterollowering dependent and independent
mechanisms. We have already described that the inhibitory effect of cerivastatin 
on angiogenesis contribute to the cholesterol-independent beneficial effect and
was due to the inhibition of the cell signaling cascade RhoA/FAK/Akt. In this
study, new insights in the molecular mechanism of action were provided. It
indicates an inhibition of exposure of alpha V beta 3 integrin on cell membrane
and a modification of gene expression. The inhibition of angiogenesis could be
related to 1) an increase in genes involved in the inhibition of cell
proliferation (p19(INK4), p21(Waf/Cip1),Wnt-5a), the inhibition of cell migration
(Rho-GDI 1, alpha E-catenin) and 2) a downregulation of genes involved in
angiogenesis (PAI-1, Vitronectin, HoxD3, Notch4) or in cell invasion (Semaphorin 
E). In addition, DNA repair protein genes (MLH1, XRCC1) were increased. This
study may indicate new biological interest of genes involved in angiogenesis
control.

PMID: 12624638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Am J Pathol. 2002 Dec;161(6):2099-109.

Sustained expression of homeobox D10 inhibits angiogenesis.

Myers C(1), Charboneau A, Cheung I, Hanks D, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of California 
at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are master regulatory genes that direct organogenesis and
maintain differentiated tissue function. As HoxD3 and HoxB3 promote angiogenesis,
we investigated whether endothelial cells use other Hox genes to maintain a
mature quiescent phenotype. HoxD10 expression was higher in quiescent as compared
to tumor-associated angiogenic endothelium. Microarray analysis of
HoxD10-overexpressing endothelial cells revealed a pattern of gene expression
consistent with a nonangiogenic phenotype. Moreover, sustained expression of
HoxD10 impaired endothelial cell migration and blocked angiogenesis induced by
basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in the
chick chorioallantoic membrane in vivo. HoxD10-overexpressing human endothelial
cells also failed to form new vessels when implanted into immunocompromised mice.
These results indicate a role for HoxD10 in maintaining a nonangiogenic state in 
the endothelium.

PMCID: PMC1850921
PMID: 12466126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2002;19(6):503-11.

Transduction of HOXD3-antisense into human melanoma cells results in decreased
invasive and motile activities.

Okubo Y(1), Hamada J, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Tsutsumida A, Furuuchi K, Aoyama T,
Sugihara T, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Homeobox genes regulate sets of genes that determine cellular fates in embryonic 
morphogenesis and maintenance of adult tissue architecture by regulating cellular
motility and cell-cell interactions. Our previous studies showed that a specific 
member, HOXD3, when overexpressed, enhanced cell motility and invasiveness of
human lung cancer A549 cells (Hamada et al. Int. J. Cancer 2001; 93: 516-25
[19]). In the present study, we investigated the roles of HOXD3 in motile and
invasive behavior of human malignant melanoma cells. Of seven melanoma cell lines
examined here, six cell lines expressed the HOXD3 gene, whereas normal
melanocytes did not. We transduced the HOXD3-antisense gene expression vector
into two cell lines (A375M and MMIV). The cell transduced with the
HOXD3-antisense gene showed reduced in vitro invasion of Matrigel. The
transduction of the HOXD3-antisense gene also decreased cell spreading,
haptotactic activity to vitronectin and laminin-1, and phagokinetic activity. To 
find the difference of gene expression between the HOXD3-antisense-transduced
A375M cells and the control A375MNeo2 cells, we carried out cDNA microarray
analysis. The results of the microarray analysis indicated that the increased
expression of cdc42-interacting protein 4, KIAA0554 and tropomyosin 1, which are 
all associated with the cytoskeletal system, may be involved in the reduction of 
motile and invasive activity by the HOXD3-antisense gene transduction.

PMID: 12405287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Life Sci. 2002 Oct 11;71(21):2543-52.

A vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor analog alters the expression of homeobox
genes.

Steingart RA(1), Heldenberg E, Pinhasov A, Brenneman DE, Fridkin M, Gozes I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.

A lipophilic analog of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP),
stearyl-Nle(17)-neurotensin(6-11)VIP(7-28) (SNH), that inhibited lung cancer
growth, has been previously described. The mechanism of SNH inhibition of cancer 
growth is still being elucidated. The present study examined the effects of SNH
on homeobox genes in the colon cancer cell line HT 29 that expresses VIP
receptors. Homeobox genes contain a characteristic DNA sequence, coding for a
stretch of 61 amino acid homeodomain that binds specific DNA motifs. While the
HOX gene family contains a single homeodomain, the POU gene family contains an
additional DNA binding homeodomain. HT 29 cells were incubated with SNH; RNA was 
extracted and subjected to reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) with primers that matched the conserved area of the various HOX or POU
genes. The PCR products that were altered by SNH treatment were sequenced. Three 
candidate SNH-responsive genes, the HOX A4, the HOX B5 and the PUO V
transcription factor I (Oct-3) were identified. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR with
specific primers confirmed the increase in HOX A4 and the decrease in Oct-3
expression levels following SNH treatment. Thus, the HOX A4 and the Oct-3
homeobox genes may partially mediate SNH activity on cancer cells.

PMID: 12270759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2002 May;77(3):251-63.

[Roles of integrin beta 3 in enhancement of cell motility by HOXD3
overexpression].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohta H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hokkaido University Graduate School of Dental Medicine, Sapporo 060-8586,
Japan.

PMID: 12056052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Oncogene. 2002 Jan 24;21(5):798-808.

HOXD3 enhances motility and invasiveness through the TGF-beta-dependent and
-independent pathways in A549 cells.

Miyazaki YJ(1), Hamada J, Tada M, Furuuchi K, Takahashi Y, Kondo S, Katoh H,
Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Homeobox genes regulate sets of genes that determine cellular fates in embryonic 
morphogenesis and maintenance of adult tissue architecture by regulating cellular
motility and cell-cell interactions. Our previous studies showed that a specific 
member, HOXD3, when overexpressed, upregulates integrin beta3 expression in human
erythroleukemia HEL cells and lung cancer A549 cells, and enhances their motility
and invasiveness. We performed a microarray study of over 7075 genes to determine
the mechanisms underlying the HOXD3-enhanced motility and invasiveness in A549
cells. RT-PCR-based tracking gene analyses highlighted a set of
TGF-beta-upregulated genes, which included matrix metalloproteinase-2,
syndecan-1, CD44, and TGF-beta-induced 68 kDa protein. Exogenous TGF-beta also
caused this pattern of upregulation in A549 cells and enhanced their migratory
and invasive activity, confirming the involvement of TGF-beta signaling. However,
HOXD3 reduced the expression of TGF-beta-independent genes coding for desmosomal 
components such as desmoglein, desmoplakin and plakoglobin which are known to
suppress tumor invasion and metastasis. These results suggest that HOXD3 enhances
the invasive and metastatic potential of cancer cells through the
TGF-beta-dependent and -independent pathways.

PMID: 11850808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3595-607.

Independent regulation of initiation and maintenance phases of Hoxa3 expression
in the vertebrate hindbrain involve auto- and cross-regulatory mechanisms.

Manzanares M(1), Bel-Vialar S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Ferretti E, Marshall H,
Maconochie MM, Blasi F, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During development of the vertebrate hindbrain, Hox genes play multiple roles in 
the segmental processes that regulate anteroposterior (AP) patterning. Paralogous
Hox genes, such as Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, generally have very similar patterns
of expression, and gene targeting experiments have shown that members of paralogy
group 3 can functionally compensate for each other. Hence, distinct functions for
individual members of this family may primarily depend upon differences in their 
expression domains. The earliest domains of expression of the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes in hindbrain rhombomeric (r) segments are transiently regulated by
kreisler, a conserved Maf b-Zip protein, but the mechanisms that maintain
expression in later stages are unknown. In this study, we have compared the
segmental expression and regulation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 in mouse and chick embryos
to investigate how they are controlled after initial activation. We found that
the patterns of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 expression in r5 and r6 in later stages during
mouse and chick hindbrain development were differentially regulated. Hoxa3
expression was maintained in r5 and r6, while Hoxb3 was downregulated. Regulatory
comparisons of cis-elements from the chick and mouse Hoxa3 locus in both
transgenic mouse and chick embryos have identified a conserved enhancer that
mediates the late phase of Hoxa3 expression through a conserved
auto/cross-regulatory loop. This block of similarity is also present in the human
and horn shark loci, and contains two bipartite Hox/Pbx-binding sites that are
necessary for its in vivo activity in the hindbrain. These HOX/PBC sites are
positioned near a conserved kreisler-binding site (KrA) that is involved in
activating early expression in r5 and r6, but their activity is independent of
kreisler. This work demonstrates that separate elements are involved in
initiating and maintaining Hoxa3 expression during hindbrain segmentation, and
that it is regulated in a manner different from Hoxb3 in later stages. Together, 
these findings add further strength to the emerging importance of positive auto- 
and cross-regulatory interactions between Hox genes as a general mechanism for
maintaining their correct spatial patterns in the vertebrate nervous system.

PMID: 11566863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 1;15(17):2209-14.

Large scale transgenic and cluster deletion analysis of the HoxD complex separate
an ancestral regulatory module from evolutionary innovations.

Spitz F(1), Gonzalez F, Peichel C, Vogt TF, Duboule D, Zákány J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The ancestral role of the Hox gene family is specifying morphogenetic differences
along the main body axis. In vertebrates, HoxD genes were also co-opted along
with the emergence of novel structures such as limbs and genitalia. We propose
that these functional recruitments relied on the appearance, or implementation,
of regulatory sequences outside of the complex. Whereas transgenic human and
murine HOXD clusters could function during axial patterning, in mice they were
not expressed outside the trunk. Accordingly, deletion of the entire cluster
abolished axial expression, whereas recently acquired regulatory controls were
preserved.

PMCID: PMC312772
PMID: 11544178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2001 Jul;76(4):239-50.

[Overexpression of the human HOXD3-antisense in melanoma cells results in
decreased invasive activity].

[Article in Japanese]

Okubo Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

PMID: 11523115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Surg Res. 2001 Sep;100(1):46-56.

Hox D3 expression in normal and impaired wound healing.

Uyeno LA(1), Newman-Keagle JA, Cheung I, Hunt TK, Young DM, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that Hox D3 and Hox B3 can promote
angiogenesis. As angiogenesis is essential for wound healing, we examined
expression of these genes in the vasculature following wounding in normal and
genetically diabetic adult mice with impaired healing.
METHODS: In situ hybridization was performed on tissues taken 0, 1, 4, 7, and 14 
days following administration of linear wounds in wild-type and genetically
diabetic mice. Expression of Hox D3 and Hox B3, angiogenesis, and synthesis of
type I collagen were assessed in the wound.
RESULTS: Hox B3 was expressed in endothelial cells (ECs) of both medium and small
vessels in unwounded tissue, whereas little Hox D3 was detected in resting ECs.
Hox D3 expression was significantly upregulated by 1 day after wounding in ECs of
vessels immediately adjacent to the wound site, and expression was maintained for
at least 7 days. In the diabetic mice, expression of Hox B3 was similar to that
of wild-type mice. In contrast, expression of Hox D3 in ECs was significantly
lower and delayed during wound repair in diabetic mice. In cultured microvascular
ECs, Hox D3 selectively induced high levels of collagen I mRNA expression. Hox
D3-deficient wounds of diabetic animals also displayed a reduction in expression 
and deposition of type I collagen.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that reduced angiogenesis and type I collagen 
in diabetic mice with impaired wound healing may be related to deficient Hox D3
expression, and restoring Hox D3 expression may enhance angiogenesis and wound
repair.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11516204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell. 2001 Jul 27;106(2):207-17.

Localized and transient transcription of Hox genes suggests a link between
patterning and the segmentation clock.

Zákány J(1), Kmita M, Alarcon P, de la Pompa JL, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Cell 2001 Sep 21;106(6):795.

During development, Hox gene transcription is activated in presomitic mesoderm
with a time sequence that follows the order of the genes along the chromosome.
Here, we show that Hoxd1 and other Hox genes display dynamic stripes of
expression within presomitic mesoderm. The underlying transcriptional bursts may 
reflect the mechanism that coordinates Hox gene activation with somitogenesis.
This mechanism appears to depend upon Notch signaling, as mice deficient for
RBPJk, the effector of the Notch pathway, showed severely reduced Hoxd gene
expression in presomitic mesoderm. These results suggest a molecular link between
Hox gene activation and the segmentation clock. Such a linkage would efficiently 
keep in phase the production of novel segments with their morphological
specification.

PMID: 11511348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Int J Cancer. 2001 Aug 15;93(4):516-25.

Overexpression of homeobox gene HOXD3 induces coordinate expression of
metastasis-related genes in human lung cancer cells.

Hamada Ji(1), Omatsu T, Okada F, Furuuchi K, Okubo Y, Takahashi Y, Tada M,
Miyazaki YJ, Taniguchi Y, Shirato H, Miyasaka K, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Homeobox-containing genes are expressed in spatiotemporal fashion during
embryogenesis and act as master transcription-regulating factors which control
the expression of a variety of genes involved in morphogenesis. They are also
expressed in a tissue-specific manner in normal adult tissues and appear to give 
cells spatial information in the maintenance of their architectural integrity. We
transfected a HOXD3 class I homeobox-containing gene into human lung cancer A549 
cells and investigated alterations in gene expressions and phenotypes related to 
the maintenance of tissue architecture in HOXD3-overexpressing A549 cells. In the
HOXD3-overexpressing cell lines, expression of E-cadherin was lost and
plakoglobin was strongly repressed, whereas integrin alpha3 and beta3 were
up-regulated and N-cadherin and integrin alpha4 were newly expressed. Compared
with parental and control transfectant lines, the HOXD3-overexpressing cell lines
showed highly motile and invasive activity. Blocking experiments using
anti-integrin beta1 and beta3 suggested that the increased haptotaxis of the
HOXD3-overexpressing cells to vitronectin resulted from increased expression and 
activation of integrin alphavbeta3, and that overexpression of the HOXD3 gene
converted the integrin beta1-dependent haptotaxis to fibronectin into both
integrin beta1- and beta3-dependent one. HOXD3 overexpression increased
production of matrix-degrative enzymes including matrix metalloproteinase-2 and
urokinase-plasminogen activator. When the tumor cells were intravenously injected
into the tail veins of nude mice, HOXD3 transfectants formed a significantly
large number of metastatic foci in lungs compared with the control transfectants.
These findings suggest that HOXD3 can act as a metastasis-promoting gene in human
lung cancer A549 cells.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11477555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nature. 2000 Feb 10;403(6770):661-5.

Maintenance of functional equivalence during paralogous Hox gene evolution.

Greer JM(1), Puetz J, Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 Feb 10;403(6770):607, 609-10.

Biological diversity is driven mainly by gene duplication followed by mutation
and selection. This divergence in either regulatory or protein-coding sequences
can result in quite different biological functions for even closely related
genes. This concept is exemplified by the mammalian Hox gene complex, a group of 
39 genes which are located on 4 linkage groups, dispersed on 4 chromosomes. The
evolution of this complex began with amplification in cis of a primordial Hox
gene to produce 13 members, followed by duplications in trans of much of the
entire unit. As a consequence, Hox genes that occupy the same relative position
along the 5' to 3' chromosomal coordinate (trans-paralogous genes) share more
similarity in sequence and expression pattern than do adjacent Hox genes on the
same chromosome. Studies in mice indicate that although individual family members
may have unique biological roles, they also share overlapping functions with
their paralogues. Here we show that the proteins encoded by the paralogous genes,
Hoxa3 and Hoxd3, can carry out identical biological functions, and that the
different roles attributed to these genes are the result of quantitative
modulations in gene expression.

PMID: 10688203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gastroenterology. 1999 Dec;117(6):1339-51.

Coordinated expression of 3' hox genes during murine embryonal gut development:
an enteric Hox code.

Pitera JE(1), Smith VV, Thorogood P, Milla PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, England. J.Pitera@ich.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hox genes are highly conserved developmental control genes
that may be organized and expressed in the form of a code required for correct
morphogenesis. Little is known about their control of the embryonal gut. However,
Hox paralogues 4 and 5, which are expressed at the sites of origin of vagal
neural crest cells and splanchnic mesoderm, are likely to be important. We have
studied the expression domains of these genes in the gut both spatially and
temporally.
METHODS: CD1 mice embryos of embryonic days E8.5-E17.5 were studied. The spatial 
and temporal expression patterns of messenger RNA of Hoxa4, b4, c4, d4, a5, c5,
and b5 homeoprotein were determined by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry in whole embryos, whole gastrointestinal tracts, and
vibratome sections.
RESULTS: There were different spatial, temporal, and combinatorial expression
patterns in different morphological regions: foregut, prececal gut, cecum, and
postcecal gut. Two dynamic gradients, rostral and caudal, were coordinated with
nested expression domains along the gut primordium. Region-specific domains were 
present in the stomach and cecum.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression patterns of genes in paralogous groups 4 and 5
suggest that they are organized to form a specific enteric Hox code required for 
correct enteric development.

PMID: 10579975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nature. 1999 Oct 21;401(6755):761-2.

Hox genes and the making of sphincters.

Zákány J(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Switzerland.

PMID: 10548099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1999 Sep;74(5):367-76.

[Overexpression of human homeobox gene in lung cancer A549 cells results in
enhanced motile and invasive properties].

[Article in Japanese]

Omatu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Since homeobox-containing genes (HOX genes) are a family of transcriptional
regulators, which give cells positional information in morphogenesis, cancer
metastasis can be explained as a heterotopic expression of HOX genes. In the
present study, I transfected HOXD3 gene into human lung cancer A549 cells and
investigated alterations of adhesiveness, migration and invasiveness of the tumor
cells. Overexpression of the HOXD3 gene enhanced expressions of integrin alpha 3,
alpha 4 and beta 3 subunits, and increased adhesive and migratory activities
toward fibronectin and vitronectin. It was suggested that the increased migration
of the tumor cells resulted from enhanced expression and activation of integrin
alpha v beta 3. Furthermore, the overexpression of HOXD3 increased mRNA
expressions of urokinase-type plasminogen activator and transcription factors
ets-1 and -2. Most of these molecules, which increased with overexpression of
HOXD3, are well-known factors associated with tumor invasion and metastasis.
Indeed, HOXD3 transfectants revealed high invasive activity to matrigel, a
basement membrane model, compared to their parent cells and control
neo-transfectants. These findings suggest that abnormal expression of HOXD3 may
enhance tumor invasion and metastasis through increased expressions of
metastasis-related genes.

PMID: 10495851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Dyn. 1999 Jun;215(2):96-107.

RARbeta mediates the response of Hoxd4 and Hoxb4 to exogenous retinoic acid.

Folberg A(1), Nagy Kovács E, Luo J, Giguère V, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

One action of retinoids in development is the regulation of Hox gene expression. 
Hoxd4 and Hoxb4 expression in the embryonic hindbrain is anteriorized by retinoic
acid (RA) treatment of mid-gestation mouse embryos. Here we demonstrate that
retinoic acid receptor beta (Rarb) deficient mice present only a partial
anteriorization of either Hoxd4 or Hoxb4 in response to RA treatment. Our results
strongly suggest that RARbeta is a mediator of their RA-response, and reveal
anteroposterior polarity within a single rhombomere (r). Additionally, we
generated mice doubly mutated for Hoxd4 and Rarb in an attempt to identify common
morphogenetic pathways between these two genes. We conclude that there are no
synergistic interactions between Hoxd4 and Rarb in the specification of the
cervical vertebrae.

PMID: 10373014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jul;65(1):104-10.

Monodactylous limbs and abnormal genitalia are associated with hemizygosity for
the human 2q31 region that includes the HOXD cluster.

Del Campo M(1), Jones MC, Veraksa AN, Curry CJ, Jones KL, Mascarello JT,
Ali-Kahn-Catts Z, Drumheller T, McGinnis W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dysmorphology, Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Vertebrates have four clusters of Hox genes (HoxA, HoxB, HoxC, and HoxD). A
variety of expression and mutation studies indicate that posterior members of the
HoxA and HoxD clusters play an important role in vertebrate limb development. In 
humans, mutations in HOXD13 have been associated with type II syndactyly or
synpolydactyly, and, in HOXA13, with hand-foot-genital syndrome. We have
investigated two unrelated children with a previously unreported pattern of
severe developmental defects on the anterior-posterior (a-p) limb axis and in the
genitalia, consisting of a single bone in the zeugopod, either monodactyly or
oligodactyly in the autopod of all four limbs, and penoscrotal hypoplasia. Both
children are heterozygous for a deletion that eliminates at least eight
(HOXD3-HOXD13) of the nine genes in the HOXD cluster. We propose that the
patients' phenotypes are due in part to haploinsufficiency for HOXD-cluster
genes. This hypothesis is supported by the expression patterns of these genes in 
early vertebrate embryos. However, the involvement of additional genes in the
region could explain the discordance, in severity, between these human phenotypes
and the milder, non-polarized phenotypes present in mice hemizygous for HoxD
cluster genes. These cases represent the first reported examples of deficiencies 
for an entire Hox cluster in vertebrates and suggest that the diploid dose of
human HOXD genes is crucial for normal growth and patterning of the limbs along
the anterior-posterior axis.

PMCID: PMC1378080
PMID: 10364522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Biol. 1998 Mar 1;195(1):1-15.

Hox group 3 paralogs regulate the development and migration of the thymus,
thyroid, and parathyroid glands.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112-5331.

The thymus, thyroid, and parathyroid glands in vertebrates develop from the
pharyngeal region, with contributions both from pharyngeal endoderm and from
neural crest cells in the pharyngeal arches. Hoxa3 mutant homozygotes have
defects in the development of all three organs. Roles for the Hoxa3 paralogs,
Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, were investigated by examining various mutant combinations. The 
thyroid defects seen in Hoxa3 single mutants are exacerbated in double mutants
with either of its paralogs, although none of the double-mutant combinations
resulted in thyroid agenesis. The results indicate that the primary role of these
genes in thyroid development is their effect on the development and migration of 
the ultimobranchial bodies, which contribute the parafollicular or C-cells to the
thyroid. Hoxb3, Hoxd3 double mutants show no obvious defects in the thymus or
parathyroids. However, the removal of one functional copy of Hoxa3 from the
Hoxb3, Hoxd3 double mutants (Hoxa3 +/-, Hoxb3-/-, Hoxd3-/-) results in the
failure of the thymus and parathyroid glands to migrate to their normal positions
in the throat. Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms used to
mediate the movement of tissues during development. These results indicate that
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3 have highly overlapping functions in mediating the
migration of pharyngeal organ primordia. In addition, Hoxa3 has a unique function
with respect to its paralogs in thymus, parathyroid, and thyroid development.
This unique function may be conferred by the expression of Hoxa3, but not Hoxb3
nor Hoxd3, in the pharyngeal pouch endoderm.

PMID: 9520319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):274-88.

Hox group 3 paralogous genes act synergistically in the formation of somitic and 
neural crest-derived structures.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that are used to regionalize the mammalian
embryo. Analysis of mice carrying targeted mutations in individual and multiple
Hox genes is beginning to reveal a complex network of interactions among these
closely related genes which is responsible for directing the formation of
spatially restricted tissues and structures. In this report we present an
analysis of the genetic interactions between all members of the third paralogous 
group, Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3. Previous analysis has shown that although mice
homozygous for loss-of-function mutations in either Hoxa3 or Hoxd3 have no
defects in common, mice mutant for both genes demonstrate that these two genes
strongly interact in a dosage-dependent manner. To complete the analysis of this 
paralogous gene family, mice with a targeted disruption of the Hoxb3 gene were
generated. Homozygous mutants have minor defects at low penetrance in the
formation of both the cervical vertebrae and the IXth cranial nerve. Analysis and
comparison of all double-mutant combinations demonstrate that all three members
of this paralogous group interact synergistically to affect the development of
both neuronal and mesenchymal neural crest-derived structures, as well as somitic
mesoderm-derived structures. Surprisingly, with respect to the formation of the
cervical vertebrae, mice doubly mutant for Hoxa3 and Hoxd3 or Hoxb3 and Hoxd3
show an indistinguishable defect, loss of the entire atlas. This suggests that
the identity of the specific Hox genes that are functional in a given region may 
not be as critical as the total number of Hox genes operating in that region.

PMID: 9441667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nat Genet. 1997 May;16(1):79-83.

Organization of the Fugu rubripes Hox clusters: evidence for continuing evolution
of vertebrate Hox complexes.

Aparicio S(1), Hawker K, Cottage A, Mikawa Y, Zuo L, Venkatesh B, Chen E,
Krumlauf R, Brenner S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute for Developmental Biology and Cancer Research,
Cambridge, UK. saparici@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

The clustered organization of Hox genes provides a powerful opportunity to
examine gene gain and loss in evolution because physical linkage is a key
diagnostic feature which allows homology to be established unambiguously.
Furthermore, Hox genes play a key role in determination of axial and appendicular
skeletal morphology and may be a key component of the evolution of diverse
metazoan body forms. Despite suggestions that changes in Hox gene number played a
role in evolution of metazoan body plans, there has been a general lack of
evidence for such variation amongst gnathostomes (or indeed any vertebrate) and
it has therefore been widely assumed that differential regulation may be the key 
element in all vertebrate Hox evolution. We have studied the Hox gene clusters of
a teleost fish, Fugu rubripes, to test the possibility that Hox organization may 
have varied since the origin of jawed vertebrates. We have identified four Hox
complexes in Fugu and found an unprecedented degree of variation when compared
with tetrapod clusters. Our data show that: Fugu clusters are widely variant with
respect to length; at least nine genes have been lost; there is a new group-2
paralogue; and pseudo-gene remnants of group-1 and group-3 paralogues were found 
in the Hoxc complex, when compared with the present mammalian clusters. We show
that gene loss after duplication of the prototypical vertebrate Hox clusters is a
key feature of both tetrapod and fish evolution.

PMID: 9140399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Aug 6;93(16):8247-52.

Sequence and expression of the murine Hoxd-3 homeobox gene.

Tan DP(1), Shao X, Pu L, Guo V, Nirenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Murine Hoxd-3 (Hox 4.1) genomic DNA and cDNA and Hoxa-3 (Hox 1.5) cDNA were
cloned and sequenced. The homeodomains of Hoxd-3 and Hoxa-3 and regions before
and after the homeodomain are highly conserved. Both Hoxa-3 and Hoxa-3 proteins
have a proline-rich region that contains consensus amino acid sequences for
binding to Src homology 3 domains of some signal transduction proteins. Northern 
blot analysis of RNA from 8- to 11-day-old mouse embryos revealed a 4.3-kb
species of Hoxd-3 RNA, whereas a less abundant 3.0-kb species of Hoxd-3 RNA was
found in RNA from 9- to 11-day-old embryos. Two species of Hoxd-3 poly(A)+ RNA,
4.3 and 6.0 kb in length, were found in poly(A)+ RNA from adult mouse kidney, but
not in RNA from other adult tissues tested. Hoxd-3 mRNA was detected by in situ
hybridization in 12-, 14-, and 17-day-old mouse embryos in the posterior half of 
the myelencephalon, spinal cord, dorsal root ganglia, first cervical vertebra,
thyroid gland, kidney tubules, esophagus, stomach, and intestines.

PMCID: PMC38655
PMID: 8710855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Blood. 1995 May 15;85(10):2786-94.

Overexpression of the HOX4A (HOXD3) homeobox gene in human erythroleukemia HEL
cells results in altered adhesive properties.

Taniguchi Y(1), Komatsu N, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Life Science (Cell Biology), Tokai University School
of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

We previously isolated the human homeobox gene HOX4A (HOXD3) on chromosome 2 from
a human genomic library and determined its nucleotide sequence. In the present
study, expression of the HOX4A gene was investigated in human hematopoietic cell 
lines. Reverse transcriptase-mediated polymerase chain reaction analysis showed
that the HOX4A gene was expressed in erythroleukemia HEL and K562 cells but not
in promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells. To study the role of the HOX4A gene in
erythropoiesis, expression vectors containing the HOX4A gene in the sense or
antisense orientation were introduced into HEL cells. The sense transfectants
overexpressing the HOX4A gene formed aggregates, which were composed of densely
associated cells adhering to tissue-culture dishes, whereas the parental HEL
cells and antisense transfectants adhered poorly to the dishes. Furthermore, the 
sense transfectants overexpressing the HOX4A gene attached more efficiently to
fibronectin and collagen than did the antisense transfectants and parental HEL
cells. Northern blot analysis showed that integrin beta 3 mRNA levels were
significantly increased in the HEL cells overexpressing the HOX4A gene, whereas
the integrin beta 1 and alpha IIb mRNA levels did not show a distinct correlation
with HOX4A mRNA levels. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis showed that 
the sense transfectants overexpressing the HOX4A gene expressed increased levels 
of integrin alpha IIb beta 3 (GP IIb-IIIa) complex as compared with the parental 
HEL cells and antisense transfectants. These results implicate the homeobox gene 
HOX4A in the regulation of cell adhesion processes.

PMID: 7742539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;14(4):295-304.

Analysis of the Hoxd-3 gene: structure and localization of its sense and natural 
antisense transcripts.

Bedford M(1), Arman E, Orr-Urtreger A, Lonai P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

This study set out to investigate the structure and localized expression of the
mouse homeobox-containing gene Hoxd-3. In addition to identifying a transcript of
the type known from other Antennapedia (Antp)-like mammalian homeobox cDNAs, an
antisense transcript was also detected. The antisense form of Hoxd-3 overlaps
with 603 bp of the sense transcript including the homeobox. Active antisense
transcription has been confirmed by RNA blot analysis with single-stranded probes
and by the direction of splicing of an intron in the antisense transcript. The
localized expression of sense and antisense transcripts was compared by in situ
hybridization. Hoxd-3 expression was observed from 8.5 days p.c., in the neural
tube with a sharp border in the hind brain at the level of rhombomeres 4-5. In
contrast, the earliest antisense expression was detected at 10.5 days p.c. in
cDNA libraries. At 12.5 days p.c., sense and antisense transcripts colocalized in
the liver. The possible role of antisense homeobox transcripts during liver and
the hematopoietic development is discussed.

PMID: 7710686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. EMBO J. 1994 Jul 15;13(14):3339-47.

The thyroid transcription factor-1 gene is a candidate target for regulation by
Hox proteins.

Guazzi S(1), Lonigro R, Pintonello L, Boncinelli E, Di Lauro R, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele,
Milano, Italy.

Vertebrate Hox homeobox genes are transcription factors which regulate
antero-posterior axial identity in embryogenesis, presumably through activation
and/or repression of downstream target genes. Some of these targets were reported
to code for molecules involved in cell-cell interactions, whereas no relationship
has yet been demonstrated between Hox genes and other transcription factors
involved in determining and/or maintaining tissue specificity. The thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is a homeodomain-containing protein required for
expression of thyroid-specific genes. A 862 bp 5' genomic fragment of the rat
TTF-1 gene, conferring thyroid-specific expression to a reporter gene, was
sufficient to mediate transactivation by the human HOXB3 gene in co-transfection 
assay in both NIH3T3 or HeLa cells. HOXB3 is expressed in early mammalian
embryogenesis in the anterior neuroectoderm, branchial arches and their
derivatives, including the area of the thyroid primordia and thyroid gland.
Transcription of the TTF-1 promoter is induced only by HOXB3, while its
paralogous gene HOXD3 or other Hox genes expressed more posteriorly (HOXA4,
HOXD4, HOXC5, HOXC6, HOXC8 and Hoxd-8) have no effect. Transactivation by HOXB3
is mediated by two binding sites containing an ATTA core located at -100 and +30 
from the transcription start site. DNase I footprinting experiments show that the
two sites bind HOXB3 protein synthesized in both Escherichia coli and eukaryotic 
cells, as well as nuclear factor(s) present in protein extracts obtained from
mouse embryonic tissues which express group 3 Hox genes and TTF-1. Some of the
DNA-protein complexes formed by the embryonic extracts are indistinguishable from
those generated by HOXB3.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC395231
PMID: 7913891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 1993 Nov;119(3):579-95.

Mice homozygous for a targeted disruption of Hoxd-3 (Hox-4.1) exhibit anterior
transformations of the first and second cervical vertebrae, the atlas and the
axis.

Condie BG(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112.

Gene targeting in embryo-derived stem (ES) cells was used to generate mice with a
disruption in the homeobox-containing gene Hoxd-3 (Hox-4.1). Mice homozygous for 
this mutation show a radically remodeled craniocervical joint. The anterior arch 
of the atlas is transformed to an extension of the basioccipital bone of the
skull. The lateral masses of the atlas also assume a morphology more closely
resembling the exoccipitals and, to a variable extent, fuse with the
exoccipitals. Formation of the second cervical vertebra, the axis, is also
affected. The dens and the superior facets are deleted, and the axis shows
'atlas-like' characteristics. An unexpected observation is that different parts
of the same vertebra are differentially affected by the loss of Hoxd-3 function. 
Some parts are deleted, others are homeotically transformed to more anterior
structures. These observations suggest that one role of Hox genes may be to
differentially control the proliferation rates of the mesenchymal condensations
that give rise to the vertebral cartilages. Within the mouse Hox complex,
paralogous genes not only encode very similar proteins but also often exhibit
very similar expression patterns. Therefore, it has been postulated that
paralogous Hox genes would perform similar roles. Surprisingly, however, no
tissues or structures are affected in common by mutations in the two paralogous
genes, Hoxa-3 and Hoxd-3.

PMID: 7910549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


