
1. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 28;12(3):e1005738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005738.
eCollection 2016.

Bat Accelerated Regions Identify a Bat Forelimb Specific Enhancer in the HoxD
Locus.

Booker BM(1,)(2), Friedrich T(2,)(3), Mason MK(4), VanderMeer JE(1,)(2), Zhao
J(1,)(2,)(5), Eckalbar WL(1,)(2), Logan M(6,)(7), Illing N(4), Pollard
KS(2,)(3,)(8), Ahituv N(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States of America. (3)Gladstone Institutes, San
Francisco, California, United States of America. (4)Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. (5)Key Laboratory
of Advanced Control and Optimization for Chemical Processes of the Ministry of
Education, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.
(6)Division of Developmental Biology, MRC-National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, United Kingdom. (7)Randall Division of Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, Guys Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Division of Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, United States of America.

The molecular events leading to the development of the bat wing remain largely
unknown, and are thought to be caused, in part, by changes in gene expression
during limb development. These expression changes could be instigated by
variations in gene regulatory enhancers. Here, we used a comparative genomics
approach to identify regions that evolved rapidly in the bat ancestor, but are
highly conserved in other vertebrates. We discovered 166 bat accelerated regions 
(BARs) that overlap H3K27ac and p300 ChIP-seq peaks in developing mouse limbs.
Using a mouse enhancer assay, we show that five Myotis lucifugus BARs drive gene 
expression in the developing mouse limb, with the majority showing differential
enhancer activity compared to the mouse orthologous BAR sequences. These include 
BAR116, which is located telomeric to the HoxD cluster and had robust forelimb
expression for the M. lucifugus sequence and no activity for the mouse sequence
at embryonic day 12.5. Developing limb expression analysis of Hoxd10-Hoxd13 in
Miniopterus natalensis bats showed a high-forelimb weak-hindlimb expression for
Hoxd10-Hoxd11, similar to the expression trend observed for M. lucifugus BAR116
in mice, suggesting that it could be involved in the regulation of the bat HoxD
complex. Combined, our results highlight novel regulatory regions that could be
instrumental for the morphological differences leading to the development of the 
bat wing.

PMID: 27019019  [PubMed - in process]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 15. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8099. [Epub ahead of print]

STARD13-correlated ceRNA network inhibits EMT and metastasis of breast cancer.

Li X(1,)(2), Zheng L(1,)(2), Zhang F(1,)(2), Hu J(1,)(2), Chou J(1,)(2), Liu
Y(3), Xing Y(1,)(2), Xi T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis 
and Intervention, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of 
China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Science and Technology,
China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) network has been correlated with the
initiation and development of cancer. Here, we identify CDH5, HOXD1, and HOXD10
as putative STARD13 ceRNAs and they display concordant patterns with STARD13 in
different metastatic potential breast cancer cell lines and tissues. Notably,
3'UTRs of these genes suppress breast cancer metastasis via inhibiting
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in vitro and in vivo, which are activated
through the crosstalk between STARD13 and its ceRNAs in 3'UTR- and
miRNA-dependent manners. In addition, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis reveals that
mRNA level of STARD13 and its ceRNAs is remarkably associated with survival of
breast cancer patients. These results suggest that 3'UTRs of CDH5, HOXD1, and
HOXD10 inhibit breast cancer metastasis via serving as STARD13 ceRNAs.

PMID: 26985770  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Histol Histopathol. 2016 Feb 19:11742. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of skeletal muscle in motor neuron development.

Baguma-Nibasheka M(1), Fracassi A(2), Costain WJ(3), Moreno S(2), Kablar B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, Canada. (2)Department of Science, LIME, University "Roma Tre", Rome,
Italy. (3)Glycosyltransferases and Neuroglycomics, Institute for Biological
Sciences, National Research Council, Ottawa, ON, Canada. (4)Department of Medical
Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
bkablar@dal.ca.

The current paper is a continuation of our work most recently described in
Kablar, 2011. Here, we show lists of up- and down-regulated genes obtained by a
cDNA microarray analysis that compared developing mouse MyoD-/- limb musculature 
(MyoD-dependent, innervated by Lateral Motor Column motor neurons) and Myf5-/-
back (epaxial) musculature (Myf5-dependent, innervated by Medial Motor Column
motor neurons) to the control and to each other, at embryonic day 13.5 which
coincides with the robust programmed cell death of motor neurons and the
inability of myogenesis to undergo its normal progression in the absence of Myf5 
and MyoD that at this embryonic day cannot substitute for each other. We wanted
to see if/how the myogenic program couples with the neurotrophic one, and also to
separate Lateral from Medial column trophic requirements, potentially relevant to
Motor Neuron Diseases with the predilection for the Lateral column. Several
follow-up steps revealed that Kif5c, Stxbp1 and Polb, differentially expressed in
the MyoD-/- limb muscle, and Ppargc1a, Glrb and Hoxd10, differentially expressed 
in the Myf5-/- back muscle, are actually regulators of motor neuron numbers. We
propose a series of follow-up experiments and various ways to consider our
current data.

PMID: 26892388  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Med Genet. 2016 Apr;53(4):250-5. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103505. Epub 2016 
Jan 4.

Deletions of 5' HOXC genes are associated with lower extremity malformations,
including clubfoot and vertical talus.

Alvarado DM(1), McCall K(1), Hecht JT(2), Dobbs MB(3), Gurnett CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston,
Texas, USA. (3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA Shriners Hospital for Children, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Department of Pediatrics, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: Deletions of the HOXC gene cluster result in variable phenotypes in
mice, but have been rarely described in humans.
OBJECTIVE: To report chromosome 12q13.13 microdeletions ranging from 13 to 175 kb
and involving the 5' HOXC genes in four families, segregating congenital lower
limb malformations, including clubfoot, vertical talus and hip dysplasia.
METHODS: Probands (N=253) with clubfoot or vertical talus were screened for point
mutations and copy number variants using multiplexed direct genomic selection, a 
pooled BAC targeted capture approach. SNP genotyping included 1178 probands with 
clubfoot or vertical talus and 1775 controls.
RESULTS: The microdeletions share a minimal non-coding region overlap upstream of
HOXC13, with variable phenotypes depending upon HOXC13, HOXC12 or the HOTAIR
lncRNA inclusion. SNP analysis revealed HOXC11 p.Ser191Phe segregating with
clubfoot in a small family and enrichment of HOXC12 p.Asn176Lys in patients with 
clubfoot or vertical talus (rs189468720, p=0.0057, OR=3.8). Defects in limb
morphogenesis include shortened and overlapping toes, as well as peroneus muscle 
hypoplasia. Finally, HOXC and HOXD gene expression is reduced in fibroblasts from
a patient with a 5' HOXC deletion, consistent with previous studies demonstrating
that dosage of lncRNAs alters expression of HOXD genes in trans.
CONCLUSIONS: Because HOXD10 has been implicated in the aetiology of congenital
vertical talus, variation in its expression may contribute to the lower limb
phenotypes occurring with 5' HOXC microdeletions. Identification of 5' HOXC
microdeletions highlights the importance of transcriptional regulators in the
aetiology of severe lower limb malformations and will improve their diagnosis and
management.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26729820  [PubMed - in process]


5. Circ Heart Fail. 2016 Jan;9(1):e002261. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.115.002261.
Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Sympathoexcitation in Rats With Chronic Heart Failure Depends on Homeobox D10 and
MicroRNA-7b Inhibiting GABBR1 Translation in Paraventricular Nucleus.

Wang R(1), Huang Q(1), Zhou R(1), Dong Z(1), Qi Y(1), Li H(1), Wei X(1), Wu H(1),
Wang H(1), Wilcox CS(1), Hultström M(1), Zhou X(1), Lai EY(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biotechnology (R.W., H.L, H. Wu) and Bioscience (Y.Q.,
X.W., X.Z.), School of Life Science, Jilin Normal University, Siping, China; Key 
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine Research of Ministry of Education, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China (R.W.); Department of Physiology, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China (Q.H., R.Z., H. Wang, E.Y.L.);
Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China (Z.D.); Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology 
and Hypertension, and Hypertension, Kidney and Vascular Health Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC (C.S.W.); and Integrative Physiology, Department of
Medical Cell Biology (M.H.) and Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine,
Department of Surgical Sciences (M.H.), Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)From the Departments of Biotechnology (R.W., H.L, H. Wu) and Bioscience (Y.Q.,
X.W., X.Z.), School of Life Science, Jilin Normal University, Siping, China; Key 
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine Research of Ministry of Education, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China (R.W.); Department of Physiology, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China (Q.H., R.Z., H. Wang, E.Y.L.);
Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China (Z.D.); Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology 
and Hypertension, and Hypertension, Kidney and Vascular Health Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC (C.S.W.); and Integrative Physiology, Department of
Medical Cell Biology (M.H.) and Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine,
Department of Surgical Sciences (M.H.), Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
laienyin@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Chronic heart failure (CHF) increases sympathoexcitation through
angiotensin II (ANG II) receptors (AT1R) in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN).
Recent publications indicate both <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid B-type receptor 1 (GABBR1) 
and microRNA-7b (miR-7b) are expressed in the PVN. We hypothesized that ANG II
regulates sympathoexcitation through homeobox D10 (HoxD10), which regulates
miR-7b in other tissues.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ligation of the left anterior descendent coronary artery in 
rats caused CHF and sympathoexcitation. PVN expression of AT1R, HoxD10, and
miR-7b was increased, whereas GABBR1 was lower in CHF. Infusion of miR-7b in the 
PVN caused sympathoexcitation in control animals and enhanced the changes in CHF.
Antisense miR-7b infused in PVN normalized GABBR1 expression while attenuating
CHF symptoms, including sympathoexcitation. A luciferase reporter assay detected 
miR-7b binding to the 3' untranslated region of GABBR1 that was absent after
targeted mutagenesis. ANG II induced HoxD10 and miR-7b in NG108 cells, effects
blocked by AT1R blocker losartan and by HoxD10 silencing. miR-7b transfection
into NG108 cells decreased GABBR1 expression, which was inhibited by miR-7b
antisense. In vivo PVN knockdown of AT1R attenuated the symptoms of CHF, whereas 
HoxD10 overexpression exaggerated them. Finally, in vivo PVN ANG II infusion
caused dose-dependent sympathoexcitation that was abrogated by miR-7b antisense
and exaggerated by GABBR1 silencing.
CONCLUSIONS: There is an ANG II/AT1R/HoxD10/miR-7b/GABBR1 pathway in the PVN that
contributes to sympathoexcitation and deterioration of cardiac function in CHF.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4692171 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26699387  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):7233-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4415. Epub 2015 Oct 1.

Upregulation of long non-coding RNA HIF 1a-anti-sense 1 induced by transforming
growth factor-ß-mediated targeting of sirtuin 1 promotes osteoblastic
differentiation of human bone marrow stromal cells.

Xu Y(1), Wang S(1), Tang C(1), Chen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Huashan Hospital Affiliated to Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the regulatory mechanism of long
non-coding RNA hypoxia-inducible factor 1a-anti-sense 1 (lncRNA HIF1a-AS1) in
osteoblast differentiation as well as its targeting by sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), which
may be inhibited by transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß in bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSCs). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), western blot analysis, 
lncRNA PCR arrays and chromatin immunoprecipitation were performed in order to
examine the interference of SIRT1 expression by TGF-ß, the effects of SIRT1
overexpression on lncRNA HIF1a-AS1 and the regulation of the expression of
homeobox (HOX)D10, which promotes BMSC differentiation, by lncRNA HIF1a-AS1. The 
results showed that TGF-ß interfered with SIRT1 expression. Furthermore, lncRNA
HIF1a-AS1 was significantly downregulated following overexpression of SIRT1. In
addition, low expression of HIF1a-AS1 was sufficient to block the expression of
HOXD10. The present study further demonstrated that downregulation of HOXD10 by
HIF1a-AS1 interfered with acetylation, and subsequently resulted in the
inhibition of osteoblast differentiation. These results suggested that HIF1a-AS1 
is an essential mediator of osteoblast differentiation, and may thus represent a 
gene-therapeutic agent for the treatment of human bone diseases.

PMCID: PMC4626181
PMID: 26460121  [PubMed - in process]


7. EBioMedicine. 2015 Jul 2;2(8):927-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2015.06.025.
eCollection 2015.

Diagnostic Performance of Plasma DNA Methylation Profiles in Lung Cancer,
Pulmonary Fibrosis and COPD.

Wielscher M(1), Vierlinger K(1), Kegler U(1), Ziesche R(2), Gsur A(3), Weinhäusel
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)AIT - Austrian Institute of Technology, Health & Environment Department,
Molecular Diagnostics Unit, Muthgasse 11/2, 1190 Vienna, Austria. (2)Medical
University of Vienna, Clinical Department for Pulmonology, Spitalgasse 23, 1090
Vienna, Austria. (3)Medical University of Vienna, Institute of Cancer Research,
Borschkegasse 8A, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Disease-specific alterations of the cell-free DNA methylation status are
frequently found in serum samples and are currently considered to be suitable
biomarkers. Candidate markers were identified by bisulfite conversion-based
genome-wide methylation screening of lung tissue from lung cancer, fibrotic ILD, 
and COPD. cfDNA from 400 µl serum (n = 204) served to test the diagnostic
performance of these markers. Following methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme 
digestion and enrichment of methylated DNA via targeted amplification
(multiplexed MSRE enrichment), a total of 96 markers were addressed by highly
parallel qPCR. Lung cancer was efficiently separated from non-cancer and controls
with a sensitivity of 87.8%, (95%CI: 0.67-0.97) and specificity 90.2%, (95%CI:
0.65-0.98). Cancer was distinguished from ILD with a specificity of 88%, (95%CI: 
0.57-1), and COPD from cancer with a specificity of 88% (95%CI: 0.64-0.97).
Separation of ILD from COPD and controls was possible with a sensitivity of 63.1%
(95%CI: 0.4-0.78) and a specificity of 70% (95%CI: 0.54-0.81). The results were
confirmed using an independent sample set (n = 46) by use of the four top markers
discovered in the study (HOXD10, PAX9, PTPRN2, and STAG3) yielding an AUC of 0.85
(95%CI: 0.72-0.95). This technique was capable of distinguishing interrelated
complex pulmonary diseases suggesting that multiplexed MSRE enrichment might be
useful for simple and reliable diagnosis of diverse multifactorial disease
states.

PMCID: PMC4563135
PMID: 26425700  [PubMed]


8. Biol Reprod. 2015 Nov;93(5):121. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.131516. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

The Histone Methyltransferase Gene Absent, Small, or Homeotic Discs-1 Like Is
Required for Normal Hox Gene Expression and Fertility in Mice.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Geister KA(2), Jones M(2), Waqas M(1), Maillard I(3), Camper
SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan scamper@umich.edu.

Chromatin remodeling influences gene expression in developing and adult
organisms. Active and repressive marks of histone methylation dictate the
embryonic expression boundaries of developmentally regulated genes, including the
Hox gene cluster. Drosophila ash1 (absent, small or homeotic discs 1) gene
encodes a histone methyltransferase essential for regulation of Hox gene
expression that interacts genetically with other members of the trithorax group
(TrxG). While mammalian members of the mixed lineage leukemia (Mll) family of
TrxG genes have roles in regulation of Hox gene expression, little is known about
the expression and function of the mammalian ortholog of the Drosophila ash1
gene, Ash1-like (Ash1l). Here we report the expression of mouse Ash1l gene in
specific structures within various organs and provide evidence that reduced Ash1l
expression has tissue-specific effects on mammalian development and adult
homeostasis. Mutants exhibit partially penetrant postnatal lethality and failure 
to thrive. Surviving mutants have growth insufficiency, skeletal transformations,
and infertility associated with developmental defects in both male and female
reproductive organs. Specifically, expression of Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 are altered in
the epididymis of Ash1l mutant males and Hoxa10 is reduced in the uterus of Ash1l
mutant females. In summary, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ash1l is
important for the development and function of several tissues and for proper
expression of homeotic genes in mammals.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4712006 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26333994  [PubMed - in process]


9. World J Surg Oncol. 2015 Aug 28;13:259. doi: 10.1186/s12957-015-0673-8.

MicroRNA-10b promotes migration and invasion through Hoxd10 in human gastric
cancer.

Wang YY(1), Li L(2), Ye ZY(3), Zhao ZS(4), Yan ZL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastrointestinal Surgery and Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial
People's Hospital, Hangzhou, 310014, People's Republic of China.
lywyy1979@126.Com. (2)Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology of Zhejiang Province,
Hangzhou, 310014, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China. liydeshy@163.com.
(3)Departments of Gastrointestinal Surgery and Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial
People's Hospital, Hangzhou, 310014, People's Republic of China.
zaiyuanye@163.com. (4)Departments of Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial People's
Hospital, Hangzhou, 310014, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.
zhaozhongsheng1950@163.com. (5)Departments of Gastrointestinal Surgery and
Pathology, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, Hangzhou, 310014, People's
Republic of China. zlongyan@126.Com.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to investigate the effect of miR-10b overexpression
on cancer cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and Hoxd10 expression.
METHODS: The effect of miR-10b on proliferation, migration, and invasion of
MKN-28, BGC-823, and SGC-7901 cells and the expression of Hoxd10 protein in
SGC-7901 and BGC-823 cells were detected following transfection of miR-10b
inhibitor or Negative Control B. Expression of Hoxd10 protein in 436
paraffin-embedded cancer tissues was also investigated.
RESULTS: miR-10b was significantly upregulated in AGS, MKN-28, BGC-823, HCG-27,
SGC-7901, and MKN-45 cell lines, miR-10b inhibitor significantly inhibited
proliferation and migration of MKN-45, BGC-823 and SGC-7901 cells 48 h after
transfection, while Hoxd10 protein in these cells lines had increased 72 h after 
transfection. Hoxd10 was highly expressed in gastric cancer and correlated with
size of tumor, Lauren classification, depth of invasion, lymph node and distant
metastasis, Tumor-Node-Metastasis (TNM) stage, and prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-10b promotes migration and invasion through Hoxd10 in human
gastric cancer cell lines and may play an important role in tumorigenesis,
progression, and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4551748
PMID: 26311318  [PubMed - in process]


10. Oncol Rep. 2015 Oct;34(4):1681-91. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4194. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

HOXD10 acts as a tumor-suppressive factor via inhibition of the RHOC/AKT/MAPK
pathway in human cholangiocellular carcinoma.

Yang H(1), Zhou J(2), Mi J(3), Ma K(1), Fan Y(1), Ning J(1), Wang C(1), Wei X(1),
Zhao H(4), Li E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710062, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical 
Oncology, Xi'an Chest Hospital of Shaanxi, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan Science and
Technology University, Luoyang, Henan 471003, P.R. China. (4)Department of
General Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038, P.R. China.

HOXD10, a key regulator of cell-differentiated phenotype maintainence, has been
demonstrated to be involved in the tumorigenesis of many human malignacies.
However, the status of HOXD10 expression and its biological function in
cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) remain to be clarified. In the present study,
we investigated the clinical significance and biological functions of HOXD10 in
CCC and found that the expression of HOXD10 and its downstream effector RHOC was 
significantly different in well-differentiated CCC tissues compared with
poorly-differentiated lesions. We also observed a significant correlation between
low HOXD10 and high RHOC expression levels and worse prognosis. The stable
overexpression of HOXD10 by lentivirus vector significantly inhibited cell
invasion partly by downregulating the expression of MMP2 and MMP9, and
significantly increased early apoptosis in CCC cell lines and induced G1 phase
cell cycle arrest, contributing to the inhibition of cell proliferation in vitro.
Additionally, we demonstrated that the inactivation of the RHOC/AKT/MAPK pathway 
was involved in the tumor-suppressive functions of HOXD10 in CCC. These results
suggested that HOXD10 may be a putative suppressor gene and can act as a
prognostic marker and potentially a novel therapeutic target for CCC.

PMCID: PMC4564083
PMID: 26260613  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):5071-9. eCollection 2015.

Augmented miR-10b expression associated with depressed expression of its target
gene KLF4 involved in gastric carcinoma.

Ma Z(1), Chen Y(1), Min L(1), Li L(1), Huang H(1), Li J(1), Yan Q(2), Song P(3), 
Dai L(1), Yao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Huzhou Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou Central Hospital Huzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (2)Department of Surgery, Huzhou Central Hospital Huzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Huzhou Central Hospital Huzhou,
Zhejiang, China.

Previous studies have revealed several targets of miR-10b, such as syndecan-1,
HOXD10, TBX5, and E-cadherin. In this study, we aimed to assess whether
Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is a target gene of miR-10b in gastric cancer (GC). 
Targeting of KLF4 by miR-10b was confirmed by dual-luciferase reporter assays.
The expression levels of miR-10b and KLF4 mRNA in 5 different gastric cancer cell
lines and 65 pairs of gastric cancer tissues were detected by Real-time PCR. In
addition, KLF4 protein in gastric cancer cell lines and 30 GC tissues was
measured by western blotting and immunochemistry, respectively. KLF4 is a direct 
target gene of miR-10b in GC, and its expression is reduced by miR-10b at both
mRNA and protein levels. In addition, the expression level of miR-10b was
tendentiously upregulated in GC tissues while the expression levels of KLF4 mRNA 
and protein were decreased in gastric cancer tissues compared with normal
adjacent tissue. There was a dramatically inverse correlation between the
expression levels of miR-10b and KLF4 mRNA in GC (r=-0.339, P=0.006). These
findings indicate that miR-10b was upregulated in GC and may have a key role in
GC pathogenesis and development through the downregulation of its target gene
KLF4.

PMCID: PMC4503073
PMID: 26191201  [PubMed - in process]


12. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 8;5:11724. doi: 10.1038/srep11724.

Bridging Links between Long Noncoding RNA HOTAIR and HPV Oncoprotein E7 in
Cervical Cancer Pathogenesis.

Sharma S(1), Mandal P(1), Sadhukhan T(1), Roy Chowdhury R(2), Ranjan Mondal N(2),
Chakravarty B(2), Chatterjee T(2), Roy S(3), Sengupta S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Netaji Subhas Sanatorium, 2nd
Floor, P.O. N.S.S, Kalyani 741251, West Bengal, India. (2)Department of
Gynecology, Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre and Research Institute, Kolkata,India.
(3)Sri Aurobindo Seva Kendra, 1H, Gariahat Road (S) Jodhpur Park, Kolkata-700068,
West Bengal, India.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 oncoprotein E7 plays a major role in cervical 
carcinogenesis by interacting with and functionally inactivating various host
regulatory molecules. Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) HOTAIR is one such regulator
that recruits chromatin remodelling complex PRC2, creating gene silencing
H3K27<U+2009>me3 marks. Hence, we hypothesized that HOTAIR could be a potential target
of E7, in HPV16 related cervical cancers (CaCx). We identified significant linear
trend of progressive HOTAIR down-regulation through HPV negative controls, HPV16 
positive non-malignants and CaCx samples. Majority of CaCx cases portrayed HOTAIR
down-regulation in comparison to HPV negative controls, with corresponding
up-regulation of HOTAIR target, HOXD10, and enrichment of cancer related
pathways. However, a small subset had significantly higher HOTAIR expression,
concomitant with high E7 expression and enrichment of metastatic pathways.
Expression of HOTAIR and PRC2-complex members (EZH2 and SUZ12), showed
significant positive correlation with E7 expression in CaCx cases and E7
transfected C33A cell line, suggestive of interplay between E7 and HOTAIR.
Functional inactivation of HOTAIR by direct interaction with E7 could also be
predicted by in silico analysis and confirmed by RNA-Immunoprecipitation. Our
study depicts one of the causal mechanisms of cervical carcinogenesis by HPV16
E7, through modulation of HOTAIR expression and function.

PMCID: PMC4495428
PMID: 26152361  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Cancer. 2015 May 21;14:108. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0371-8.

The long noncoding RNA HOTAIR has tissue and cell type-dependent effects on HOX
gene expression and phenotype of urothelial cancer cells.

Heubach J(1), Monsior J(2), Deenen R(3), Niegisch G(4), Szarvas T(5,)(6),
Niedworok C(7), Schulz WA(8), Hoffmann MJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf,
Moorenstr. 5, 40225, Duesseldorf, Germany. judith.heubach@hhu.de. (2)Department
of Urology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Moorenstr. 5,
40225, Duesseldorf, Germany. juliana.monsior@hhu.de. (3)Biomedical and Medical
Research Center, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Universitaetsstr. 1,
40225, Duesseldorf, Germany. rene.deenen@hhu.de. (4)Department of Urology,
Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, 40225,
Duesseldorf, Germany. Guenter.Niegisch@med.uni-duesseldorf.de. (5)Department of
Urology, University of Duisburg- Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147, Essen, Germany.
sztibusz@gmail.com. (6)Department of Urology, Semmelweis University, Ülloi ut
78/b, 1082, Budapest, Hungary. sztibusz@gmail.com. (7)Department of Urology,
University of Duisburg- Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147, Essen, Germany.
Christian.Niedworok@uk-essen.de. (8)Department of Urology, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, 40225, Duesseldorf, Germany.
wolfgang.schulz@hhu.de. (9)Department of Urology, Medical Faculty,
Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, 40225, Duesseldorf, Germany.
michele.hoffmann@uni-duesseldorf.de.

BACKGROUND: Urothelial carcinoma (UC) is the fifth most common cancer in the
developed world. Delineation of differentiation subtypes in UC highlighted the
importance of aberrant differentiation. Understanding underlying mechanisms may
facilitate diagnosis and development of efficient therapy strategies. It is well 
accepted that epigenetic mechanisms are involved. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), 
a new class of epigenetic factors, are thought to mediate molecular differences
between cell types to control cellular identity. The present study focuses on the
lncRNA HOTAIR, originating from the HOXC locus. Its overexpression induces an
aggressive phenotype in many cancers and aberrant expression of homeotic HOX
transcription factors, especially HOXD10, that regulate differentiation and
tissue homeostasis. The aim of the present study was to determine the functional 
role of HOTAIR in UC with regard to aggressive phenotype, regulation of aberrant 
differentiation and altered HOX gene expression.
METHODS: We determined RNA expression levels of HOTAIR and HOX genes in UC
tissues and cell lines. Knockdown of HOTAIR and ectopic overexpression was
performed to determine the effect on reported target genes in UC. Cell lines were
stably transfected with HOTAIR to investigate changes in phenotype and HOX gene
expression.
RESULTS: HOTAIR was overexpressed in approximately half of UC tissues and cell
lines. Effects of HOTAIR overexpression differed between cell lines. Whereas
VM-CUB1 cells acquired the expected phenotype with increased proliferation,
clonogenicity, anchorage independent growth, migratory activity and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, 5637 cells grew more slowly displaying
induction of senescence and related immune response genes. Other UC lines showed 
intermediate effects. Expression profiling revealed divergent effects on HOX
genes, cell cycle regulators and differentiation according with the phenotypic
differences between HOTAIR-overexpressing VM-CUB1 and 5637 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that HOTAIR overexpression may affect
differentiation state and aggressiveness of UC cells, but in a cell-type
dependent manner. Our functional studies and the comparison of our expression
data sets with those from other cancer cell types, which revealed minimal
overlaps, indicate that effects of HOTAIR are strongly tissue-dependent and can
even differ within one cancer type. Thus, HOTAIR functions and target genes
cannot simply be transferred from one cancer type to the other.

PMCID: PMC4455698
PMID: 25994132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 15;6:6879. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7879.

miR-1269 promotes metastasis and forms a positive feedback loop with TGF-ß.

Bu P(1), Wang L(2), Chen KY(3), Rakhilin N(3), Sun J(4), Closa A(5), Tung KL(2), 
King S(2), Kristine Varanko A(2), Xu Y(2), Huan Chen J(6), Zessin AS(7), Shealy
J(3), Cummings B(8), Hsu D(7), Lipkin SM(9), Moreno V(5), Gümüs ZH(10), Shen
X(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
New York 14853, USA [2] Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. (2)Department of Biological and Environmental
Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. (3)School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA. (4)1] Departments of Medicine, Genetic Medicine and Surgery, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA [2] Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA. (5)1]
Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona 08193, Spain 
[2] Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology-IDIBELL,
CIBERESP, Barcelona E08907, Spain. (6)Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. (7)Division of Medical Oncology,
Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
(8)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA. (9)Departments of Medicine, Genetic Medicine and Surgery, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA. (10)1] Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York
10065, USA [2] Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10065, USA. (11)1] School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA [2] Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York 14853, USA [3] Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

As patient survival drops precipitously from early-stage cancers to late-stage
and metastatic cancers, microRNAs that promote relapse and metastasis can serve
as prognostic and predictive markers as well as therapeutic targets for
chemoprevention. Here we show that miR-1269a promotes colorectal cancer (CRC)
metastasis and forms a positive feedback loop with TGF-ß signalling. miR-1269a is
upregulated in late-stage CRCs, and long-term monitoring of 100 stage II CRC
patients revealed that miR-1269a expression in their surgically removed primary
tumours is strongly associated with risk of CRC relapse and metastasis.
Consistent with clinical observations, miR-1269a significantly increases the
ability of CRC cells to invade and metastasize in vivo. TGF-ß activates miR-1269 
via Sox4, while miR-1269a enhances TGF-ß signalling by targeting Smad7 and
HOXD10, hence forming a positive feedback loop. Our findings suggest that
miR-1269a is a potential marker to inform adjuvant chemotherapy decisions for CRC
patients and a potential therapeutic target to deter metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4399006
PMID: 25872451  [PubMed - in process]


15. Genomics Inform. 2014 Dec;12(4):247-53. doi: 10.5808/GI.2014.12.4.247. Epub 2014 
Dec 31.

Analysis of gene expression in cyclooxygenase-2-overexpressed human osteosarcoma 
cell lines.

Han JA(1), Kim JY(2), Kim JI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Kangwon National University 
School of Medicine, Chuncheon 200-701, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea. ; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul
National University Graduate School, Seoul 110-799, Korea. ; Genomic Medicine
Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799,
Korea.

Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone tumor, generally affecting young
people. While the etiology of osteosarcoma has been largely unknown, recent
studies have suggested that cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) plays a critical role in the
proliferation, migration, and invasion of osteosarcoma cells. To understand the
mechanism of action of COX-2 in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma, we compared
gene expression patterns between three stable COX-2-overexpressing cell lines and
three control cell lines derived from U2OS human osteosarcoma cells. The data
showed that 56 genes were upregulated, whereas 20 genes were downregulated, in
COX-2-overexpressed cell lines, with an average fold-change > 1.5. Among the
upregulated genes, COL1A1, COL5A2, FBN1, HOXD10, RUNX2, and TRAPPC2are involved
in bone and skeletal system development, while DDR2, RAC2, RUNX2, and TSPAN31are 
involved in the positive regulation of cell proliferation. Among the
downregulated genes, HIST1H1D, HIST1H2AI, HIST1H3H, and HIST1H4C are involved in 
nucleosome assembly and DNA packaging. These results may provide useful
information to elucidate the molecular mechanism of the COX-2-mediated malignant 
phenotype in osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4330262
PMID: 25705166  [PubMed]


16. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1613-25. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988048.

Overexpression of HOX genes is prevalent in Ewing sarcoma and is associated with 
altered epigenetic regulation of developmental transcription programs.

Svoboda LK(1), Harris A, Bailey NJ, Schwentner R, Tomazou E, von Levetzow C,
Magnuson B, Ljungman M, Kovar H, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)a Translational Oncology Program and the Departments of Pediatric and
Communicable Diseases; University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , MI USA.

The polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 are highly overexpressed by Ewing sarcoma
(ES), a tumor of stem cell origin that is driven by EWS-ETS fusion oncogenes,
most commonly EWS-FLI1. In the current study we analyzed expression of
transcription programs that are controlled by polycomb proteins during embryonic 
development to determine if they are abnormal in ES. Our results show that
polycomb target gene expression in ES deviates from normal tissues and stem cells
and that, as expected, most targets are relatively repressed. However, we also
discovered a paradoxical up regulation of numerous polycomb targets and these
were highly enriched for homeobox (HOX) genes. Comparison of HOX profiles between
malignant and non-malignant tissues revealed a distinctive HOX profile in ES,
which was characterized by overexpression of posterior HOXD genes. In addition,
ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 during stem cell differentiation led to aberrant
up regulation of posterior HOXD genes. Mechanistically, this up regulation was
associated with altered epigenetic regulation. Specifically, ES and EWS-FLI1+
stem cells displayed a relative loss of polycomb-dependent H3K27me3 and gain of
trithorax-dependent H3K4me3 at the promoters of posterior HOXD genes and also at 
the HOXD11.12 polycomb response element. In addition, a striking correlation was 
evident between HOXD13 and other genes whose regulation is coordinately regulated
during embryonic development by distal enhancer elements. Together, these studies
demonstrate that epigenetic regulation of polycomb target genes, in particular
HOXD genes, is altered in ES and that these changes are mediated downstream of
EWS-FLI1.

PMCID: PMC4622732
PMID: 25625846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Oncol Rep. 2015 Mar;33(3):1275-83. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3737. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

MicroRNA-10b is upregulated and has an invasive role in colorectal cancer through
enhanced Rhoc expression.

Wang YF(1), Li Z(1), Zhao XH(2), Zuo XM(3), Zhang Y(1), Xiao YH(1), Li J(1), Peng
ZH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Yangpu Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200090, P.R. China. (2)Central Experiment Laboratory, Yangpu
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200090, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Yangpu Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200090, P.R. China. (4)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai
First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 201620, P.R. China.

We found that the difference in miR-10b expression between the tumor tissue and
adjacent non-tumor tissue was significant. Outer periphery and portal vein serum 
miR-10b concentrations were significantly higher than those of the control.
However, the outer periphery vein miR-10b concentrations were not significant
when compared with the portal vein serum concentration in colorectal cancer. The 
expression levels of miR-10b were associated with higher-grade colorectal cancer.
MiR-10b levels were markedly elevated in lymph node metastasis-positive tumor
tissue compared with those in lymph node metastasis-free tumor tissue, and were
correlated with a downregulation in Hoxd10 expression. Rhoc protein expression in
tumor tissue was significantly amplified when compared to that of the control
tissue group. An inverse correlation between Hoxd10 and Rhoc in
immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis was observed (P<0.05). MiR-10b
expression was also inversely correlated with Hoxd10 protein expression (P<0.05).
Thus, miR-10b is potentially involved in the invasion of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 25606801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Control Release. 2015 Jan 10;197:208-18. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.11.010.
Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Simultaneous delivery of therapeutic antagomirs with paclitaxel for the
management of metastatic tumors by a pH-responsive anti-microbial
peptide-mediated liposomal delivery system.

Zhang Q(1), Ran R(1), Zhang L(1), Liu Y(1), Mei L(1), Zhang Z(1), Gao H(1), He
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Drug Targeting and Drug Delivery Systems, West China School 
of Pharmacy, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative Innovation
Center of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Drug Targeting and Drug Delivery Systems, West China 
School of Pharmacy, and State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy/Collaborative
Innovation Center of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, 610041, China. Electronic address: qinhe@scu.edu.cn.

The roles of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the regulation of metastasis have been widely 
recognized in the recent years. Mir-10b antagomir (antagomir-10b) was shown to
impede metastasis through the down-regulation of mir-10b; however, it could not
stunt the growth of primary tumors. In this study we showed that the co-delivery 
of antagomir-10b with paclitaxel (PTX) by a novel liposomal delivery system
modified with an anti-microbial peptide [D]-H6L9 (D-Lip) could significantly both
hinder the migration of 4T1 cells and induce evident cellular apoptosis and cell 
death in the meantime. The histidines in the sequence of [D]-H6L9 allowed the
peptide to get protonated under pH5.0 (mimicking the lysosome/endosome
environment), and strong membrane lytic effect could thus be activated, leading
to the escape of liposomes from the lysosomes and the decrease of of mir-10b
expression. The in vivo and ex vivo fluorescence imaging showed that D-Lip could 
reach 4T1 tumors efficaciously. Incorporation of PTX did not influence the
antagomir-10b delivery effect of D-Lip; for the in vivo tumor inhibition assay,
compared with all the other groups, the combination of antagomir-10b and PTX
delivered by D-Lip could prominently delay the growth of 4T1 tumors and reduce
the lung metastases at the same time, and the expression of Hoxd10 in tumors was 
also significantly up-regulated. Taken together, these results demonstrated that 
D-Lip could act as a sufficient tool in co-delivering antagomir-10b and PTX.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Cancer. 2014 Nov 26;13:256. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-256.

Exosome-mediated transfer of miR-10b promotes cell invasion in breast cancer.

Singh R, Pochampally R, Watabe K, Lu Z(1), Mo YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, PR China.
lzh_01@netease.com.

INTRODUCTION: Exosomes are 30-100 nm membrane vesicles of endocytic origin,
mediating diverse biological functions including tumor cell invasion, cell-cell
communication and antigen presentation through transfer of proteins, mRNAs and
microRNAs. Recent evidence suggests that microRNAs can be released through
ceramide-dependent secretory machinery regulated by neutral sphingomyelinase 2
(nSMase2) enzyme encoded by the smpd3 gene that triggers exosome secretion.
However, whether exosome-mediated microRNA transfer plays any role in cell
invasion remains poorly understood. Thus, the aim of this study was to identify
the exosomal microRNAs involved in breast cancer invasion.
METHODS: The expression level of endogenous and exosomal miRNAs were examined by 
real time PCR and the expression level of target proteins were detected by
western blot. Scanning electron and confocal microscopy were used to characterize
exosomes and to study its uptake and transfer. Luciferase reporter plasmids and
its mutant were used to confirm direct targeting. Furthermore, the functional
significance of exosomal miR-10b was estimated by invasion assay.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that microRNA carrying exosomes can be
transferred among different cell lines through direct uptake. miR-10b is highly
expressed in metastatic breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells as compared to
non-metastatic breast cancer cells or non-malignant breast cells; it is actively 
secreted into medium via exosomes. In particular, nSMase2 or ceramide promotes
the exosome-mediated miR-10b secretion whereas ceramide inhibitor suppresses this
secretion. Moreover, upon uptake, miR-10b can suppress the protein level of its
target genes such as HOXD10 and KLF4, indicating its functional significance.
Finally, treatment with exosomes derived from MDA-MB-231 cells could induce the
invasion ability of non-malignant HMLE cells.
CONCLUSION: Together, our results suggest that a set of specific microRNAs may
play an important role in modulating tumor microenvironment through exosomes.
Thus, a better understanding of this process may aid in the development of novel 
therapeutic agents.

PMCID: PMC4258287
PMID: 25428807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8803-15.

POU2F1 activity regulates HOXD10 and HOXD11 promoting a proliferative and
invasive phenotype in head and neck cancer.

Sharpe DJ(1), Orr KS(1), Moran M(1), White SJ(2), McQuaid S(3), Lappin TR(1),
Thompson A(1), James JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast, BT9 7BL. (2)Pathology Department, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School,
Dundee, DD1 9SY. (3)The Northern Ireland Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Centre
for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn
Road, Belfast, BT9 7BL and The Belfast Trust, Belfast City Hospital, Lisburn
Road, Belfast. (4)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University
Belfast, Belfast, BT9 7BL. The Northern Ireland Molecular Pathology Laboratory,
Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast,
BT9 7BL and The Belfast Trust, Belfast City Hospital, Lisburn Road, Belfast.

HOX genes are master regulators of organ morphogenesis and cell differentiation
during embryonic development, and continue to be expressed throughout post-natal 
life. To test the hypothesis that HOX genes are dysregulated in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) we defined their expression profile, and
investigated the function, transcriptional regulation and clinical relevance of a
subset of highly expressed HOXD genes. Two HOXD genes, D10 and D11, showed
strikingly high levels in HNSCC cell lines, patient tumor samples and publicly
available datasets. Knockdown of HOXD10 in HNSCC cells caused decreased
proliferation and invasion, whereas knockdown of HOXD11 reduced only invasion.
POU2F1 consensus sequences were identified in the 5' DNA of HOXD10 and D11.
Knockdown of POU2F1 significantly reduced expression of HOXD10 and D11 and
inhibited HNSCC proliferation. Luciferase reporter constructs of the HOXD10 and
D11 promoters confirmed that POU2F1 consensus binding sites are required for
optimal promoter activity. Utilizing patient tumor samples a significant
association was found between immunohistochemical staining of HOXD10 and both the
overall and the disease-specific survival, adding further support that HOXD10 is 
dysregulated in head and neck cancer. Additional studies are now warranted to
fully evaluate HOXD10 as a prognostic tool in head and neck cancers.

PMCID: PMC4226723
PMID: 25301728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Transl Med. 2014 Sep 19;12:234. doi: 10.1186/s12967-014-0234-x.

miR-10b is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma and promotes cell
proliferation, migration and invasion through RhoC, uPAR and MMPs.

Liao CG, Kong LM, Zhou P, Yang XL, Huang JG, Zhang HL, Lu N.

BACKGROUND: Recently, miR-10b is identified as a miRNA highly expressed in many
human cancers, promoting cell migration and invasion. However, the specific
function of miR-10b in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is unclear at this point.
METHODS: The miR-10b expression levels in 60 paired different TNM Stage HCC tumor
tissues compared with adjacent non-tumor (ANT) tissues, normal tissue control (8 
benign tumor and 7 normal liver tissues), 3 normal liver and 7 HCC cell lines
were measured by real-time quantitative RT-PCR and to evaluate their association 
with HCC clinicopathologic features. Invasion assay, MTT proliferation assay and 
wound-healing assay were performed to test the invasion and proliferation of HCC 
cell after transfection. The effect of miR-10b on HCC in vivo was validated by
murine xenograft model.
RESULTS: We found that miR-10b expression was increased in human HCC tissues and 
cell lines compared with normal control, respectively. The expression of miR-10b 
was correlated with HCC metastatic ability. Overexpression of miR-10b in MHCC-97L
cells increased cell motility and invasiveness, whereas inhibition of miR-10b in 
MHCC-97H cells reduced cell motility and invasiveness in vitro and in vivo. We
also showed that HOXD10 was negatively regulated by miR-10b at the
posttranscriptional level, via a specific target site within the 3'UTR by
luciferase reporter assay. Furthermore, we found that miR-10b induced HCC cell
invasion and migration by modulating the HOXD10 target gene RhoC, uPAR, MMP-2 and
MMP-9 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that miR-10b was overexpressed in HCC and
promoted HCC cell migration and invasion through the HOXD10/ RhoC/ uPAR/ MMPs
pathway which may provide a novel bio-target for HCC therapy.

PMCID: PMC4192292
PMID: 25236186  [PubMed - in process]


22. Tumour Biol. 2014 Nov;35(11):10855-60. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2324-z. Epub 2014 
Aug 1.

HOXD10 expression in human breast cancer.

Vardhini NV(1), Rao PJ, Murthy PB, Sudhakar G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Toxicology, International Institute of Biotechnology and
Toxicology (IIBAT), Padappai, Tamil Nadu, India, vardhini_n1@yahoo.com.

Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy among females. In this study, we
analyzed the expression pattern of a homeobox gene (HOXD10) in human invasive
ductal breast cancer tissues and normal tissues. With the ACTB (ß-actin) gene as 
a reference, HOXD10 was detected in 60 breast cancer tissues by using the
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) method with the Relative Expression Software
Tool (REST). We found that the HOXD10 expression level was significantly
different between cancerous and normal tissues. Downregulation of the HOXD10 gene
expression was examined in high-grade samples. Low-grade tissue showed no
difference from the control group. HOXD10 expression was reduced in grade II
breast carcinoma tissues. This data reveal that misexpression of the HOXD10 gene 
supports the development and involvement in breast cancer and may serve as a
potential biomarker for the diagnosis of human ductal invasive breast carcinoma.

PMID: 25081374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Stem Cells. 2014 Nov;32(11):2858-68. doi: 10.1002/stem.1795.

MiR-7, inhibited indirectly by lincRNA HOTAIR, directly inhibits SETDB1 and
reverses the EMT of breast cancer stem cells by downregulating the STAT3 pathway.

Zhang H(1), Cai K, Wang J, Wang X, Cheng K, Shi F, Jiang L, Zhang Y, Dou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to tumor invasion and
metastasis in many cancers and correlates highly with the acquisition of cancer
stem cell (CSC) characteristics. EMT also correlates with changes in specific
microRNAs (miRNAs) that have already been integrated into tumorigenic programs as
either oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. Here, we show that miR-7, which was
downregulated in breast CSCs (BCSCs) isolated from the human MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
cell lines, inhibited cell invasion and metastasis, decreased the BCSC population
and partially reversed EMT in MDA-MB-231 cells by directly targeting the
oncogene, SETDB1. The conspicuous epigenetic transition induced by miR-7
overexpression was found not only in MDA-MB-231 cells but also in BCSC xenograft 
tumors. MiR-7 inhibited the metastasis of BCSCs in lungs, kidneys, and adrenal
glands of NOD/SCID mice. ChIP-polymerase chain reaction result suggested that the
SETDB1 induced STAT3 expression by binding to the promoter of STAT3.
MiR-7-mediated downregulation of SETDB1 resulted in the suppression of STAT3,
which led to the downregulation of c-myc, twist, and mir-9. In addition, the
downregulation of miR-7 in BCSCs may be indirectly attributed to lincRNA HOTAIR
by modulating the expression of HoxD10 that promotes the expression of miR-7.
These findings demonstrate that miR-7 was a tumor suppressor and that the
overexpression of miR-7 might serve as a good strategy for treating highly
invasive breast cancer.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25070049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Br J Cancer. 2014 Aug 12;111(4):807-16. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.372. Epub 2014 Jul 
10.

The roles of HOXD10 in the development and progression of head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma (HNSCC).

Hakami F(1), Darda L(2), Stafford P(2), Woll P(3), Lambert DW(2), Hunter KD(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Unit of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TA, UK [2] Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, King Abdulaziz Medical City-WR, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Unit of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry,
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TA, UK. (3)Academic Unit of Clinical
Oncology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2SJ, UK. (4)1] Unit of Oral &
Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Clinical Dentistry, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2TA, UK [2] Department of Oral Pathology and Biology, University of
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: HOX gene expression is altered in many cancers; previous microarray
revealed changes in HOX gene expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma 
(HNSCC), particularly HOXD10.
METHODS: HOXD10 expression was assessed by qPCR and immunoblotting in vitro and
by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in tissues. Low-expressing cells were stably
transfected with HOXD10 and the phenotype assessed with MTS, migration and
adhesion assays and compared with the effects of siRNA knockdown in
high-HOXD10-expressing cells. Novel HOXD10 targets were identified using
expression microarrays, confirmed by reporter assay, and validated in tissues
using IHC.
RESULTS: HOXD10 expression was low in NOKs, high in most primary tumour cells,
and low in lymph node metastasis cells, a pattern confirmed using IHC in tissues.
Overexpression of HOXD10 decreased cell invasion but increased proliferation,
adhesion and migration, with knockdown causing reciprocal effects. There was no
consistent effect on apoptosis. Microarray analysis identified several putative
HOXD10-responsive genes, including angiomotin (AMOT-p80) and miR-146a. These were
confirmed as HOXD10 targets by reporter assay. Manipulation of AMOT-p80
expression resulted in phenotypic changes similar to those on manipulation of
HOXD10 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXD10 expression varies by stage of disease and produces
differential effects: high expression giving cancer cells a proliferative and
migratory advantage, and low expression may support invasion/metastasis, in part,
by modulating AMOT-p80 levels.

PMCID: PMC4134504
PMID: 25010866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4598-612. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3380. 
Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Large-scale characterization of DNA methylation changes in human gastric
carcinomas with and without metastasis.

Liu Z(1), Zhang J(2), Gao Y(1), Pei L(3), Zhou J(1), Gu L(1), Zhang L(4), Zhu
B(5), Hattori N(6), Ji J(4), Yuasa Y(7), Kim W(8), Ushijima T(6), Shi H(9), Deng 
D(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Division of Etiology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and
Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Division of Etiology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. Shihezi
University School of Medicine, Shihezi, China. (3)GRU Cancer Center, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (4)Department of Surgery, Peking University
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. (5)Department of
Oncology, Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, 
China. (6)Division of Epigenetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Molecular Oncology, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Pathology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Jongno-gu, Seoul, Korea. (9)GRU Cancer
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. dengdajun@bjmu.edu.cn
hshi@gru.edu. (10)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research
(Ministry of Education), Division of Etiology, Peking University Cancer Hospital 
and Institute, Fu-Cheng-Lu, Beijing, China. dengdajun@bjmu.edu.cn hshi@gru.edu.

PURPOSE: Metastasis is the leading cause of death for gastric carcinoma. An
epigenetic biomarker panel for predicting gastric carcinoma metastasis could have
significant clinical impact on the care of patients with gastric carcinoma. The
main purpose of this study is to characterize the methylation differences between
gastric carcinomas with and without metastasis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles between 4 metastatic
and 4 nonmetastatic gastric carcinomas and their surgical margins (SM) were
analyzed using methylated-CpG island amplification with microarray. The
methylation states of 73 candidate genes were further analyzed in patients with
gastric carcinoma in a discovery cohort (n=108) using denatured high performance 
liquid chromatography, bisulfite-sequencing, and MethyLight. The predictive
values of potential metastasis-methylation biomarkers were validated in cohorts
of patients with gastric carcinoma in China (n=330), Japan (n=129), and Korea
(n=153).
RESULTS: The gastric carcinoma genome showed significantly higher proportions of 
hypomethylation in the promoter and exon-1 regions, as well as increased
hypermethylation of intragenic fragments when compared with SMs. Significant
differential methylation was validated in the CpG islands of 15 genes (P<0.05)
and confirmed using bisulfite sequencing. These genes included BMP3, BNIP3,
CDKN2A, ECEL1, ELK1, GFRA1, HOXD10, KCNH1, PSMD10, PTPRT, SIGIRR, SRF, TBX5,
TFPI2, and ZNF382. Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 resulted in up- 
or downregulation of their transcription. Most importantly, the prevalence of
GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 methylation alterations was consistently and coordinately 
associated with gastric carcinoma metastasis and the patients' overall survival
throughout discovery and validation cohorts in China, Japan, and Korea.
CONCLUSION: Methylation changes of GFRA1, SRF, and ZNF382 may be a potential
biomarker set for prediction of gastric carcinoma metastasis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4309661
PMID: 25009298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 May 15;7(5):1244-54. eCollection 2014.

Gene microarray analysis of the lncRNA expression profile in human urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder.

Luo H(1), Zhao X(1), Wan X(1), Huang S(1), Wu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji University Shanghai 200065,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the expression profile variation of lncRNAs in normal
urinary bladder tissue and urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder through
microarray technology. The differentially expressed lncRNAs were identified and
classified, and their biological information was analyzed. The data obtained in
the study will prove helpful for the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three specimens of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and
three specimens of normal bladder tissue were identified by histology. The total 
RNA was isolated from the bladder urothelial carcinomas and normal tissue and
purified. The targets were mixed and hybridized with the genes on the microarray,
which contained thirty thousand lncRNAs. The bladder urothelial carcinomas were
then compared with the normal bladder tissue. The lncRNAs that were
differentially expressed between the two groups were identified based on the
signal-to-noise ratios using the Agilent Feature Extraction software and were
analyzed with the Agilent Genespring GX software (Agilent). The outcome was
obtained, and the biological information of these genes was deposited in GenBank.
RESULTS: The expression profile of lncRNAs was significantly different between
normal bladder tissue and urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Compared with
normal bladder tissue, 1,122 lncRNAs exhibited at least a twofold, significant
difference (P < 0.05) and are thus regarded as differentially expressed lncRNAs. 
Of these, 734 and 388 lncRNAs were upregulated and down regulated. The
differentially expressed lncRNAs in the urothelial carcinoma of the bladder are
distributed on every chromosome, and most of these lncRNAs are distributed on
chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and X.
CONCLUSIONS: Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a complicated disease that
involves the regulation of multiple genes and the participation of multiple
chromosomes. Some of the differentially expressed lncRNAs that were upregulated, 
such as AK124776, lincRNA-RAB12-1, KRT8P25, RP11-474J18.4, AC000110.1, KRT8P13,
KRT8P10, BC072678, and downregulated, such as nc-HOXB9-206, RP11-160A10.2,
nc-HOXA11-86, nc-HOXD10-7, nc-HOXB9-205, CES4, nc-HOXD12-3, systematic research
on these lncRNAs will help clarify the mechanisms of urothelial carcinoma of the 
bladder and guide the early diagnosis and treatment of this cancer in the future.

PMCID: PMC4073740
PMID: 24995079  [PubMed]


27. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1839(9):793-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.06.011. 
Epub 2014 Jun 21.

Akt1 mediates the posterior Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modifications
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Kong KA(1), Lee JY(1), Oh JH(1), Lee Y(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox genes are organized in clusters and expressed
colinearly to specify body patterning during embryonic development. Previously,
Akt1 has been identified as a putative Hox gene regulator through in silico
analysis. Substantial upregulation of consecutive 5' Hoxc genes has been observed
when Akt1 is absent in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells. In this study, we 
provide evidence that Akt1 regulates the 5' Hoxc gene expression by epigenetic
modifications. Enrichment of histone H3K9 acetylation and a low level of the
H3K27me3 mark were detected at the posterior 5' Hoxc loci when Akt1 is absent. A 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor de-repressed 5' Hoxc gene expression when
Akt1 is present, and a DNA demethylating reagent synergistically upregulated
HDAC-induced 5' Hoxc gene expression. A knockdown study revealed that Hdac6 is
mediated in the Hoxc12 repression through direct binding to the transcription
start site (TSS) in the presence of Akt1. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that endogenous Akt1 directly interacted with Hdac6. Furthermore,
exogenous Akt1 was enriched at the promoter region of the posterior Hoxc genes
such as Hoxc11 and Hoxc12, not the Akt1-independent Hoxc5 and Hoxd10 loci. The
regulation of the H3K27me3 mark by Ezh2 and Kdm6b at the 5' Hoxc gene promoter
turned out to be Akt1 dependent. Taken together, these results suggest that Akt1 
mediates the posterior 5' Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modification
such as histone methylation and acetylation, and partly through a direct binding 
to the promoter region of the 5' Hoxc genes and/or Hdac6 in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24955524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jun 4;13:142. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-142.

Evaluation of microRNA-10b prognostic significance in a prospective cohort of
breast cancer patients.

Parrella P(1), Barbano R, Pasculli B, Fontana A, Copetti M, Valori VM, Poeta ML, 
Perrone G, Righi D, Castelvetere M, Coco M, Balsamo T, Morritti M, Pellegrini F, 
Onetti-Muda A, Maiello E, Murgo R, Fazio VM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, Viale Padre Pio,
71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, (FG), Italy. pparrella@operapadrepio.it.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA-10b (miR-10b) has a prominent role in regulating tumor
invasion and metastasis by targeting the HOXD10 transcriptional repressor and has
been found up-regulated in several tumor types.
METHODS: We evaluated the expression of miR-10b in paired tumor and normal
specimens obtained from a prospective cohort of breast cancer patients with at
least 36 months follow-up enrolled according to the REMARK guidelines (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>150). 
RNA quality was measured and only samples with RNA Integrity Number (RIN) =7.0
were analyzed.
RESULTS: The relative expression of miR-10b in tumor as compared to its normal
counterpart (RER) was determined by RT-qPCR. miR-10b RERs were higher in the
subgroup of patients with synchronous metastases (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11, Median 0.25; IQR
0.11-1.02) as compared with patients without metastases (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>90, Median 0.09; IQR
0.04-0.29) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028). In the subgroup of patients without synchronous
metastases (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>90), higher miR-10b RERs were associated with increased risk of
disease progression and death in both univariable (HR 1.16, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021 and HR
1.20, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015 respectively for 0.10 unitary increase of miR-10b RERs levels)
and multivariable (HR1.30, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, and HR 1.31, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003 respectively for
0.10 unitary increase of miR-10b RERs levels) Cox regression models. The addition
of miR-10b RERs to the Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) provided an improvement 
in discrimination power and risk reclassification abilities for the clinical
outcomes at 36 months. Survival C-indices significantly increased from 0.849 to
0.889 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) for OS and from 0.735 to 0.767 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.050) for DFS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidences that the addition of miR-10b RERs to
the prognostic factors used in clinical routine could improve the prediction
abilities for both overall mortality and disease progression in breast cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC4055397
PMID: 24897960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 3;9(6):e98945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098945. eCollection 
2014.

Timed deletion of Twist1 in the limb bud reveals age-specific impacts on autopod 
and zeugopod patterning.

Loebel DA(1), Hor AC(2), Bildsoe HK(1), Tam PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New South
Wales, Australia; Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia. (2)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research
Institute, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

Twist1 encodes a transcription factor that plays a vital role in limb
development. We have used a tamoxifen-inducible Cre transgene, Ubc-CreERT2, to
generate time-specific deletions of Twist1 by inducing Cre activity in mouse
embryos at different ages from embryonic (E) day 9.5 onwards. A novel forelimb
phenotype of supernumerary pre-axial digits and enlargement or partial
duplication of the distal radius was observed when Cre activity was induced at
E9.5. Gene expression analysis revealed significant upregulation of Hoxd10,
Hoxd11 and Grem1 in the anterior half of the forelimb bud at E11.5. There is also
localized upregulation of Ptch1, Hand2 and Hoxd13 at the site of ectopic digit
formation, indicating a posterior molecular identity for the supernumerary
digits. The specific skeletal phenotypes, which include duplication of digits and
distal zeugopods but no overt posteriorization, differ from those of other Twist1
conditional knockout mutants. This outcome may be attributed to the deferment of 
Twist1 ablation to a later time frame of limb morphogenesis, which leads to the
ectopic activation of posterior genes in the anterior tissues after the
establishment of anterior-posterior anatomical identities in the forelimb bud.

PMCID: PMC4044014
PMID: 24893291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Front Zool. 2014 Apr 12;11(1):33. doi: 10.1186/1742-9994-11-33.

New developmental evidence supports a homeotic frameshift of digit identity in
the evolution of the bird wing.

Salinas-Saavedra M, Gonzalez-Cabrera C, Ossa-Fuentes L, Botelho JF, Ruiz-Flores
M, Vargas AO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Ontogenia y Filogenia, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de
Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Las Palmeras 3425, Ñuñoa, Santiago, Chile.
thearchosaur@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The homology of the digits in the bird wing is a high-profile
controversy in developmental and evolutionary biology. The embryonic position of 
the digits cartilages with respect to the primary axis (ulnare and ulna)
corresponds to 2, 3, 4, but comparative-evolutionary morphology supports 1, 2, 3.
A homeotic frameshift of digit identity in evolution could explain how cells in
embryonic positions 2, 3, 4 began developing morphologies 1, 2, 3. Another
alternative is that no re-patterning of cell fates occurred, and the primary axis
shifted its position by some other mechanism. In the wing, only the anterior
digit lacks expression of HoxD10 and HoxD12, resembling digit 1 of other limbs,
as predicted by 1, 2, 3. However, upon loss of digit 1 in evolution, the most
anterior digit 2 could have lost their expression, deceitfully resembling a digit
1. To test this notion, we observed HoxD10 and HoxD12 in a limb where digit 2 is 
the most anterior digit: The rabbit foot. We also explored whether early
inhibition of Shh signalling in the embryonic wing bud induces an experimental
homeotic frameshift, or an experimental axis shift. We tested these hypotheses
using DiI injections to study the fate of cells in these experimental wings.
RESULTS: We found strong transcription of HoxD10 and HoxD12 was present in the
most anterior digit 2 of the rabbit foot. Thus, we found no evidence to question 
the use of HoxD expression as support for 1, 2, 3. When Shh signalling in early
wing buds is inhibited, our fate maps demonstrate that an experimental homeotic
frameshift is induced.
CONCLUSION: Along with comparative morphology, HoxD expression provides strong
support for 1, 2, 3 identity of wing digits. As an explanation for the offset 2, 
3, 4 embryological position, the homeotic frameshift hypothesis is consistent
with known mechanisms of limb development, and further proven to be
experimentally possible. In contrast, the underlying mechanisms and experimental 
plausibility of an axis shift remain unclear.

PMCID: PMC3986427
PMID: 24725625  [PubMed]


32. J Oncol. 2014;2014:702527. doi: 10.1155/2014/702527. Epub 2014 Jan 30.

Evaluation of p53, HoxD10, and E-Cadherin Status in Breast Cancer and Correlation
with Histological Grade and Other Prognostic Factors.

Sekar P(1), Bharti JN(2), Nigam JS(1), Sharma A(1), Soni PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital, Hari Nagar, New Delhi
110066, India. (2)Department of Pathology, Maulana Azad Medical College, Bahadur 
Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002, India.

Background. Study of tumor molecular characteristics is necessary to understand
both the risk of breast cancer recurrence and the response to therapy. Aims. To
evaluate p53, HoxD10, and E-cadherin status in breast cancer and to correlate
with histological grade and other prognostic factors. Material and Methods. The
study was conducted in 60 cases of invasive ductal carcinoma NOS with 20 cases
belonging to each grade and evaluation of p53 was done by IHC and that of HoxD10 
and E Cadherin status by PCR and correlation was done with histological grade and
other prognostic factors. Result. p53 expression was seen in 71.67% (43/60) of
the tumors. HoxD10 gene was downregulated in 46.67% (28/60) of the tumors. p53
overexpression and lower HoxD10 mRNA levels showed statistically significant
association higher histological grade of the tumor (P < 0.05). CDH1 gene mutation
was seen in 60% (15/25) of the tumors. No significant association was found
between p53 expression, HoxD10 gene, CDH1 gene mutation, and other prognostic
factors. Conclusion. p53 over expression and lower HoxD10 mRNA levels were found 
to be significantly associated with higher grade tumours. This suggests that p53 
and HoxD10 gene play an important tumor suppressor role and the loss of which
results in breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3929168
PMID: 24634677  [PubMed]


33. Oncol Rep. 2014 Apr;31(4):1832-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3048. Epub 2014 Feb 24.

MicroRNA-10b promotes migration and invasion through KLF4 and HOXD10 in human
bladder cancer.

Xiao H(1), Li H(1), Yu G(1), Xiao W(2), Hu J(1), Tang K(1), Zeng J(1), He W(1),
Zeng G(3), Ye Z(1), Xu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China. (2)Translational 
Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China. (3)Department of Urology,
Minimally Invasive Surgery Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.R. China.

The present study was performed to investigate the effect of microRNA-10b
(miR-10b) on cell migration and invasion in human bladder cancer (BC). Real-time 
PCR was performed to detect the expression of miR-10b in BC cell lines. miR-10b
mimics, the negative control for mimics, miR-10b inhibitor and the negative
control for inhibitor were transfected into BC cell lines and the effects of
miR-10b on the migration and invasion of cells were investigated through
Transwell assay. Meanwhile, protein levels of KLF4, HOXD10, E-cadherin and MMP14 
were measured. Luciferase assays were also performed to validate KLF4 and HOXD10 
as miR-10b targets. In vivo metastasis assay was performed to validate if miR-10b
can promote BC cell line metastasis in vivo. miR-10b is significantly upregulated
in BC cell lines and metastatic tissues. Increased miR-10b expression
significantly enhanced BC cell migration and invasion, while decreased miR-10b
expression reduced cell migration and invasion. In vivo metastasis assay
demonstrated that overexpression of miR-10b markedly promoted BC metastasis.
Moreover, KLF4 and HOXD10 were identified as direct targets of miR-10b in BC
cells. Silencing of KLF4 or HOXD10 recapitulated the pro-metastatic function.
Furthermore, we found that E-cadherin and MMP14 may be the downstream factors of 
KLF4 and HOXD10 in the suppression of BC metastasis by miR-10b. These data
suggest that miR-10b may function as oncogenes in BC cells. Targeting these novel
strategies, inhibition of miR-10b/KLF4/E-cadherin axis and miR-10b/HOXD10/MMP14
axis may be helpful as a therapeutic approach to block BC cell metastasis.

PMID: 24573354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;29(4):781-90. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu004. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Regulation of endometrial receptivity by the highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and
HOXD10 HOX-class homeobox genes.

Xu B(1), Geerts D, Bu Z, Ai J, Jin L, Li Y, Zhang H, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
People's Republic of China.

STUDY QUESTION: Are other HOX genes, in addition to HOXA10, involved in
endometrial receptivity?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 genes also appear
to be involved in endometrial receptivity.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Within the HOX family of homeobox transcription factor
genes are the leading candidates for the regulation of embryonic implantation. A 
crucial role of HOXA10 in endometrial receptivity has been well established.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: To identify HOX candidate genes, we performed data 
mining on all 39 human HOX genes in the 'Human body index' gene expression
database of normal human tissue. The temporal and spatial expression pattern of
four highly expressed HOX genes in the human endometrium was determined. To
further investigate the function of these Hox genes, we used a robust in vivo
mouse model in which we blocked maternal Hox gene expression.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING AND METHODS: Analysis of a gene expression
profile set in the public domain consisting of 504 samples representing 95
different normal human tissues, showed that in addition to HOXA10, also HOXA9,
HOXA11, HOXB6 and HOXD10 mRNA showed increased expression in the human
endometrium (16 samples). The temporal and spatial expression pattern of these
four HOX genes throughout the menstrual cycle was determined in the endometrium
from 27 female patients eligible for IVF-embryo transfer with a normal cycle by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot and immunohistochemistry. The 
role of maternal Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 was assessed in a mouse implantation
model by expression knockdown using RNA interference. Forty mice were transfected
with Hoxa9-, Hoxa11- or Hoxd10-specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs or a
vector control by injection into the uterine horn at Day 2 after vaginal plug
detection (Day 1) (160 mice in total). The effects were examined by qRT-PCR and
western blot at Day 4 and litter sizes counted at Day 9 of pregnancy.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: HOXA10, HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 all showed 
increased expression during the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle (P <
0.01). Knockdown of Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 in the murine uterus resulted in
significantly reduced average implantation rates (P < 0.01) and, with regard to
four Hox target genes, also correlated with a significantly increased empty
spiracles homolog 2 (Emx2) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(Igfbp1), and decreased integrin ß3 (Itgb3) and leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif),
expression (P < 0.01).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Menstrual cycle stage was not confirmed by
serum hormone analysis. We verified the absence of significant differences in
stage-specific expression of the reference genes used in our study (ACTB/Actb and
GAPDH/Gapdh) and therefore possible limitations of this approach were minimized. 
In addition, the translatability of our data from a mouse model to patients needs
to be investigated further.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We provide evidence that three other HOX
genes in addition to HOXA10 are involved in endometrial receptivity, and that
part of their function is asserted through several known HOX target genes,
suggesting the presence of a central HOX signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 24549215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e81423. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081423.
eCollection 2013.

IGFBP3, a transcriptional target of homeobox D10, is correlated with the
prognosis of gastric cancer.

Xue M(1), Fang Y(1), Sun G(2), Zhuo W(3), Zhong J(2), Qian C(1), Wang L(1), Wang 
L(2), Si J(1), Chen S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Sir Runrun Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China ; Institute of Gastroenterology, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Institute of Gastroenterology, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China ; Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated
Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Institute of
Gastroenterology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Homeobox D10 (HoxD10) plays important roles in the differentiation of embryonic
cells and progression of breast cancer. Our previous report revealed that
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP3) was regulated by HoxD10 in 
gastric cancer cells; however, the functional roles and underlying mechanisms of 
IGFBP3 in gastric cancer remain unclear. Here, we found that the expression of
IGFBP3 were upregulated after ectopic expression of HoxD10 in gastric cancer
cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that HoxD10 bound to three
potential regions of IGFBP3 promoter. Exogenous HoxD10 significantly enhanced the
activity of luciferase reporter containing these binding regions in gastric
cancer cells. Further data showed that all of these binding sites had Hox binding
element "TTAT". Immunohistochemical staining results revealed that IGFBP3
expression was significantly downregulated in 86 gastric adenocarcinomas tissues 
relative to their adjacent non-cancerous tissues (p<0.001). Moreover, IGFBP3
expression was significantly lower in gastric tumor with lymph node metastasis
compared with that without lymph node metastasis (p=0.045). Patients with high
expression level of IGFBP3 showed favorable 5 year overall survival (p=0.011).
Knockdown of IGFBP3 accelerated gastric cancer cell migration and invasion and
induced the expression of invasive factors including MMP14, uPA and uPAR. Thus,
our data suggest that HoxD10-targeted gene IGFBP3 may suppress gastric cancer
cell invasion and favors the survival of gastric cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3873913
PMID: 24386080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e83080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083080.
eCollection 2013.

MicroRNA-10b promotes nucleus pulposus cell proliferation through RhoC-Akt
pathway by targeting HOXD10 in intervetebral disc degeneration.

Yu X(1), Li Z(2), Shen J(2), Wu WK(3), Liang J(2), Weng X(2), Qiu G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China ; State Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beilishi Road, Xicheng District, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China. (3)Institute of Digestive Disease and State Key Laboratory of
Digestive Disease, LKS Institute of Health Sciences & Department of Medicine and 
Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Aberrant proliferation of nucleus pulposus cell is implicated in the pathogenesis
of intervertebral disc degeneration. Recent findings revealed that microRNAs, a
class of small noncoding RNAs, could regulate cell proliferation in many
pathological conditions. Here, we showed that miR-10b was dramatically
upregulated in degenerative nucleus pulposus tissues when compared with nucleus
pulposus tissues isolated from patients with idiopathic scoliosis. Moreover,
miR-10b levels were associated with disc degeneration grade and downregulation of
HOXD10. In cultured nucleus pulposus cells, miR-10b overexpression stimulated
cell proliferation with concomitant translational inhibition of HOXD10 whereas
restored expression of HOXD10 reversed the mitogenic effect of miR-10b.
MiR-10b-mediated downregulation of HOXD10 led to increased RhoC expression and
Akt phosphorylation. Either knockdown of RhoC or inhibition of Akt abolished the 
effect of miR-10b on nucleus pulposus cell proliferation. Taken together,
aberrant miR-10b upregulation in intervertebral disc degeneration could
contribute to abnormal nucleus pulposus cell proliferation through derepressing
the RhoC-Akt pathway by targeting HOXD10. Our study also underscores the
potential of miR-10b and the RhoC-Akt pathway as novel therapeutic targets in
intervertebral disc degeneration.

PMCID: PMC3869743
PMID: 24376640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Sci Rep. 2013 Dec 5;3:3423. doi: 10.1038/srep03423.

Targeting microRNA-23a to inhibit glioma cell invasion via HOXD10.

Hu X(1), Chen D, Cui Y, Li Z, Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.

Glioma is the most frequent primary brain tumor. Recently, the upregulation of
microRNA (miR)-23a was found to be associated with glioma, but the molecular
mechanism by which miR-23a promotes glioma growth remains to be unveiled. In the 
present study, we found that miR-23a was significantly upregulated in glioma
tissues compared to their matched adjacent tissues. miR-23a was also highly
expressed in glioma cell lines SHG44, U251, and U87 cells. Moreover, we
identified homeobox D10 (HOXD10) as a novel target for miR-23a. The expression of
HOXD10 was significantly reduced in glioma tissues and cell lines, and miR-23a
negatively regulates the protein expression of HOXD10 in U251 and U87 cells. We
further showed that miRNA-23a promoted U251 and U87 cell invasion, at least
partially, by directly targeting HOXD10 and further modulating MMP-14. These
findings suggest that miR-23a may serve as a promising therapeutic target for
glioma.

PMCID: PMC3851882
PMID: 24305689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Apr;29(4):835-42. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12429.

miR-224 promotion of cell migration and invasion by targeting Homeobox D 10 gene 
in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li Q(1), Ding C, Chen C, Zhang Z, Xiao H, Xie F, Lei L, Chen Y, Mao B, Jiang M,
Li J, Wang D, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Center of Basic Medicine, College of Basic Medical Science, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNA molecules that
control target gene expression and are implicated in the regulation of diverse
cellular pathways. In our previous research, we have demonstrated that miR-224
was overexpressed in liver cancer cells and tissues, which was an important
factor in the regulation of cell migration and invasion. This study aimed to
further explore the regulatory mechanism of miR-224 in the migration and invasion
in liver cancer cells.
METHODS: A luciferase reporter assay was used to confirm that the HOXD10 gene was
a direct target of miR-224. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction, Western blotting, Transwell migration, and Matrigel invasion assays
were performed to clarify the molecular mechanism of miR-224 in the regulation of
cell migration and invasion in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
RESULTS: (i) The expression of miR-224 was strongly upregulated in MHHC97H and
MHCC97L cells, and its expression level was significantly associated with cell
invasive potential. (ii) The HOXD10 gene was confirmed to be a direct target of
miR-224. Compared with normal liver tissues and cells, HOXD10 had lower
expression in HCC tissues and cells and inversely regulated HCC cell invasion.
(iii) miR-224 promoted expression of the tumor invasion-associated proteins
p-PAK4 and MMP-9 by directly targeting HOXD10.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a previously undescribed regulatory pathway in
which the miR-224/HOXD10/p-PAK4/MMP-9 signaling pathway contributes to the
regulation of cell migration and invasion and provides a new biotarget for HCC
treatment.

© 2013 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24219032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Neurosci. 2013 Nov 6;33(45):17797-813. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2778-13.2013.

Genetic dissection of retinal inputs to brainstem nuclei controlling image
stabilization.

Dhande OS(1), Estevez ME, Quattrochi LE, El-Danaf RN, Nguyen PL, Berson DM,
Huberman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Department, Neurobiology Section in the Division of Biology and 
Department of Ophthalmology at the University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, and Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island 02912.

When the head rotates, the image of the visual world slips across the retina. A
dedicated set of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and brainstem visual nuclei termed
the "accessory optic system" (AOS) generate slip-compensating eye movements that 
stabilize visual images on the retina and improve visual performance. Which types
of RGCs project to each of the various AOS nuclei remain unresolved. Here we
report a new transgenic mouse line, Hoxd10-GFP, in which the RGCs projecting to
all the AOS nuclei are fluorescently labeled. Electrophysiological recordings of 
Hoxd10-GFP RGCs revealed that they include all three subtypes of On
direction-selective RGCs (On-DSGCs), responding to upward, downward, or forward
motion. Hoxd10-GFP RGCs also include one subtype of On-Off DSGCs tuned for
forward motion. Retrograde circuit mapping with modified rabies viruses revealed 
that the On-DSGCs project to the brainstem centers involved in both horizontal
and vertical retinal slip compensation. In contrast, the On-Off DSGCs labeled in 
Hoxd10-GFP mice projected to AOS nuclei controlling horizontal but not vertical
image stabilization. Moreover, the forward tuned On-Off DSGCs appear
physiologically and molecularly distinct from all previously genetically
identified On-Off DSGCs. These data begin to clarify the cell types and circuits 
underlying image stabilization during self-motion, and they support an unexpected
diversity of DSGC subtypes.

PMCID: PMC3818553
PMID: 24198370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jan 15;23(2):167-79. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0039. Epub 2013
Nov 5.

Identification of a developmental gene expression signature, including HOX genes,
for the normal human colonic crypt stem cell niche: overexpression of the
signature parallels stem cell overpopulation during colon tumorigenesis.

Bhatlekar S(1), Addya S, Salunek M, Orr CR, Surrey S, McKenzie S, Fields JZ,
Boman BM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Center for Translational Cancer Research, Helen F. Graham Cancer Center and 
Research Institute, University of Delaware , Newark, Delaware.

Our goal was to identify a unique gene expression signature for human colonic
stem cells (SCs). Accordingly, we determined the gene expression pattern for a
known SC-enriched region--the crypt bottom. Colonic crypts and isolated crypt
subsections (top, middle, and bottom) were purified from fresh, normal, human,
surgical specimens. We then used an innovative strategy that used two-color
microarrays (~18,500 genes) to compare gene expression in the crypt bottom with
expression in the other crypt subsections (middle or top). Array results were
validated by PCR and immunostaining. About 25% of genes analyzed were expressed
in crypts: 88 preferentially in the bottom, 68 in the middle, and 131 in the top.
Among genes upregulated in the bottom, ~30% were classified as growth and/or
developmental genes including several in the PI3 kinase pathway, a
six-transmembrane protein STAMP1, and two homeobox (HOXA4, HOXD10) genes. qPCR
and immunostaining validated that HOXA4 and HOXD10 are selectively expressed in
the normal crypt bottom and are overexpressed in colon carcinomas (CRCs).
Immunostaining showed that HOXA4 and HOXD10 are co-expressed with the SC markers 
CD166 and ALDH1 in cells at the normal crypt bottom, and the number of these
co-expressing cells is increased in CRCs. Thus, our findings show that these two 
HOX genes are selectively expressed in colonic SCs and that HOX overexpression in
CRCs parallels the SC overpopulation that occurs during CRC development. Our
study suggests that developmental genes play key roles in the maintenance of
normal SCs and crypt renewal, and contribute to the SC overpopulation that drives
colon tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3887463
PMID: 23980595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Oncol. 2013 Jul;43(1):63-71. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1935. Epub 2013 May 13.

Loss of HOXD10 expression induced by upregulation of miR-10b accelerates the
migration and invasion activities of ovarian cancer cells.

Nakayama I(1), Shibazaki M, Yashima-Abo A, Miura F, Sugiyama T, Masuda T, Maesawa
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute of Biomedical Science, Iwate Medical
University, Iwate, Japan.

Small and large non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) contribute to the acquisition of
aggressive tumor behavior in diverse human malignancies. Two types of ncRNAs,
miRNA-10b (miR-10b) and homemobox (HOX) transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), can
suppress the translation of the HOXD10 gene, an mRNA encoding a transcriptional
repressor that inhibits the expression of cell migration/invasion-associated
genes. Using epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines and primary tumors, we
investigated whether miR-10b and/or HOTAIR can regulate the expression of HOXD10,
and whether it permits gain of pro-metastatic gene products, matrix
metallopeptidase 14 (MMP14) and ras homolog family member C (RHOC).
Overexpression of miR-10b induced a decrease in HOXD10 protein expression, and
upregulated the migration and invasion abilities in ovarian cancer cell lines
(P<0.05). In these cells, a significant increase of MMP14 and RHOC protein was
observed. No significant upregulation of the HOXD10 protein was observed in cells
with the treatment of HOTAIR-siRNA. Positive signals for HOXD10 and MMP14
proteins were observed in 47 (69%) and 25 (37%) of 68 patients with epithelial
ovarian cancers. An inverse correlation between HOXD10 and MMP14
immunoreactivities was observed (P<0.05), and miR-10b expression was also
inversely correlated with HOXD10 protein expression (P<0.05). These results
suggested that downregulation of HOXD10 expression by miR-10b overexpression may 
induce an increase of pro-metastatic gene products, such as MMP14 and RHOC, and
contribute to the acquisition of metastatic phenotypes in epithelial ovarian
cancer cells.

PMID: 23670532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Sep 23;424:53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 
May 10.

Gene methylation in gastric cancer.

Qu Y(1), Dang S, Hou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, People's Republic of China.

Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies and remains the second
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Over 70% of new cases and deaths
occur in developing countries. In the early years of the molecular biology
revolution, cancer research mainly focuses on genetic alterations, including
gastric cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and
maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mammals. Disruption of
epigenetic processes can lead to altered gene function and malignant cellular
transformation. Recent advancements in the rapidly evolving field of cancer
epigenetics have shown extensive reprogramming of every component of the
epigenetic machinery in cancer, including DNA methylation, histone modifications,
nucleosome positioning, noncoding RNAs, and microRNAs. Aberrant DNA methylation
in the promoter regions of gene, which leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor 
and other cancer-related genes in cancer cells, is the most well-defined
epigenetic hallmark in gastric cancer. The advantages of gene methylation as a
target for detection and diagnosis of cancer in biopsy specimens and non-invasive
body fluids such as serum and gastric washes have led to many studies of
application in gastric cancer. This review focuses on the most common and
important phenomenon of epigenetics, DNA methylation, in gastric cancer and
illustrates the impact epigenetics has had on this field.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23669186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Oct 4;3:e398. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.134.

MicroRNA-10b pleiotropically regulates invasion, angiogenicity and apoptosis of
tumor cells resembling mesenchymal subtype of glioblastoma multiforme.

Lin J(1), Teo S, Lam DH, Jeyaseelan K, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, Singapore, Singapore.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a heterogeneous disease despite its seemingly
uniform pathology. Deconvolution of The Cancer Genome Atlas's GBM gene expression
data has unveiled the existence of distinct gene expression signature underlying 
discrete GBM subtypes. Recent conflicting findings proposed that microRNA
(miRNA)-10b exclusively regulates glioma growth or invasion but not both. We
showed that silencing of miRNA-10b by baculoviral decoy vectors in a glioma cell 
line resembling the mesenchymal subtype of GBM reduces its growth, invasion and
angiogenesis while promoting apoptosis in vitro. In an orthotopic human glioma
mouse model, inhibition of miRNA-10b diminishes the invasiveness, angiogenicity
and growth of the mesenchymal subtype-like glioma cells in the brain and
significantly prolonged survival of glioma-bearing mice. We demonstrated that the
pleiotropic nature of miRNA-10b was due to its suppression of multiple tumor
suppressors, including TP53, FOXO3, CYLD, PAX6, PTCH1, HOXD10 and NOTCH1. In
particular, siRNA-mediated knockdown experiments identified TP53, PAX6, NOTCH1
and HOXD10 as invasion regulatory genes in our mesenchymal subtype-like glioma
cells. By interrogating the REMBRANDT, we noted that dysregulation of many direct
targets of miRNA-10b was associated with significantly poorer patient survival.
Thus, our study uncovers a novel role for miRNA-10b in regulating angiogenesis
and suggests that miRNA-10b may be a pleiotropic regulator of gliomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3481123
PMID: 23034333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e40728. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040728. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Functional dissection of HOXD cluster genes in regulation of neuroblastoma cell
proliferation and differentiation.

Zha Y(1), Ding E, Yang L, Mao L, Wang X, McCarthy BA, Huang S, Ding HF.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia
Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Retinoic acid (RA) can induce growth arrest and neuronal differentiation of
neuroblastoma cells and has been used in clinic for treatment of neuroblastoma.
It has been reported that RA induces the expression of several HOXD genes in
human neuroblastoma cell lines, but their roles in RA action are largely unknown.
The HOXD cluster contains nine genes (HOXD1, HOXD3, HOXD4, and HOXD8-13) that are
positioned sequentially from 3' to 5', with HOXD1 at the 3' end and HOXD13 the 5'
end. Here we show that all HOXD genes are induced by RA in the human
neuroblastoma BE(2)-C cells, with the genes located at the 3' end being activated
generally earlier than those positioned more 5' within the cluster. Individual
induction of HOXD8, HOXD9, HOXD10 or HOXD12 is sufficient to induce both growth
arrest and neuronal differentiation, which is associated with downregulation of
cell cycle-promoting genes and upregulation of neuronal differentiation genes.
However, induction of other HOXD genes either has no effect (HOXD1) or has
partial effects (HOXD3, HOXD4, HOXD11 and HOXD13) on BE(2)-C cell proliferation
or differentiation. We further show that knockdown of HOXD8 expression, but not
that of HOXD9 expression, significantly inhibits the differentiation-inducing
activity of RA. HOXD8 directly activates the transcription of HOXC9, a key
effector of RA action in neuroblastoma cells. These findings highlight the
distinct functions of HOXD genes in RA induction of neuroblastoma cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3413684
PMID: 22879880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Biol. 2012 Sep 25;22(18):1676-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.06.067. Epub 2012 
Aug 2.

A genetic basis for altered sexual behavior in mutant female mice.

Zakany J(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre Frontiers in Genetics, Department of Genetics and
Evolution, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.
jozsef.zakany@unige.ch

Although neural substrates of mammalian female mating behavior have been
described, the association between complex courtship activity and specific
underlying mechanisms remains elusive. We have isolated a mouse line that
unexpectedly shows altered female social behavior with increased investigation of
males and increased genital biting. We investigated adult individuals by
behavioral observation and genetic and molecular neuroanatomy methods. We report 
exacerbated inverse pursuits and incapacitating bites directed at the genitals of
stud males. This extreme deviation from wild-type female courtship segregates
with a deletion of the Hoxd1 to Hoxd9 genomic region. This dominant Atypical
female courtship allele (HoxD(Afc)) induces ectopic Hoxd10 gene expression in
several regions in newborn forebrain transitorily and stably in a sparse
subpopulation of cells in the cornu ammonis fields of adult hippocampus, which
may thus lead to an abnormal modulation in the sexual behavior of mutant females.
The resulting compulsive sexual solicitation behavior displayed by the most
affected individuals suggests new avenues to study the genetic and molecular
bases of normal and pathological mammalian affect and raises the potential
involvement of the hippocampus in the control of female courtship behavior. The
potential relevance to human 2q.31.1 microdeletion syndrome is discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22863319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):197-202. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.069. Epub 2012 Jul 
25.

Interaction between Tbx1 and Hoxd10 and connection with TGFß-BMP signal pathway
during kidney development.

Fu Y(1), Li F(2), Zhao DY(3), Zhang JS(4), Lv Y(5), Li-Ling J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medicine, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China. Electronic address: fuyu_727@yahoo.cn. (2)Department
of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medicine, China Medical University,
Shenyang, China. Electronic address: lifeiphoenix@yahoo.com.cn. (3)Sino-Dutch
Biomedical and Information Engineering School, Northeastern University, Shenyang,
China. Electronic address: zhaoyue@bmie.neu.edu.cn. (4)Sino-Dutch Biomedical and 
Information Engineering School, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China.
Electronic address: zhangjs@bmie.neu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Medical Genetics,
School of Basic Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang, China. Electronic
address: hawk.lv@163.com. (6)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic
Medicine, China Medical University, Shenyang, China; Sino-Dutch Biomedical and
Information Engineering School, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China;
Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Life Science & Key Laboratory for
Bio-resources and Eco-environment of the Ministry of Education, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China. Electronic address: jliling@scu.edu.cn.

Renal malformations are commonly found among patients carrying a 22q11 deletion
which renders loss of Tbx1 gene, an important transcriptional factor implicated
in a number of developmental processes. Smad1 is known to interact with Tbx1, but
the exact mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we have measured the
expression of Tbx1 in both murine and human tissues using RT-PCR, and analyzed
its protein product and protein-protein interactions with Western blotting and
immunoprecipitation assays. Precipitated proteins were verified with mass
spectrometry. As discovered, Tbx1 binds with Hoxd10. Tbx1 and Hoxd10 genes also
have similar expression profiles during murine kidney development. Based on
homology between mouse and human, we hypothesized that such interaction also
exists in human. Through a RNA interference experiment using a human embryonic
kidney HEK293 cell line, we demonstrated that TBX1 can alter TGF-ß/BMP, an
important signaling pathway, through interacting with HOXD10. Above findings may 
shed light on the mechanism of TBX1 mutations leading to renal malformations
found in patients carrying a 22q11 deletion.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22842189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):1005-12. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1542. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Co-inhibition of microRNA-10b and microRNA-21 exerts synergistic inhibition on
the proliferation and invasion of human glioma cells.

Dong CG(1), Wu WK, Feng SY, Wang XJ, Shao JF, Qiao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that function as negative gene
regulators. Alterations in the expression of miRNAs have been implicated in the
pathogenesis and development of most human malignancies. Recent data indicate
that microRNA-21 and microRNA-10b are significantly elevated in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) suggesting their role in the regulation of multiple genes
associated with cancer. In this study, U87MG human glioblastoma cells were
treated with miRNA inhibitors targeting miR-10b and miR-21, alone or in
combination. The results showed that the miR-21 inhibitor additively interacted
with miR-10b inhibitor on U87MG cells. The 50% inhibitory concentration values
were dramatically decreased in cells treated with the combination of miR-10b and 
miR-21 inhibitors. Furthermore, inhibitors synergistically combined, enhanced
apoptosis significantly and reduced invasion ability assessed by flow cytometry
and Transwell migration assay. Thus, the miR-21 inhibitor may interrupt the
activity of EGFR pathways, increasing PDCD4 and TPM1 expression and reducing MMP 
activities, independently of PTEN status. Meanwhile, miR-10b inhibitor reduced by
Twist proceeds to inhibit translation of the mRNA encoding HOXD10 leading to the 
increase of the expression of the well-characterized pro-metastatic gene RHOC.
Taken together, these data strongly suggest that a combination of miR-21
inhibitor and miR-10b inhibitor could be an effective therapeutic strategy for
controlling the growth of GBM by inhibiting oncogene expression and
overexpressing tumor suppressor genes. Moreover, a regulatory strategy based on
the combination of miRNA inhibitors may provide insights into the mechanisms of
the modulation of signaling genes involved in tumor cell apoptosis and
invasiveness.

PMID: 22766763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038403. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Conversion of stationary to invasive tumor initiating cells (TICs): role of
hypoxia in membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) trafficking.

Li J(1), Zucker S, Pulkoski-Gross A, Kuscu C, Karaayvaz M, Ju J, Yao H, Song E,
Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Cancer Prevention, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
New York, United States of America. jian.cao@sunysb.edu

Emerging evidence has implicated the role of tumor initiating cells (TICs) in the
process of cancer metastasis. The mechanism underlying the conversion of TICs
from stationary to invasive remains to be characterized. In this report, we
employed less invasive breast cancer TICs, SK-3rd, that displays
CD44(high)/CD24(low) with high mammosphere-forming and tumorigenic capacities, to
investigate the mechanism by which stationary TICs are converted to invasive
TICs. Invasive ability of SK-3rd TICs was markedly enhanced when the cells were
cultured under hypoxic conditions. Given the role of membrane type 1-matrix
metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP) in cancer invasion/metastasis, we explored a possible
involvement of MT1-MMP in hypoxia-induced TIC invasion. Silencing of MT1-MMP by a
shRNA approach resulted in diminution of hypoxia-induced cell invasion in vitro
and metastasis in vivo. Under hypoxic conditions, MT1-MMP redistributed from
cytoplasmic storage pools to the cell surface of TICs, which coincides with the
increased cell invasion. In addition, CD44, a cancer stem-like cell marker,
inversely correlated with increased cell surface MT1-MMP. Interestingly, cell
surface MT1-MMP gradually disappeared when the hypoxia-treated cells were
switched to normoxia, suggesting the plasticity of TICs in response to oxygen
content. Furthermore, we dissected the pathways leading to upregulated MT1-MMP in
cytoplasmic storage pools under normoxic conditions, by demonstrating a cascade
involving Twist1-miR10b-HoxD10 leading to enhanced MT1-MMP expression in SK-3rd
TICs. These observations suggest that MT1-MMP is a key molecule capable of
executing conversion of stationary TICs to invasive TICs under hypoxic conditions
and thereby controlling metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3367975
PMID: 22679501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Dyn. 2012 Apr;241(4):718-31. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23763.

Hox transcription factors influence motoneuron identity through the integrated
actions of both homeodomain and non-homeodomain regions.

Misra M(1), Sours E, Lance-Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hox transcription factors play a critical role in the specification
of motoneuron subtypes within the spinal cord. Our previous work showed that two 
orthologous members of this family, Hoxd10 and Hoxd11, exert opposing effects on 
motoneuron development in the lumbosacral (LS) spinal cord of the embryonic
chick: Hoxd10 promotes the development of lateral motoneuron subtypes that
project to dorsal limb muscles, while Hoxd11 represses the development of lateral
subtypes in favor of medial subtypes that innervate ventral limb muscles and
axial muscles. The striking degree of homology between the DNA-binding
homeodomains of Hoxd10 and Hoxd11 suggested that non-homeodomain regions mediate 
their divergent effects. In the present study, we investigate the relative
contributions of homeodomain and non-homeodomain regions of Hoxd10 and Hoxd11 to 
motoneuron specification.
RESULTS: Using in ovo electroporation to express chimeric and mutant constructs
in LS motoneurons, we find that both the homeodomain and non-homeodomain regions 
of Hoxd10 are necessary to specify lateral motoneurons. In contrast,
non-homeodomain regions of Hoxd11 are sufficient to repress lateral motoneuron
fates in favor of medial fates.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our data demonstrate that even closely related Hox
orthologues rely on distinct combinations of homeodomain-dependent and
-independent mechanisms to specify motoneuron identity.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3314312
PMID: 22411553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Dyn. 2012 Apr;241(4):792-802. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23756. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

A function for all posterior Hoxd genes during digit development?

Delpretti S(1), Zakany J, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre Frontiers in Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Four posterior Hoxd genes, from Hoxd13 to Hoxd10, are collectively
regulated during the development of tetrapod digits. Besides the well-documented 
role of Hoxd13, the function of the neighboring genes has been difficult to
evaluate due to the close genetic linkage and potential regulatory interferences.
We used a combination of five small nested deletions in cis, involving from two
to four consecutive genes of the Hoxd13 to Hoxd9 loci, in mice, to evaluate their
combined functional importance.
RESULTS: We show that deletions leading to a gain of function of Hoxd13, via
regulatory re-allocation, generate abnormal phenotypes, in agreement with the
dominant negative role of this gene. We also show that Hoxd10, Hoxd11, and Hoxd12
all seem to play a genuine role in digit development, though less compelling than
that of Hoxd13. In contrast, the nearby Hoxd9 contributed no measurable function 
in digits.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that a slight and transient deregulation of Hoxd13
expression can readily affect the relative lengths of limb segments and that all 
posterior Hoxd genes likely contribute to the final limb morphology. We discuss
the difficulty to clearly assess the functional share of individual genes within 
such a gene family, where closely located neighbors, coding for homologous
proteins, are regulated by a unique circuitry and all contribute to shape the
distal parts of our appendages.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22374744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Oncol. 2012 May;40(5):1553-60. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1342. Epub 2012 Jan
24.

miR-10b promotes cell invasion through RhoC-AKT signaling pathway by targeting
HOXD10 in gastric cancer.

Liu Z(1), Zhu J, Cao H, Ren H, Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun 130041, PR China.

MicroRNAs play critical roles in tumorigenesis as either oncogenes or tumor
suppressors. As a microRNA induced by Twist, miR-10b function as a metastasis
driver in different types of cancer, in which the downstream target gene HOXD10
is the main mediator. In gastric tumor species, miR-10b levels were dramatically 
elevated in lymphoma node metastasis-positive tumor tissues compared with
lymphoma node metastasis-free tumor tissues, and were correlated to dowregulation
of HOXD10 expression. In gastric cell lines with distinct degrees of
differentiation, miR-10b was highly expressed in the cell line with strong
metastatic ability. In MNK45 cells, inhibition of miR-10b led to abrogation of
cell invasion. While in GES-1 cells, miR-10 overexpression resulted in
enhancement of invasiveness through translational inhibition of HOXD10, and
constitutive expression of HOXD10 reversed the effects of miR-10b on cell
invasion. Furthermore, either knockdown of RhoC or inhibition of AKT activation
interfered miR-10-induced invasiveness in GES-1 cells. In summary, these
observations suggest that miR-10b can stimulate the upregulation of RhoC and AKT 
phosphorylation through targeting HOXD10, thus promoting cell invasion in gastric
tumors.

PMID: 22293682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Breast Cancer (Auckl). 2012;6:9-19. doi: 10.4137/BCBCR.S8513. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Delivery of MicroRNA-10b with Polylysine Nanoparticles for Inhibition of Breast
Cancer Cell Wound Healing.

Jin H(1), Yu Y, Chrisler WB, Xiong Y, Hu D, Lei C.

Author information: 
(1)Postdoctoral Research Associate, Cell Biology and Biochemistry Group,
Fundamental and Computational Sciences Directorate, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland WA, USA.

Recent studies revealed that micro RNA-10b (mir-10b) is highly expressed in
metastatic breast cancer cells and positively regulates breast cancer cell
migration and invasion through inhibition of HOXD10 target synthesis. In this
study we designed anti-mir-10b molecules and combined them with poly L-lysine
(PLL) to test the delivery effectiveness. An RNA molecule sequence exactly
matching the mature mir-10b minor antisense showed strong inhibition when mixed
with PLL in a wound-healing assay with human breast cell line MDA-MB-231. The
resulting PLL-RNA nanoparticles delivered the anti-microRNA molecules into
cytoplasm of breast cancer cells in a concentration-dependent manner that
displayed sustainable effectiveness.

PMCID: PMC3256732
PMID: 22259248  [PubMed]


53. Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):219-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.12.026. Epub 2011
Dec 24.

HoxB8 in noradrenergic specification and differentiation of the autonomic nervous
system.

Huber L(1), Ferdin M, Holzmann J, Stubbusch J, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain
Research, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Different prespecification of mesencephalic and trunk neural crest cells
determines their response to environmental differentiation signals and
contributes to the generation of different autonomic neuron subtypes,
parasympathetic ciliary neurons in the head and trunk noradrenergic sympathetic
neurons. The differentiation of ciliary and sympathetic neurons shares many
features, including the initial BMP-induced expression of noradrenergic
characteristics that is, however, subsequently lost in ciliary but maintained in 
sympathetic neurons. The molecular basis of specific prespecification and
differentiation patterns has remained unclear. We show here that HoxB gene
expression in trunk neural crest is maintained in sympathetic neurons. Ectopic
expression of a single HoxB gene, HoxB8, in mesencephalic neural crest results in
a strongly increased expression of sympathetic neuron characteristics like the
transcription factor Hand2, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and
dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) in ciliary neurons. Other subtype-specific
properties like RGS4 and RCad are not induced. HoxB8 has only minor effects in
postmitotic ciliary neurons and is unable to induce TH and DBH in the enteric
nervous system. Thus, we conclude that HoxB8 acts by maintaining noradrenergic
properties transiently expressed in ciliary neuron progenitors during normal
development. HoxC8, HoxB9, HoxB1 and HoxD10 elicit either small and transient or 
no effects on noradrenergic differentiation, suggesting a selective effect of
HoxB8. These results implicate that Hox genes contribute to the differential
development of autonomic neuron precursors by maintaining noradrenergic
properties in the trunk sympathetic neuron lineage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22236961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Oncol. 2012 Apr;40(4):1180-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1321. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Homeobox gene expression profile indicates HOXA5 as a candidate prognostic marker
in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Rodini CO(1), Xavier FC, Paiva KB, De Souza Setúbal Destro MF, Moyses RA,
Michaluarte P, Carvalho MB, Fukuyama EE; Head And Neck Genome Project Gencapo,
Tajara EH, Okamoto OK, Nunes FD.

Collaborators: Cury PM, De Carvalho MB, Dias-Neto E, Figueiredo DL, Fukuyama EE, 
Góis-Filho JF, Leopoldino AM, Mamede RC, Michaluart-Junior P, Moreira-Filho CA,
Moyses RA, Nóbrega FG, Nóbrega MP, Nunes FD, Ojopi EP, Okamoto OK, Serafini LN,
Severino P, Silva AM, Silva WA Jr, Silveira NJ, Souza SC, Tajara EH, Wünsch-Filho
V, Zago MA, Amar A, Arap SS, Araújo NS, Araújo-Filho V, Barbieri RB, Bandeira CM,
Bastos AU, Bogossian AP, Braconi MA, Brandão LG, Brandão RM, Canto AL,
Carvalho-Neto PB, Casemiro AF, Cerione M, Cernea CR, Cicco R, Chagas MJ, Chedid
H, Chiappini PB, Correia LA, Costa A, Costa AC, Cunha BR, Curioni OA, Dias TH,
Durazzo M, Ferraz AR, Figueiredo RO, Fortes CS, Franzi SA, Frizzera AP, Gallo J, 
Gazito D, Guimarães PE, Gutierres AP, Inamine R, Kaneto CM, Lehn CN, López RV,
Macarenco R, Magalhães RP, Martins AE, Meneses C, Mercante AM, Montenegro FL,
Pinheiro DG, Polachini GM, Porsani AF, Rapoport A, Rodini CO, Rodrigues AN,
Rodrigues-Lisoni FC, Rodrigues RV, Rossi L, Santos AR, Santos M, Settani F, Silva
FA, Silva IT, Silva-Filho GB, Smith RB, Souza TB, Stabenow E, Takamori JT,
Tavares MR, Turcano R, Valentim PJ, Volpi EM, Xavier FC, Yamagushi F, Cominato
ML, Correa PM, Mendes GS, Paiva R, Ramos O, Silva C, Silva MJ, Tarlá MV.

The search for molecular markers to improve diagnosis, individualize treatment
and predict behavior of tumors has been the focus of several studies. This study 
aimed to analyze homeobox gene expression profile in oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC) as well as to investigate whether some of these genes are relevant
molecular markers of prognosis and/or tumor aggressiveness. Homeobox gene
expression levels were assessed by microarrays and qRT-PCR in OSCC tissues and
adjacent non-cancerous matched tissues (margin), as well as in OSCC cell lines.
Analysis of microarray data revealed the expression of 147 homeobox genes,
including one set of six at least 2-fold up-regulated, and another set of 34 at
least 2-fold down-regulated homeobox genes in OSCC. After qRT-PCR assays, the
three most up-regulated homeobox genes (HOXA5, HOXD10 and HOXD11) revealed higher
and statistically significant expression levels in OSCC samples when compared to 
margins. Patients presenting lower expression of HOXA5 had poorer prognosis
compared to those with higher expression (P=0.03). Additionally, the status of
HOXA5, HOXD10 and HOXD11 expression levels in OSCC cell lines also showed a
significant up-regulation when compared to normal oral keratinocytes. Results
confirm the presence of three significantly upregulated (>4-fold) homeobox genes 
(HOXA5, HOXD10 and HOXD11) in OSCC that may play a significant role in the
pathogenesis of these tumors. Moreover, since lower levels of HOXA5 predict poor 
prognosis, this gene may be a novel candidate for development of therapeutic
strategies in OSCC.

PMCID: PMC3584618
PMID: 22227861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Med. 2012 May 9;18:389-400. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2011.00172.

Homeobox D10 gene, a candidate tumor suppressor, is downregulated through
promoter hypermethylation and associated with gastric carcinogenesis.

Wang L(1), Chen S, Xue M, Zhong J, Wang X, Gan L, Lam EK, Liu X, Zhang J, Zhou T,
Yu J, Jin H, Si J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Sir Run Run Shaw Clinical Medicine
Institution of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Homeobox D10 (HoxD10 ) gene plays a critical role in cell differentiation and
morphogenesis during development. However, the function of HoxD10 in tumor
progression remains largely unknown. We demonstrate that the expression of HoxD10
is commonly downregulated in gastric cancer tissues (n = 33) and cell lines (n = 
8) relative to normal stomach tissues. Functionally, reexpression of HoxD10
results in significant inhibition of cell survival, induction of cell apoptosis, 
and impairment of cell migration and invasion. Moreover, ectopic expression of
HoxD10 suppresses gastric tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model. To identify
target candidates of HoxD10, we performed cDNA microarray and showed that HoxD10 
regulates multiple downstream genes including IGFBP3. Reintroduction of HoxD10
transcriptionally upregulates IGFBP3, activates caspase 3 and caspase 8, and
subsequently induces cell apoptosis. Methylation specific PCR revealed that
HoxD10 promoter DNA was hypermethylated in gastric cancer cell lines.
Additionally, 5-aza demethylation treatment could transiently reactivate the
expression of HoxD10 in gastric cancer cells. HoxD10 promoter methylation
frequently was detected in gastric cancer tissues obtained from endoscopic
biopsies (85.7%, 24/28) and surgically resected samples (82.6%, 57/69).
Intestinal metaplasia tissues showed a 60% methylation rate (18/30), but no
detectable methylation in normal stomach tissues (0%, 0/10). Taken together, our 
results suggest that HoxD10 functions as a candidate tumor suppressor in gastric 
cancer, which is inactivated through promoter hypermethylation.

PMCID: PMC3356424
PMID: 22160393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 16;286(50):43475-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.284158. Epub
2011 Oct 21.

Cysteine-rich 61-connective tissue growth factor-nephroblastoma-overexpressed 5
(CCN5)/Wnt-1-induced signaling protein-2 (WISP-2) regulates microRNA-10b via
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a-TWIST signaling networks in human breast cancer
cells.

Haque I(1), Banerjee S, Mehta S, De A, Majumder M, Mayo MS, Kambhampati S,
Campbell DR, Banerjee SK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Kansas City, Missouri
64128, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are naturally occurring single-stranded RNA molecules that
post-transcriptionally regulate the expression of target mRNA transcripts. Many
of these target mRNA transcripts are involved in regulating processes commonly
altered during tumorigenesis and metastatic growth. These include cell
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion. Among the
several miRNAs, miRNA-10b (miR-10b) expression is increased in metastatic breast 
cancer cells and positively regulates cell migration and invasion through the
suppression of the homeobox D10 (HOXD10) tumor suppressor signaling pathway. In
breast metastatic cells, miR-10b expression is enhanced by a transcription factor
TWIST1. We find that miR-10b expression in breast cancer cells can be suppressed 
by CCN5, and this CCN5 effect is mediated through the inhibition of TWIST1
expression. Moreover, CCN5-induced inhibition of TWIST1 expression is mediated
through the translational inhibition/modification of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a 
via impeding JNK signaling pathway. Collectively, these studies suggest a novel
regulatory pathway exists through which CCN5 exerts its anti-invasive function.
On the basis of these findings, it is plausible that reactivation of CCN5 in
miR-10b-positive invasive/metastatic breast cancers alone or in combination with 
current therapeutic regimens could provide a unique, alternative strategy to
existing breast cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3234824
PMID: 22020939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Autophagy. 2011 Nov;7(11):1384-6. doi: 10.4161/auto.7.11.17371. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Context effect: microRNA-10b in cancer cell proliferation, spread and death.

Gabriely G(1), Teplyuk NM, Krichevsky AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Single microRNA (miRNA) can regulate expression of several or multiple principal 
targets in a specific microenvironment. In different cellular contexts, the same 
miRNA may exhibit diverse functions, depending on the repertoire and
stoichiometry of its direct mRNA targets. For instance, in breast cancer,
microRNA-10b (miR-10b) promotes invasion and metastasis of tumor cells through
post-transcriptional regulation of HOXD10. In contrast, in glioblastoma (GBM),
the most common and malignant primary brain tumor, miR-10b promotes proliferation
and prevents death of cancer cells by targeting cell cycle inhibitors and
pro-apoptotic genes. Here, we discuss a unique role of miR-10b in cancer cell
survival, in diverse tumor microenvironments.

PMID: 21795860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Nov;19(11):1198-201. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.95. Epub 2011
Jun 8.

Duplication at chromosome 2q31.1-q31.2 in a family presenting syndactyly and
nystagmus.

Ghoumid J(1), Andrieux J, Sablonnière B, Odent S, Philippe N, Zanlonghi X,
Saugier-Veber P, Bardyn T, Manouvrier-Hanu S, Holder-Espinasse M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, Lille, France.

HOXD genes encode transcription factors involved in the antero-posterior
patterning of the limb bud and in the specification of fingers. During the embryo
development, HOXD genes are expressed, following a spatio-temporal colinearity
that involves at least three regions, centrometric and telomeric to this cluster.
Here, we describe a father and a daughter presenting a 3-4 hand bilateral
syndactyly associated with a nystagmus. Array-comparative genomic hybridisation
showed a 3.8<U+2009>Mb duplication at 2q31.1-q31.2, comprising 27 genes including the
entire HOXD cluster. We performed expression studies in lymphoblasts by reverse
transcription-PCR and observed an HOXD13 and HOXD10 overexpression, whereas the
HOXD12 expression was decreased. HOXD13 and HOXD10 overexpression, associated
with a misregulation of at least HOXD12, may therefore induce the syndactyly.
Deletions of the HOXD cluster and its regulatory sequences induce hand
malformations and, particularly, finger anomalies. Recently, smaller duplications
of the same region have been reported in association with a mesomelic dysplasia, 
type Kantaputra. We discuss the variable phenotypes associated with such 2q
duplications.

PMCID: PMC3198150
PMID: 21654727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 29;286(30):26616-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.224212. Epub
2011 Jun 3.

Heparin impairs angiogenesis through inhibition of microRNA-10b.

Shen X(1), Fang J, Lv X, Pei Z, Wang Y, Jiang S, Ding K.

Author information: 
(1)Glycochemistry & Glycobiology Laboratory, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai.

Heparin, which has been used as an anticoagulant drug for decades, inhibits
angiogenesis, whereas thrombin promotes tumor-associated angiogenesis. However,
the mechanisms underlying the regulation of angiogenesis by heparin and thrombin 
are not well understood. Here, we show that microRNA-10b (miR-10b) is
down-regulated by heparin and up-regulated by thrombin in human microvascular
endothelial cells (HMEC-1). Overexpression of miR-10b induces HMEC-1 cell
migration, tube formation, and angiogenesis, and down-regulates homeobox D10
(HoxD10) expression via direct binding of miR-10b to the putative 3' UTR of
HoxD10. In addition, HMEC-1 cell migration and tube formation are induced by
HoxD10 knockdown, whereas angiogenesis is arrested when HoxD10 expression is
increased after anti-miR-10b or heparin treatments. Furthermore, expression of
miR-10b and its transcription factor Twist are up-regulated by thrombin, whereas 
HoxD10 expression is impaired by thrombin. Using quartz crystal microbalance
analysis, we show that heparin binds to thrombin, thereby inhibiting
thrombin-induced expression of Twist and miR-10b. However, the expression of
miR-10b is not attenuated by heparin any more after thrombin expression is
silenced by its siRNA. Interestingly, we find that heparin attenuates miR-10b
expression and induces HoxD10 expression in vivo to inhibit angiogenesis and
impair the growth of MDA-MB-231 tumor xenografts. These results provide insight
into the molecular mechanism by which heparin and thrombin regulate angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3143626
PMID: 21642433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 29;408(1):186-92. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.017. Epub 2011 Apr 9.

Homeobox D1 regulates angiogenic functions of endothelial cells via integrin ß1
expression.

Park H(1), Choi HJ, Kim J, Kim M, Rho SS, Hwang D, Kim YM, Kwon YG.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. happyojin@gmail.com

Homeobox (HOX) family genes, major transcription factors for embryonic
development, have been also implicated in vascular development and angiogenesis, 
particularly with regulation of genes involved in cell-cell or cell-extracellular
matrix (ECM) interactions. However, the cellular and molecular functions of HOXD1
in endothelial cells (ECs) are yet to be explored. We here report that HOXD1 is
prominently expressed in human ECs and regulates angiogenic activities. Knockdown
of HOXD1 in ECs resulted in significant inhibition of migration and adhesion as
well as tube like structure formation. These effects were correlated with the
reduced expression of integrin ß1 (ITGB1), an important signaling component of
angiogenesis. Consistently, ITGB1 promoter activity was decreased by HOXD1
knockdown in ECs. Furthermore, we identified the putative HOXD1-binding sites in 
the promoter region of ITGB1. Together, these findings suggest that HOXD1 plays a
significant role in EC functions by regulating the expression of ITGB1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21501586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Anim Biotechnol. 2011 Apr;22(2):51-63. doi: 10.1080/10495398.2011.552031.

Muscle gene expression associated with increased marbling in beef cattle.

Clark DL(1), Boler DD, Kutzler LW, Jones KA, McKeith FK, Killefer J, Carr TR,
Dilger AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Illinois 61801, USA.

The objective of this study was to identify specific bovine genes expressed
within skeletal muscle that are associated with intramuscular fat deposition.
Twenty-eight Angus-Simmental cross steers and heifers were harvested at the
University of Illinois Meat Science Laboratory. Four pairs of animals were
identified based on similar adjusted backfat thickness but differing amounts of
intramuscular fat within each pair. RNA was extracted from muscle samples devoid 
of visible fat and microarray analysis was performed. Based on this analysis, 9
genes were selected and expression was subsequently confirmed by qPCR. Expression
levels of MYH3, HOXD10, MXRA8, and CASQ2 were increased in animals with high
marbling, whereas levels of NPNT, MRC1, DNER, and CYPB4 were decreased in high
marbled animals. The remaining gene, ACTN2 was determined to be a false positive 
and was, therefore, excluded from further study. Despite the positive results of 
the preliminary study, associations between gene expression and intramuscular fat
content did not extend to the larger population of cattle. A significant negative
association existed between expression of MRC1 and marbling level (P = 0.04).
Therefore, this study was unable to identify a particular skeletal muscle gene
set whose expression correlated well with marbling levels in the larger
population of beef cattle.

PMID: 21500107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Brain Res. 2011 May 10;1389:9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.03.013. Epub 2011 
Mar 16.

MicroRNA-10b induces glioma cell invasion by modulating MMP-14 and uPAR
expression via HOXD10.

Sun L(1), Yan W, Wang Y, Sun G, Luo H, Zhang J, Wang X, You Y, Yang Z, Liu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, PR China.

MicroRNAs are small endogenous noncoding RNAs, which modulate target gene
expression by binding with target mRNA sequences in the 3'untranslated region
(UTR) with an imperfect complementarity that inhibits the mRNA translation. Many 
microRNAs have been reported to function as tumor oncogenes or anti-oncogenes.
Recently, more and more microRNAs have been reported to contribute to a tumor's
invasive potential. Here, we show that microRNA-10b (miR-10b) was over-expressed 
in glioma samples and directly associated with the glioma's pathological grade
and malignancy. We also found that miR-10b induced glioma cell invasion by
modulating tumor invasion factors MMP-14 and uPAR expression via the direct
target HOXD10. The miR-10b/HOXD10/MMP-14/uPAR signaling pathway might contribute 
to the invasion of glioma. Accordingly, glioma cells lost their invasive ability 
when treated with specific antisense oligonucleotides (miR-10b inhibitors),
suggesting that miR-10b could be used as a new bio-target to cure glioma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21419107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cell Adh Migr. 2011 Mar-Apr;5(2):133-41. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Temporal changes in Hox gene expression accompany endothelial cell
differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Bahrami SB(1), Veiseh M, Dunn AA, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; University of California-San Francisco, CA, USA.

In pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs), expression of the Hox master
regulatory transcription factors that play essential roles in organogenesis,
angiogenesis, and maintenance of differentiated tissues, is globally suppressed. 
We investigated whether differentiation of endothelial cells (ECs) from mouse
ESCs was accompanied by activation of distinct Hox gene expression profiles.
Differentiation was observed within 3 days, as indicated by the appearance of
cells expressing specific endothelial marker genes (Flk-1+ /VE-Cadherin+ ).
Expression of HoxA3 and HoxD3, which drive adult endothelial cell invasion and
angiogenesis, peaked at day 3 and declined thereafter, whereas expression of
HoxA5 and HoxD10, which maintain a mature quiescent EC phenotype, was low at day 
3, but increased over time. The temporal and reciprocal changes in HoxD3 and
HoxA5 expression were accompanied by corresponding changes in expression of
established downstream target genes including integrin ß3 and Thrombospondin-2.
Our results indicate that differentiation and maturation of ECs derived from
cultured ESCs mimic changes in Hox gene expression that accompany maturation of
immature angiogenic endothelium into differentiated quiescent endothelium in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC3084978
PMID: 21200152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):288-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.034. Epub 2010 
Dec 30.

A regulatory 'landscape effect' over the HoxD cluster.

Tschopp P(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre-Frontiers in Genetics, Department of Zoology and
Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest-Ansermet 30,
Geneva, Switzerland.

Faithful expression of Hox genes in both time and space is essential for proper
patterning of the primary body axis. Transgenic approaches in vertebrates have
suggested that this collinear activation process is regulated in a largely gene
cluster-autonomous manner. In contrast, more recently co-opted expression
specificities, required in other embryonic structures, depend upon long-range
enhancer sequences acting from outside the gene clusters. This regulatory
dichotomy was recently questioned, since gene activation along the trunk seems to
be partially regulated by signals located outside of the cluster. We investigated
these alternative regulatory strategies by engineering a large inversion that
precisely separates the murine HoxD complex from its centromeric neighborhood.
Mutant animals displayed posterior transformations along with subtle
deregulations of Hoxd genes, indicating an impact of the centromeric landscape on
the fine-tuning of Hoxd gene expression. Proximal limbs were also affected,
suggesting that this 'landscape effect' is generic and impacts upon regulatory
mechanisms of various qualities and evolutionary origins.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13703. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013703.

The LARGE principle of cellular reprogramming: lost, acquired and retained gene
expression in foreskin and amniotic fluid-derived human iPS cells.

Wolfrum K(1), Wang Y, Prigione A, Sperling K, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Human amniotic fluid cells (AFCs) are routinely obtained for prenatal diagnostics
procedures. Recently, it has been illustrated that these cells may also serve as 
a valuable model system to study developmental processes and for application in
regenerative therapies. Cellular reprogramming is a means of assigning greater
value to primary AFCs by inducing self-renewal and pluripotency and, thus,
bypassing senescence. Here, we report the generation and characterization of
human amniotic fluid-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (AFiPSCs) and
demonstrate their ability to differentiate into the trophoblast lineage after
stimulation with BMP2/BMP4. We further carried out comparative transcriptome
analyses of primary human AFCs, AFiPSCs, fibroblast-derived iPSCs (FiPSCs) and
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). This revealed that the expression of key
senescence-associated genes are down-regulated upon the induction of pluripotency
in primary AFCs (AFiPSCs). By defining distinct and overlapping gene expression
patterns and deriving the LARGE (Lost, Acquired and Retained Gene Expression)
Principle of Cellular Reprogramming, we could further highlight that AFiPSCs,
FiPSCs and ESCs share a core self-renewal gene regulatory network driven by OCT4,
SOX2 and NANOG. Nevertheless, these cell types are marked by distinct gene
expression signatures. For example, expression of the transcription factors,
SIX6, EGR2, PKNOX2, HOXD4, HOXD10, DLX5 and RAXL1, known to regulate
developmental processes, are retained in AFiPSCs and FiPSCs. Surprisingly,
expression of the self-renewal-associated gene PRDM14 or the developmental
processes-regulating genes WNT3A and GSC are restricted to ESCs. Implications of 
this, with respect to the stability of the undifferentiated state and long-term
differentiation potential of iPSCs, warrant further studies.

PMCID: PMC2966395
PMID: 21060825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 19;285(47):36721-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.162305. Epub
2010 Sep 15.

Hyaluronan-CD44 interaction promotes c-Src-mediated twist signaling, microRNA-10b
expression, and RhoA/RhoC up-regulation, leading to Rho-kinase-associated
cytoskeleton activation and breast tumor cell invasion.

Bourguignon LY(1), Wong G, Earle C, Krueger K, Spevak CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Endocrine Unit (111N), University of California at San
Francisco and Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California 94121,
USA. lilly.bourguignon@ucsf.edu

Dysregulation of microRNAs is observed in many cancers, including breast cancer. 
In particular, miR-10b appears to play an important role in tumor cell invasion
and breast cancer progression. In this study, we investigated hyaluronan
(HA)-induced CD44 (a primary HA receptor) interaction with c-Src kinase and the
transcriptional factor, Twist, in breast tumor cells (MDA-MB-231 cells). Our
results indicate that HA binding to CD44 promotes c-Src kinase activation, which,
in turn, increases Twist phosphorylation, leading to the nuclear translocation of
Twist and transcriptional activation. Further analyses reveal that miR-10b is
controlled by an upstream promoter containing the Twist binding site(s), whereas 
ChIP assays demonstrate that stimulation of miR-10b expression by
HA/CD44-activated c-Src is Twist-dependent in breast tumor cells. This process
results in the reduction of a tumor suppressor protein (HOXD10), RhoA/RhoC
up-regulation, Rho-kinase (ROK) activation, and breast tumor cell invasion.
Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with PP2 (a c-Src inhibitor) or Twist-specific
siRNAs effectively blocks HA-mediated Twist signaling events, abrogates miR-10b
production, and increases HOXD10 expression. Subsequently, this c-Src/Twist
signaling inhibition causes down-regulation of RhoA/RhoC expression and
impairment of ROK-regulated cytoskeleton function (e.g. tumor cell invasion). To 
further evaluate the role of miR-10b in RhoGTPase signaling, MDA-MB-231 cells
were also transfected with a specific anti-miR-10b inhibitor in order to silence 
miR-10b expression and block its target functions. Our results demonstrate that
anti-miR-10b inhibitor not only enhances HOXD10 expression but also abrogates
HA/CD44-mediated tumor cell behaviors in breast tumor cells. Taken together,
these findings indicate that the HA-induced CD44 interaction with c-Src-activated
Twist plays a pivotal role in miR-10b production, leading to the down-regulation 
of tumor suppressor protein (HOXD10), RhoGTPase-ROK activation, and tumor cell
invasion. All of these events are critical prerequisite steps for the acquisition
of metastatic properties by human breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2978601
PMID: 20843787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cas Lek Cesk. 2010;149(1):4-9.

[HOX genes and the limb development in the clinical praxis and in the
experiment].

[Article in Czech]

Snajdr P(1), Grim M, Liska F.

Author information: 
(1)Univerzita Karlova v Praze, 1. lékarská fakulta, Anatomický ústav.
pavel.snajdr@lf1.cuni.cz

In human, congenital malformations of the limbs are ranked among the most
prevalent of all congenital birth defects. Substantial portion of these defects
has genetic origin. Increasing knowledge about the particular mutations
responsible for limb malformations in human results in the increasing
availability of DNA diagnostic procedures for confirmation of clinical diagnosis 
and family counselling. Increasing understanding of the underlying developmental 
processes revealed by studying limb defects both in human and animal models may
offer better therapeutic options in the future. This review concentrates on the
role of Hox genes in limb development. Man, as well as other mammals, has 39 HOX 
genes, divided into 4 complexes (clusters). HOX genes play a major role in body
plan layout and development of many organ systems. Experimental data show that
during the limb development, HOX genes influence patterning along the
proximodistal and anteroposterior (thumb-little finger) axis of the limb bud. In 
human, limb malformation was described in patients with mutations in HOXA11,
HOXA13, HOXD10, and HOXD13 genes. Most frequent among these malformations are
hand-foot-genital syndrome caused by HOXA13 gene mutation, and synpolydactyly
caused by HOXD13 mutation. Severity of the phenotype manifestation of these
diseases is variable, and depends on the particular mutation type, where point
mutations, polyalanine expansions and deletions can take part.

PMID: 20662453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nat Biotechnol. 2010 Apr;28(4):341-7. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1618. Epub 2010 Mar 28.

Therapeutic silencing of miR-10b inhibits metastasis in a mouse mammary tumor
model.

Ma L(1), Reinhardt F, Pan E, Soutschek J, Bhat B, Marcusson EG, Teruya-Feldstein 
J, Bell GW, Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are increasingly implicated in the regulation of metastasis.
Despite their potential as targets for anti-metastatic therapy, miRNAs have only 
been silenced in normal tissues of rodents and nonhuman primates. Therefore, the 
development of effective approaches for sequence-specific inhibition of miRNAs in
tumors remains a scientific and clinical challenge. Here we show that systemic
treatment of tumor-bearing mice with miR-10b antagomirs-a class of chemically
modified anti-miRNA oligonucleotide-suppresses breast cancer metastasis. Both in 
vitro and in vivo, silencing of miR-10b with antagomirs significantly decreases
miR-10b levels and increases the levels of a functionally important miR-10b
target, Hoxd10. Administration of miR-10b antagomirs to mice bearing highly
metastatic cells does not reduce primary mammary tumor growth but markedly
suppresses formation of lung metastases in a sequence-specific manner. The
miR-10b antagomir, which is well tolerated by normal animals, appears to be a
promising candidate for the development of new anti-metastasis agents.

PMCID: PMC2852471
PMID: 20351690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R58. doi: 10.1186/bcr2348. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

MicroRNA expression profiling of male breast cancer.

Fassan M(1), Baffa R, Palazzo JP, Lloyd J, Crosariol M, Liu CG, Volinia S, Alder 
H, Rugge M, Croce CM, Rosenberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Thomas Jefferson University - Kimmel Cancer Center,
1112 College Building, 1025 Walnut Street, PA 19107, USA. matteo.fassan@unipd.it

INTRODUCTION: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small noncoding RNAs that control
gene expression by targeting mRNAs and triggering either translation repression
or RNA degradation. Their aberrant expression may be involved in human diseases, 
including cancer. To test the hypothesis that there is a specific miRNA
expression signature which characterizes male breast cancers, we performed miRNA 
microarray analysis in a series of male breast cancers and compared them with
cases of male gynecomastia and female breast cancers.
METHODS: Paraffin blocks were obtained at the Department of Pathology of Thomas
Jefferson University from 28 male patients including 23 breast cancers and five
cases of male gynecomastia, and from 10 female ductal breast carcinomas. The RNA 
harvested was hybridized to miRNA microarrays (~1,100 miRNA probes, including 326
human and 249 mouse miRNA genes, spotted in duplicate). To further support the
microarray data, an immunohistochemical analysis for two specific miRNA gene
targets (HOXD10 and VEGF) was performed in a small series of male breast
carcinoma and gynecomastia samples.
RESULTS: We identified a male breast cancer miRNA signature composed of a large
portion of underexpressed miRNAs. In particular, 17 miRNAs with increased
expression and 26 miRNAs with decreased expression were identified in male breast
cancer compared with gynecomastia. Among these miRNAs, some had
well-characterized cancer development association and some showed a deregulation 
in cancer specimens similar to the one previously observed in the published
signatures of female breast cancer. Comparing male with female breast cancer
miRNA expression signatures, 17 significantly deregulated miRNAs were observed
(four overexpressed and 13 underexpressed in male breast cancers). The HOXD10 and
VEGF gene immunohistochemical expression significantly follows the corresponding 
miRNA deregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that specific miRNAs may be directly involved in
male breast cancer development and that they may represent a novel diagnostic
tool in the characterization of specific cancer gene targets.

PMCID: PMC2750120
PMID: 19664288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 15;69(16):6721-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4069. Epub
2009 Aug 4.

Endothelial cell migration and vascular endothelial growth factor expression are 
the result of loss of breast tissue polarity.

Chen A(1), Cuevas I, Kenny PA, Miyake H, Mace K, Ghajar C, Boudreau A, Bissell
MJ, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California at San Francisco, 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 1;70(15):6398. Bissell, Mina [corrected to Bissell, Mina J].

Recruiting a new blood supply is a rate-limiting step in tumor progression. In a 
three-dimensional model of breast carcinogenesis, disorganized, proliferative
transformed breast epithelial cells express significantly higher expression of
angiogenic genes compared with their polarized, growth-arrested nonmalignant
counterparts. Elevated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion by
malignant cells enhanced recruitment of endothelial cells (EC) in heterotypic
cocultures. Significantly, phenotypic reversion of malignant cells via
reexpression of HoxD10, which is lost in malignant progression, significantly
attenuated VEGF expression in a hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha-independent
fashion and reduced EC migration. This was due primarily to restoring polarity:
forced proliferation of polarized, nonmalignant cells did not induce VEGF
expression and EC recruitment, whereas disrupting the architecture of
growth-arrested, reverted cells did. These data show that disrupting
cytostructure activates the angiogenic switch even in the absence of
proliferation and/or hypoxia and restoring organization of malignant clusters
reduces VEGF expression and EC activation to levels found in quiescent
nonmalignant epithelium. These data confirm the importance of tissue architecture
and polarity in malignant progression.

PMCID: PMC2760003
PMID: 19654314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Pathol. 2009 Oct;219(2):214-21. doi: 10.1002/path.2586.

MicroRNA expression profiling of human metastatic cancers identifies cancer gene 
targets.

Baffa R(1), Fassan M, Volinia S, O'Hara B, Liu CG, Palazzo JP, Gardiman M, Rugge 
M, Gomella LG, Croce CM, Rosenberg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Thomas Jefferson University, Kimmel Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. R_Baffa@mail.jci.tju.edu

Small non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) contribute to cancer development and
progression, and are differentially expressed in normal tissues and cancers.
However, the specific role of miRNAs in the metastatic process is still unknown. 
To seek a specific miRNA expression signature characterizing the metastatic
phenotype of solid tumours, we performed a miRNA microarray analysis on 43 paired
primary tumours (ten colon, ten bladder, 13 breast, and ten lung cancers) and one
of their related metastatic lymph nodes. We identified a metastatic cancer miRNA 
signature comprising 15 overexpressed and 17 underexpressed miRNAs. Our results
were confirmed by qRT-PCR analysis. Among the miRNAs identified, some have a
well-characterized association with cancer progression, eg miR-10b, miR-21,
miR-30a, miR-30e, miR-125b, miR-141, miR-200b, miR-200c, and miR-205. To further 
support our data, we performed an immunohistochemical analysis for three
well-defined miRNA gene targets (PDCD4, DHFR, and HOXD10 genes) on a small series
of paired colon, breast, and bladder cancers, and one of their metastatic lymph
nodes. We found that the immunohistochemical expression of these targets
significantly follows the corresponding miRNA deregulation. Our results suggest
that specific miRNAs may be directly involved in cancer metastasis and that they 
may represent a novel diagnostic tool in the characterization of metastatic
cancer gene targets.

2009 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19593777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Int J Cancer. 2009 Sep 15;125(6):1407-13. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24522.

MicroRNA-10b is overexpressed in malignant glioma and associated with tumor
invasive factors, uPAR and RhoC.

Sasayama T(1), Nishihara M, Kondoh T, Hosoda K, Kohmura E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan. takasasa@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are effective post-transcriptional regulators of gene
expression and are important in many biological processes. Although the oncogenic
and tumor suppressive functions of several miRNAs have been characterized, the
role of miRNAs in mediating tumor invasion and migration remains largely
unexplored. Recently, miR-10b was identified as an miRNA highly expressed in
metastatic breast cancer, promoting cell migration and invasion. Here, we
performed real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
assays on 43 glioma samples (17 glioblastoma, 6 anaplastic astrocytoma, 10
low-grade astrocytoma, 6 oligodendroglioma and 4 ependymoma) and 6 glioma cell
lines. We found that miR-10b expression was upregulated in all glioma samples
compared to non-neoplastic brain tissues. The expression levels of miR-10b were
associated with higher grade glioma. In addition, mRNA expressions of RhoC and
urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), which were thought to be
regulated by miR-10b via HOXD10, were statistically significantly correlated with
the expression of miR-10b (p < 0.001, p = 0.001, respectively). Also, protein
expression levels of RhoC and uPAR were associated with expression levels of
miR-10b (p = 0.009, p = 0.014, respectively). Finally, multifocal lesions on
enhanced MRI of 7 malignant gliomas were associated with higher expression levels
of miR-10b (p = 0.02). Our data indicated that miR-10b might play some role in
the invasion of glioma cells.

2009 UICC

PMID: 19536818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Sep;48(9):828-41. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20687.

DNA hypermethylation accompanied by transcriptional repression in follicular
lymphoma.

Bennett LB(1), Schnabel JL, Kelchen JM, Taylor KH, Guo J, Arthur GL, Papageorgio 
CN, Shi H, Caldwell CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of
Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
bennettlb@health.missouri.edu

High-throughput microarray technologies were used to study DNA methylation
accompanied by transcriptional changes in follicular lymphoma (FL). Using
Methylated CpG Island Amplification with Microarrays to study CpG Island DNA
methylation in FL, we discovered widespread hypermethylation of homeobox genes
and previously identified targets of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in cell
lines and primary tumors, but not in benign follicular hyperplasia (BFH). DNA
methylation for HOXA11, HOXD10, HOXB7, HOXC12, PAX6, LHX9, SFMBT2, EN2, and PAX7 
was independently validated in the RL cell line and HOXA11, HOXD10, PAX6, and EN2
in primary tumors. Combined Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) also
established DNA methylation for the previously identified PRC2 targets DCC, DES, 
GAD2, AQP5, GPR61, GRIA4, GJD2, and AMPH in FL but not in BFH. Gene expression
analyses revealed 411 genes that were hypermethylated and transcriptionally
repressed in RL, 74% of which were reactivated by the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaD) plus or minus the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA). Forty genes were also downregulated in primary FL. Our
results suggest that extensive hypermethylation in promoters of polycomb target
genes is a characteristic of FL and that loss of expression of certain SUZ12
target genes could be functionally relevant for lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2738630
PMID: 19530241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Clin Genet. 2009 May;75(5):449-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01147.x.

A novel microdeletion at chromosome 2q31.1-31.2 in a three-generation family
presenting duplication of great toes with clinodactyly.

Tsai LP(1), Liao HM, Chen YJ, Fang JS, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tzu Chi General Hospital, Xindian, Taipei, Taiwan.

HOXD gene cluster maps to chromosome 2q31 and plays a key role in embryonic limb 
morphogenesis. Mutations of the HOXD13 and HOXD10 genes have been found to be
associated with digital and limb malformations. In addition, dysregulation of
HOXD gene cluster has been proposed to account for the limb abnormalities in
patients with chromosome 2q rearrangements. In this report, we investigated a
three-generation family presenting clinical phenotypes of duplication of great
toes, tapering fingers, and clinodactyly of the fifth finger in both hands, which
were transmitted in a dominant fashion in this family. We identified and
validated an interstitial microdeletion of approximately 3.4 Mb at chromosome
2q31.1-31.2 by array-based comparative genomic hybridization, fluorescence in
situ hybridization, and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction that
cosegregates with the clinical phenotypes in this family. The microdeletion
removes 30 labeled genes including the entire HOXD gene cluster, suggesting that 
the digital abnormalities of this family may be attributed to the
haploinsufficiency of the HOXD gene cluster. The delineation of the microdeletion
region may contribute to the genotype-phenotype correlation study in patients
with genomic rearrangements of the long arm of chromosome 2 and helps to
understand the pathogenesis of haploinsufficiency of the HOXD gene cluster.

PMID: 19459884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005121. Epub 2009 Apr 13.

Heterochronic shift in Hox-mediated activation of sonic hedgehog leads to
morphological changes during fin development.

Sakamoto K(1), Onimaru K, Munakata K, Suda N, Tamura M, Ochi H, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Nagatsuta-cho, Yokohama, Japan.

We explored the molecular mechanisms of morphological transformations of
vertebrate paired fin/limb evolution by comparative gene expression profiling and
functional analyses. In this study, we focused on the temporal differences of the
onset of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression in paired appendages among different
vertebrates. In limb buds of chick and mouse, Shh expression is activated as soon
as there is a morphological bud, concomitant with Hoxd10 expression. In dogfish
(Scyliorhinus canicula), however, we found that Shh was transcribed late in fin
development, concomitant with Hoxd13 expression. We utilized zebrafish as a model
to determine whether quantitative changes in hox expression alter the timing of
shh expression in pectoral fins of zebrafish embryos. We found that the temporal 
shift of Shh activity altered the size of endoskeletal elements in paired fins of
zebrafish and dogfish. Thus, a threshold level of hox expression determines the
onset of shh expression, and the subsequent heterochronic shift of Shh activity
can affect the size of the fin endoskeleton. This process may have facilitated
major morphological changes in paired appendages during vertebrate limb
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2664896
PMID: 19365553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 1;330(1):54-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.03.009. Epub 2009
Mar 21.

Restricted patterns of Hoxd10 and Hoxd11 set segmental differences in motoneuron 
subtype complement in the lumbosacral spinal cord.

Misra M(1), Shah V, Carpenter E, McCaffery P, Lance-Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Center for Neuroscience, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 3500 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

During normal vertebrate development, Hoxd10 and Hoxd11 are expressed by
differentiating motoneurons in restricted patterns along the rostrocaudal axis of
the lumbosacral (LS) spinal cord. To assess the roles of these genes in the
attainment of motoneuron subtypes characteristic of LS subdomains, we examined
subtype complement after overexpression of Hoxd10 or Hoxd11 in the embryonic
chick LS cord and in a Hoxd10 loss-of-function mouse embryo. Data presented here 
provide evidence that Hoxd10 defines the position of the lateral motor column
(LMC) as a whole and, in rostral LS segments, specifically promotes the
development of motoneurons of the lateral subdivision of the lateral motor column
(LMCl). In contrast, Hoxd11 appears to impart a caudal and medial LMC (LMCm)
identity to some motoneurons and molecular profiles suggestive of a suppression
of LMC development in others. We also provide evidence that Hoxd11 suppresses the
expression of Hoxd10 and the retinoic acid synthetic enzyme, retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (RALDH2). In a normal chick embryo, Hoxd10 and RALDH2 are
expressed throughout the LS region at early stages of motoneuron differentiation 
but their levels decline in Hoxd11-expressing caudal LS segments that ultimately 
contain few LMCl motoneurons. We hypothesize that one of the roles played by
Hoxd11 is to modulate Hoxd10 and local retinoic acid levels and thus, perhaps
define the caudal boundaries of the LMC and its subtype complement.

PMCID: PMC2699214
PMID: 19306865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Dyn. 2009 Mar;238(3):673-84. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21859.

Deletion of a conserved noncoding sequence in Plzf intron leads to Plzf
down-regulation in limb bud and polydactyly in the rat.

Liska F(1), Snajdr P, Sedová L, Seda O, Chylíková B, Slámová P, Krejcí E, Sedmera
D, Grim M, Krenová D, Kren V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and
General Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Praha, Czech Republic.
frantisek.liska@lf1.cuni.cz

Lx mutation in SHR.Lx rat manifests in homozygotes as hindlimb preaxial
polydactyly. It was previously mapped to a chromosome 8 segment containing the
Plzf gene. Plzf (promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein) influences limb
development as a direct repressor of posterior HoxD genes. However, the Plzf
coding sequence is intact in the Lx mutants. Using linkage mapping in F2 hybrids,
we downsized the segment containing Lx to 155 kb and sequenced conserved
noncoding elements (CNEs) inside. A 2,964-bp deletion in Plzf intron 2, never
detected in control animals, is the only candidate for Lx. The deletion removes
the most deeply conserved CNE in the 155-kb segment, suggesting a regulatory
influence on Plzf expression. Correspondingly, using in situ hybridization and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, we found a decrease of Plzf
expression in Lx/Lx limb buds with concomitant anterior expansion of expression
domains of its targets, Hoxd10-13 genes, in the absence of ectopic Sonic hedgehog
expression. Upstream regulation of Plzf in limb buds is currently unknown. We
present here the first candidate Plzf cis-regulatory sequence.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19191224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2009;4(1):e4213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004213. Epub 2009 Jan 16.

Cell lineage and regional identity of cultured spinal cord neural stem cells and 
comparison to brain-derived neural stem cells.

Kelly TK(1), Karsten SL, Geschwind DH, Kornblum HI.

Author information: 
(1)The Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Behavior, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) can be isolated from different regions of the central
nervous system. There has been controversy whether regional differences amongst
stem and progenitor cells are cell intrinsic and whether these differences are
maintained during expansion in culture. The identification of inherent regional
differences has important implications for the use of these cells in neural
repair. Here, we compared NSCs derived from the spinal cord and embryonic cortex.
We found that while cultured cortical and spinal cord derived NSCs respond
similarly to mitogens and are equally neuronogenic, they retain and maintain
through multiple passages gene expression patterns indicative of the region from 
which they were isolated (e.g Emx2 and HoxD10). Further microarray analysis
identified 229 genes that were differentially expressed between cortical and
spinal cord derived neurospheres, including many Hox genes, Nuclear receptors,
Irx3, Pace4, Lhx2, Emx2 and Ntrk2. NSCs in the cortex express LeX. However, in
the embryonic spinal cord there are two lineally related populations of NSCs: one
that expresses LeX and one that does not. The LeX negative population contains
few markers of regional identity but is able to generate LeX expressing NSCs that
express markers of regional identity. LeX positive cells do not give rise to
LeX-negative NSCs. These results demonstrate that while both embryonic cortical
and spinal cord NSCs have similar self-renewal properties and multipotency, they 
retain aspects of regional identity, even when passaged long-term in vitro.
Furthermore, there is a population of a LeX negative NSC that is present in
neurospheres derived from the embryonic spinal cord but not the cortex.

PMCID: PMC2615219
PMID: 19148290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 15;68(20):8195-200. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2103.

MicroRNA-7, a homeobox D10 target, inhibits p21-activated kinase 1 and regulates 
its functions.

Reddy SD(1), Ohshiro K, Rayala SK, Kumar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

MicroRNAs are noncoding RNAs that inhibit the expression of their targets in a
sequence-specific manner and play crucial roles during oncogenesis. Here we show 
that microRNA-7 (miR-7) inhibits p21-activated kinase 1 (Pak1) expression, a
widely up-regulated signaling kinase in multiple human cancers, by targeting the 
3'-untranslated region (UTR) of Pak1 mRNA. We noticed an inverse correlation
between the levels of endogenous miR-7 and Pak1 expression in human cancer cells.
We discovered that endogenous miR-7 expression is positively regulated by a
homeodomain transcription factor, HoxD10, the loss of which leads to an increased
invasiveness. HoxD10 directly interacts with the miR-7 chromatin. Accordingly,
the levels of Pak1 protein are progressively up-regulated whereas those of miR-7 
and its upstream activator HoxD10 are progressively down-regulated in a cellular 
model of breast cancer progression from low to highly invasive phenotypes.
Furthermore, HoxD10 expression in highly invasive breast cancer cells resulted in
an increased miR-7 expression but reduced Pak1 3'-UTR-luciferase activity and
reduced Pak1 protein. Finally, we show that miR-7 introduction inhibits the
motility, invasiveness, anchorage-independent growth, and tumorigenic potential
of highly invasive breast cancer cells. Collectively, these findings establish
for the first time that Pak1 is a target of miR-7 and that HoxD10 plays a
regulatory role in modifying the expression of miR-7 and, consequently, the
functions of the miR-7-Pak1 pathway in human cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3636563
PMID: 18922890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nat Protoc. 2008;3(6):1101-8.

Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative C(T) method.

Schmittgen TD(1), Livak KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, Ohio State University, Parks
Hall, 500 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio, OH 43210 USA. schmittgen.2@osu.edu

Two different methods of presenting quantitative gene expression exist: absolute 
and relative quantification. Absolute quantification calculates the copy number
of the gene usually by relating the PCR signal to a standard curve. Relative gene
expression presents the data of the gene of interest relative to some calibrator 
or internal control gene. A widely used method to present relative gene
expression is the comparative C(T) method also referred to as the 2
(-DeltaDeltaC(T)) method. This protocol provides an overview of the comparative
C(T) method for quantitative gene expression studies. Also presented here are
various examples to present quantitative gene expression data using this method.

PMID: 18546601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 4;371(3):371-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.085. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

HoxD10 gene delivery using adenovirus/adeno-associate hybrid virus inhibits the
proliferation and tumorigenicity of GH4 pituitary lactotrope tumor cells.

Cho MA(1), Yashar P, Kim SK, Noh T, Gillam MP, Lee EJ, Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Pituitary Tumor Clinic, Research Institute of
Endocrinology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Prolactinoma is one of the most common types of pituitary adenoma. It has been
reported that a variety of growth factors and cytokines regulating cell growth
and angiogenesis play an important role in the growth of prolactinoma. HoxD10 has
been shown to impair endothelial cell migration, block angiogenesis, and maintain
a differentiated phenotype of cells. We investigated whether HoxD10 gene delivery
could inhibit the growth of prolactinoma. Rat GH4 lactotrope tumor cells were
infected with adenovirus/adeno-associated virus (Ad/AAV) hybrid vectors carrying 
the mouse HoxD10 gene (Hyb-HoxD10) or the beta-galactosidase gene (Hyb-Gal).
Hyb-HoxD10 expression inhibited GH4 cell proliferation in vitro. The expression
of FGF-2 and cyclin D2 was inhibited in GH4 cells infected with Hyb-HoxD10. GH4
cells transduced with Hyb-HoxD10 did not form tumors in nude mice. These results 
indicate that the delivery of HoxD10 could potentially inhibit the growth of
PRL-secreting tumors. This approach may be a useful tool for targeted therapy of 
prolactinoma and other neoplasms.

PMID: 18442473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(2):203. doi: 10.1186/bcr1867. Epub 2008 Mar 26.

Breast cancer metastasis: a microRNA story.

Negrini M(1), Calin GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Interdepartment Center for
Cancer Research, University of Ferrara, via Luigi Borsari, Ferrara 44100, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs with regulatory functions, which play
an important role in breast cancer. Several studies have shown that miRNAs can
act either as tumor suppressors or as oncogenes, and that measurement of miRNA
expression in malignancies may have diagnostic and prognostic implications. This 
article highlights a series of three recent studies that prove the involvement of
miRNAs in breast cancer metastases. The first proves that miR-10b indirectly
activates the pro-metastatic gene RHOC by suppressing HOXD10, thus leading to
tumor invasion and metastasis. The second proves that miR-373 and miR-520c can
also promote tumor invasion and metastasis, at least in part by regulating the
gene CD44. The third identifies miR-335, miR-206, and miR-126 as suppressors of
breast cancer metastasis. Loss of miR-335 leads to the activation of SOX4 and TNC
(encoding tenascin C), which are responsible for the acquisition of metastatic
properties. Altogether, these remarkable findings are important for our
understanding of malignant transformation in the breast and may have implications
for the management of patients with advanced breast cancer. The use of miRNAs as 
anticancer therapeutic agents is promising, and such fine molecular studies
certainly help in bringing miRNAs closer to clinical practice.

PMCID: PMC2397516
PMID: 18373886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Development. 2008 Jan;135(1):171-82.

Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 regulate mouse columnar, divisional and motor pool identity of 
lumbar motoneurons.

Wu Y(1), Wang G, Scott SA, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112,
USA.

A central question in neural development is how the broad diversity of neurons is
generated in the vertebrate CNS. We have investigated the function of Hoxc10 and 
Hoxd10 in mouse lumbar motoneuron development. We show that Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 are
initially expressed in most newly generated lumbar motoneurons, but subsequently 
become restricted to the lateral division of the lateral motor column (lLMC).
Disruption of Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 caused severe hindlimb locomotor defects.
Motoneurons in rostral lumbar segments were found to adopt the phenotype of
thoracic motoneurons. More caudally the lLMC and dorsal-projecting axons were
missing, yet most hindlimb muscles were innervated. The loss of the lLMC was not 
due to decreased production of motoneuron precursors or increased apoptosis.
Instead, presumptive lLMC neurons failed to migrate to their normal position, and
did not differentiate into other motoneurons or interneurons. Together, these
results show that Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 play key roles in establishing lumbar
motoneuron columnar, divisional and motor pool identity.

PMID: 18065432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nature. 2007 Oct 11;449(7163):671-3.

Cancer: micromanagement of metastasis.

Steeg PS.

Comment on
    Nature. 2007 Oct 11;449(7163):682-8.

PMID: 17928850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nature. 2007 Oct 25;449(7165):1068-72. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Regulation of cell cycle progression and gene expression by H2A deubiquitination.

Joo HY(1), Zhai L, Yang C, Nie S, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Chang C, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Kaul Human Genetics Building 402A, 720 South 20th Street, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Post-translational histone modifications have important regulatory roles in
chromatin structure and function. One example of such modifications is histone
ubiquitination, which occurs predominately on histone H2A and H2B. Although the
recent identification of the ubiquitin ligase for histone H2A has revealed
important roles for H2A ubiquitination in Hox gene silencing as well as in
X-chromosome inactivation, the enzyme(s) involved in H2A deubiquitination and the
function of H2A deubiquitination are not known. Here we report the identification
and functional characterization of the major deubiquitinase for histone H2A,
Ubp-M (also called USP16). Ubp-M prefers nucleosomal substrates in vitro, and
specifically deubiquitinates histone H2A but not H2B in vitro and in vivo.
Notably, knockdown of Ubp-M in HeLa cells results in slow cell growth rates owing
to defects in the mitotic phase of the cell cycle. Further studies reveal that
H2A deubiquitination by Ubp-M is a prerequisite for subsequent phosphorylation of
Ser 10 of H3 and chromosome segregation when cells enter mitosis. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that Ubp-M regulates Hox gene expression through H2A deubiquitination
and that blocking the function of Ubp-M results in defective posterior
development in Xenopus laevis. This study identifies the major deubiquitinase for
histone H2A and demonstrates that H2A deubiquitination is critically involved in 
cell cycle progression and gene expression.

PMID: 17914355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1121.

Micromanaging metastasis.

Schuldt A.

PMID: 17909523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nature. 2007 Oct 11;449(7163):682-8. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Tumour invasion and metastasis initiated by microRNA-10b in breast cancer.

Ma L(1), Teruya-Feldstein J, Weinberg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2008 Sep 11;455(7210):256.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Oct 11;449(7163):671-3.
    Nature. 2008 Oct 23;455(7216):E8-9; author reply E9.

MicroRNAs have been implicated in regulating diverse cellular pathways. Although 
there is emerging evidence that some microRNAs can function as oncogenes or
tumour suppressors, the role of microRNAs in mediating cancer metastasis remains 
unexplored. Here we show, using a combination of mouse and human cells, that
microRNA-10b (miR-10b) is highly expressed in metastatic breast cancer cells and 
positively regulates cell migration and invasion. Overexpression of miR-10b in
otherwise non-metastatic breast tumours initiates robust invasion and metastasis.
Expression of miR-10b is induced by the transcription factor Twist, which binds
directly to the putative promoter of mir-10b (MIRN10B). The miR-10b induced by
Twist proceeds to inhibit translation of the messenger RNA encoding homeobox D10,
resulting in increased expression of a well-characterized pro-metastatic gene,
RHOC. Significantly, the level of miR-10b expression in primary breast carcinomas
correlates with clinical progression. These findings suggest the workings of an
undescribed regulatory pathway, in which a pleiotropic transcription factor
induces expression of a specific microRNA, which suppresses its direct target and
in turn activates another pro-metastatic gene, leading to tumour cell invasion
and metastasis.

PMID: 17898713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 15;310(2):430-41. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

Hoxd and Gli3 interactions modulate digit number in the amniote limb.

Sheth R(1), Bastida MF, Ros M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011, 
Santander, Spain.

During limb development, Sonic hedgehog (SHH) and HOX proteins are considered
among the most important factors regulating digit number and identity. SHH
signaling prevents the processing of GLI3 into a short form that functions as a
strong transcriptional repressor. Gli3 mutant limbs are characterized by a severe
polydactyly and associated ectopic anterior expression of 5'Hoxd genes. To
genetically determine the involvement of 5'Hoxd genes in the polydactyly of Gli3 
mutants, we have generated a compound mutant that simultaneously removes the
three most 5'-located Hoxd genes and Gli3. Remarkably, the limbs that form in the
absence of all four of these genes show the most severe polydactyly so far
reported in the mouse. The analysis of gene expression performed in compound
mutants allows us to propose that the increase in the number of digits is
mediated by the gain in function of Hoxd10 and Hoxd9. Our results also support
the notion that an adequate balance between positive and negative effects of
different Hoxd genes is required for pentadactyly.

PMID: 17714700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Aug;6(8):1284-8. Epub 2007 May 24.

DNA methylation regulates MicroRNA expression.

Han L(1), Witmer PD, Casey E, Valle D, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Predoctoral Training Program in Human Genetics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of 
Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), an important class of small regulatory molecules for gene
expression, are transcribed by RNA polymerase II. But little is known about the
mechanisms that control miRNA expression. Comparing miRNA expression profiles
between colon cancer cell line HCT 116 and its derivative, DNA methyltransferase 
1 and 3b (DNMT1 and DNMT3b) double knockout cell line, we found that the
expression of about 10% miRNAs was regulated by DNA methylation. In addition,
neither 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment nor deletion of DNMT1 alone
recapitulated miRNA expression profile seen in the double knockout cell line,
suggesting that miRNA expression was tightly controlled by DNA methylation and
partial methylation reduction was not sufficient for miRNA reexpression. We also 
found that HOXA3 and HOXD10 were putative targets of mir-10a, one of the
differentially expressed miRNAs that is located in HOX gene cluster.

PMID: 17660710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genes Immun. 2007 Sep;8(6):480-91. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Distinctive gene expression signatures in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue
fibroblast cells: correlates with disease activity.

Galligan CL(1), Baig E, Bykerk V, Keystone EC, Fish EN.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Gene expression profiling of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA)
joint tissue samples provides a unique insight into the gene signatures involved 
in disease development and progression. Fibroblast-like synovial (FLS) cells were
obtained from RA, OA and control trauma joint tissues (non-RA, non-OA) and RNA
was analyzed by Affymetrix microarray. Thirty-four genes specific to RA and OA
FLS cells were identified (P<0.05). HOXD10, HOXD11, HOXD13, CCL8 and LIM homeobox
2 were highly and exclusively expressed in RA and CLU, sarcoglycan-gamma, GPR64, 
POU3F3, peroxisome proliferative activated receptor-gamma and tripartite
motif-containing 2 were expressed only in OA. The data also revealed expression
heterogeneity for patients with the same disease. To address disease
heterogeneity in RA FLS cells, we examined the effects of clinical disease
parameters (Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) score, C-reactive protein
(CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), rheumatoid factor (RF)) and drug
therapies (methotrexate/prednisone) on RA FLS cell gene expression. Eight
specific and unique correlations were identified: human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-DQA2 with HAQ score; Clec12A with RF; MAB21L2, SIAT7E, HAPLN1 and BAIAP2L1 
with CRP level; RGMB and OSAP with ESR. Signature RA FLS cell gene expression
profiles may provide insights into disease pathogenesis and have utility in
diagnosis, prognosis and drug responsiveness.

PMID: 17568789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2007 Sep;462:27-31.

Absence of HOXD10 mutations in idiopathic clubfoot and sporadic vertical talus.

Gurnett CA(1), Keppel C, Bick J, Bowcock AM, Dobbs MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.

The genetic etiology of idiopathic clubfoot is unknown. There have been cases
reported in which both clubfoot and vertical talus appears in the same family;
therefore, the genes responsible for vertical talus are reasonable candidates for
idiopathic clubfoot. A mutation in HOXD10 was previously identified in a family
with isolated congenital vertical talus. To determine whether HOXD10 is involved 
in the etiology of idiopathic clubfoot, HOXD10 coding and 5' and 3' untranslated 
regions were resequenced in 190 patients (177 with clubfoot, 10 with sporadic
vertical talus, and 3 with both clubfoot and vertical talus), and 160 ethnically 
matched control subjects. Rare nonsynonymous HOXD10 amino acid substitutions
(Leu154Val, Asn202Lys, and Thr175Ala), likely benign variants, were all detected 
once in patients and control subjects. Nucleotide substitutions were also
identified in HOXD10 intronic and 3' untranslated regions, but were not more
frequent in cases compared to controls. To investigate the possibility that
unsequenced regulatory regions play a role in this disorder, we performed linkage
analysis with markers on chromosome 2q near HOXD10 in one large family. We found 
no evidence of linkage near the HOXD gene cluster on chromosome 2q, suggesting
genes other than HOXD10 are responsible for idiopathic clubfoot.

PMID: 17417092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(7):730-7. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Expression patterns of Hox10 paralogous genes during lumbar spinal cord
development.

Choe A(1), Phun HQ, Tieu DD, Hu YH, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Science, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We have examined the expression of three paralogous Hox genes from E11.5 through 
E15.5 in the mouse spinal cord. These ages coincide with major phases of spinal
cord neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, cell migration, gliogenesis, and
motor neuron cell death. The three genes, Hoxa10, Hoxc10, and Hoxd10, are all
expressed in the lumbar spinal cord and have distinct expression patterns.
Mutations in these three genes are known to affect motor neuron patterning. All
three genes show lower levels of expression at the rostral limits of their
domains, with selective regions of higher expression more caudally. Hoxa10 and
Hoxd10 expression appears confined to postmitotic cell populations in the
intermediate and ventral gray, while Hoxc10 is also expressed in proliferating
cells in the dorsal ventricular zone. Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 expression is clearly
excluded from the lateral motor columns at rostral lumbar levels but is present
in this region more caudally. Double labeling demonstrates that Hoxc10 expression
is correlated with ventrolateral LIM gene expression in the caudal part of the
lumbar spinal cord.

PMID: 16495162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Orthop Res. 2006 Mar;24(3):448-53.

HOXD10 M319K mutation in a family with isolated congenital vertical talus.

Dobbs MB(1), Gurnett CA, Pierce B, Exner GU, Robarge J, Morcuende JA, Cole WG,
Templeton PA, Foster B, Bowcock AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
One Child Place, Suite 45 Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.
dobbsm@msnotes.wustl.edu

Congenital vertical talus (CVT) is a primary dislocation of the talonavicular
joint that often occurs in neuromusculoskeletal syndromes, but may also be seen
as an isolated abnormality. Six families with isolated CVT were ascertained. DNA 
was isolated from 21 affected individuals and 17 unaffected individuals from
these families, as well as from five sporadic patients with CVT. Variable
expressivity was noted in three families, manifesting as clubfoot in three
individuals. Genome-wide linkage analysis generated a maximum two-point logarithm
of odds score on chromosome 2q with D2S1353 (Zmax = 1.43 at theta(max) = 0.1), 17
Mb from the HOXD gene cluster. DNA from one affected individual of each family
was subjected to mutational analysis of the HOXD10 gene. A single missense
mutation was identified (M319K, 956T > A) in the homeodomain recognition helix of
the HOXD10 gene that segregated with disease in one large British family. This
mutation was recently described in a family of Italian descent with CVT and
Charcot-Marie-Tooth deformity HOXD10 gene mutations were not identified in any of
the other families or sporadic patients with CVT, suggesting that genetic
heterogeneity underlies this disorder.

Copyright 2006 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 16450407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Apr 1;312(6):854-64. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

Smads oppose Hox transcriptional activities.

Li X(1), Nie S, Chang C, Qiu T, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1670 University 
Blvd., VH G003, Birmingham, AL 35294-0019, USA.

BMPs and Hox proteins play crucial roles in developmental processes. Beyond their
mutual regulation of gene expression, little is known about the relations between
their mechanisms of actions. Previously, we have shown that Hoxc8 acts as a
downstream repressor in the BMP signaling pathway. Smad1 and Smad6 interact with 
Hoxc8 and regulate its repression activities. The Hox family contains 39 genes
divided into 13 paralogs. In this report, we systemically examined the potential 
functions of all the paralogous Hox proteins as BMP downstream transcription
factors. Representative Hox proteins from each paralog were tested. In the
gel-shift assay, we found that Smad1, Smad4, and Smad6 interacted with most of
the Hox proteins in ways similar to their interactions with Hoxc8. The
interactions were confirmed in mammalian cells. We also examined the effects of
Smads on Hox-induced transactivation. Particularly, we determined that for Hoxd10
as a transcriptional activator, both Smad1 and Smad6 opposed its activity. In
addition, Smad6 also inhibited Hoxc8- and Hoxb7-induced osteoprotegerin (OPG)
transactivation. Furthermore, Smad1 inhibited Hoxb4-mediated target gene Irx5
expression during early Xenopus development. Our findings suggest that Hox
proteins act as general downstream DNA-binding proteins in BMP signaling cascade 
and their transcriptional activities are regulated by Smads.

PMID: 16405960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Dec;22(6):653-6.

[Analysis of association between 5' HOXD gene and idiopathic congenital talipes
equinovarus].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LL(1), Jin CL, Liu LY, Zhang X, Ji SJ, Sun KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, 
P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in HOXD10, HOXD12 and
HOXD13 genes were chosen to investigate SNP and haplotypes distribution in
idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus nuclear pedigrees.
METHODS: Genotypes of 4 SNPs in 84 idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus
nuclear pedigrees were analyzed by restriction fragment length polymorphism and
DNA sequencing. Analysis of association between SNP locus and idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus was performed using ETDT software. Haplotypes and 
their frequencies in 84 nuclear pedigrees were established and analyzed by
TRANSMIT software.
RESULTS: rs847151 polymorphism was not detected; the rs847154 located in 5'
flanking sequence of HOXD12 gene and the rs13392701 located in exon 1 of HOXD13
gene were noted to have transmission disequilibrium in 84 nuclear pedigrees (P < 
0.05).
CONCLUSION: rs847154 located in 5' flanking sequence of HOXD12 gene and
rs13392701 located in exon 1 of HOXD13 gene are associated with idiopathic
congenital talipes equinovarus; HOXD12 andHOXD13 are important susceptible genes 
of idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus.

PMID: 16331564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genes Dev. 2005 Dec 1;19(23):2862-76.

HoxD cluster scanning deletions identify multiple defects leading to paralysis in
the mouse mutant Ironside.

Tarchini B(1), Huynh TH, Cox GA, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre Frontiers in Genetics and Department of Zoology and
Animal Biology, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

A spontaneous semidominant mutation (Ironside, Irn) was isolated in mice, leading
to severe hindlimb paralysis following multiple deletions in cis at the HoxD
locus. To understand its cellular and molecular etiology, we embarked on a
comparative analysis using systematic HoxD cluster deletions, produced via
targeted meiotic recombination (TAMERE). Different lines of mice were classified 
according to the severity of their paralyses, and subsequent analyses revealed
that multiple causative factors were involved, alone or in combination, in the
occurrence of this pathology. Among them are the loss of Hoxd10 function, the sum
of remaining Hoxd gene activity, and the ectopic gain of function of the
neighboring gene Evx2, all contributing to the mispositioning, the absence, or
misidentification of specific lumbo-sacral pools of motoneurons, nerve root
homeosis, and hindlimb innervation defects. These results highlight the
importance of a systematic approach when studying such clustered gene families,
and give insights into the function and regulation of Hox and Evx2 genes during
early spinal cord development.

PMCID: PMC1315393
PMID: 16322559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 15;65(16):7177-85.

Homeobox D10 induces phenotypic reversion of breast tumor cells in a
three-dimensional culture model.

Carrio M(1), Arderiu G, Myers C, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California 94143, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are master regulatory genes that direct organogenesis and
maintain differentiated tissue function. We previously reported that HoxD10 helps
to maintain a quiescent, differentiated phenotype in endothelial cells by
suppressing expression of genes involved in remodeling the extracellular matrix
and cell migration. Here we investigated whether HoxD10 could also promote or
maintain a differentiated phenotype in epithelial cells. We observed that HoxD10 
expression is progressively reduced in epithelial cells as malignancy increases
in both breast and endometrial tumors. Retroviral gene transfer to restore
expression of HoxD10 in the malignant breast tumor cells MDA-MB-231 significantly
impaired migration, and when these cells were cultured in a three-dimensional
laminin-rich basement membrane (3DlrBM) model, they formed polarized, acinar
structures. This phenotypic reversion was accompanied by decreased alpha3
integrin expression and reduced proliferation. Importantly, expression of HoxD10 
in the MDA-MB-231 cells inhibited their ability to form tumors in mouse
xenografts. Taken together, our results suggest that HoxD10 has tumor-suppressive
functions for mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 16103068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20860-6. Epub 2005 Mar 25.

Activation of the rat renin promoter by HOXD10.PBX1b.PREP1, Ets-1, and the
intracellular domain of notch.

Pan L(1), Glenn ST, Jones CA, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263-0001, USA.

Renin gene expression is subject to complex developmental and tissue-specific
regulation. A comparison of the promoter sequences of the human, rat, and mouse
renin genes has revealed a highly conserved sequence homologous to the DNA
recognition sequence for CBF1 (CSL/RBP-Jkappa/Su(H)/LAG1/RBPSUH). Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays document that As4.1 cell nuclear protein complex binding to
the putative rat renin CBF1-binding site (-175 to -168 bp) contains CBF1.
Transient transfection analyses in COS-7 cells further document that a CBF1-VP16 
fusion protein and the intracellular domain of Notch1 robustly activate a
promoter containing multiple copies of the rat renin CBF1-binding site. An
Ets-binding site (-143 to -138 bp) has also been identified in the rat renin
promoter by sequence comparisons and electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
Transcription factor Ets-1 is capable of activating the rat renin promoter
through the Ets-binding site. Mutation of the CBF-binding site significantly
increases transcriptional activity of the rat renin promoter in Calu-6 and COS-7 
cells but not in As4.1 cells, whereas mutation of the Ets-binding site reduces
promoter activity of the rat renin gene in all three cell lines. Finally, we show
that the intracellular domain of Notch1, Ets-1, and HOXD10.PBX1b.PREP1 activate
the rat renin promoter cooperatively in COS-7 cells. These results strongly
suggest that the renin gene is a downstream target of the Notch signaling
pathway.

PMID: 15792957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hypertension. 2005 Apr;45(4):672-80. Epub 2005 Feb 7.

Nitric oxide-dependent and nitric oxide-independent transcriptional responses to 
high shear stress in endothelial cells.

Braam B(1), de Roos R, Bluyssen H, Kemmeren P, Holstege F, Joles JA, Koomans H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center, F03.226,
P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands. g.b.braam@azu.nl

Shear stress modulates gene expression in endothelial cells (ECs) partly through 
nitric oxide (NO), acting via enhanced cGMP formation by guanylyl cyclase (GC).
We addressed non-cGMP-mediated transcriptional responses to shear stress in human
umbilical ECs subjected to high-laminar shear stress (25 dyn/cm2; 150 minutes).
RNA was isolated, reverse-transcribed, Cy3/5-labeled, and hybridized to 19 K
human microarrays. High shear (n=6), high shear with 100 micromol/L L-NAME (n=3),
and high shear with 10 micromol/L ODQ (GC inhibitor) in the perfusate (n=3) was
compared with samples not subjected to flow. Among genes responding to high shear
were HMOX1 (up) and PPARG (down). A high percentage of gene expression modulation
by shear was absent during concomitant L-NAME or ODQ. Several transcriptional
modulators were found (up: SOX5, SOX25, ZNF151, HOXD10; down: SOX11); a number of
genes were regulated by shear and by shear with ODQ, but not regulated during
L-NAME, indicating a nitric oxide synthase (NOS)-dependent, guanylyl cyclase
(GC)-independent pathway. Several genes only responded to shear stress during
L-NAME, others only responded to shear during ODQ. Upstream binding site analysis
indicated shear stress and NO-dependent regulation of transcription via SOX5 and 
SOX9. Although NO importantly modulated the effect of shear stress on EC
transcription, HMOX1 was consistently induced by shear stress, but not dependent 
on NOS or GC. Using bio-informatics software and databases, a promoter analysis
identified SOX5 and SOX9 as potential, novel, shear-sensitive, and NO-dependent
transcriptional regulators. The role of HMOX1 as a potential backup for NOS and
the downstream role of SOXes should be explored.

PMID: 15699468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Skeletal Radiol. 2004 Nov;33(11):649-54. Epub 2004 Sep 11.

Congenital vertical talus in four generations of the same family.

Levinsohn EM(1), Shrimpton AE, Cady RB, Packard DS, Hootnick DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Imaging, Crouse Hospital, 736 Irving Ave., Syracuse, NY 
13210, USA. eml@twcny.rr.com

OBJECTIVE: This paper presents four generations of a family with radiographically
demonstrated congenital vertical talus (CVT) in whom a HOXD10 gene mutation was
identified. Some members of the family with this mutation exhibited cavo-varus
foot deformity consistent with a Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT)-like disorder.
DESIGN AND PATIENTS: Physical examination was performed on nearly all of the
affected and unaffected family members. DNA was extracted from blood obtained
from 14 subjects who showed radiographic and clinical features of CVT (two of
whom also had CMT), from two subjects with features of CMT but not CVT, and from 
20 related family members who were clinically normal.
RESULTS: Radiographs show the appearance of uncorrected CVT in infancy, in
childhood, and in adulthood. DNA analysis revealed a mutation in a HOXD10 gene
located on chromosome 2 in all of the affected but none of the unaffected family 
members.
CONCLUSION: There is an autosomal-dominant-inherited mutation with complete
penetrance which is found in all members of a pedigree with CVT, some of whom
exhibit a CMT-like foot disorder. Radiologic findings vary depending on the
severity of involvement, treatment provided and age of the patient.

PMID: 15368082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biol Chem. 2004 Jul;385(7):605-14.

All-trans retinoic acid-responsive genes identified in the human SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cell line and their regulated expression in the nervous system of
early embryos.

Merrill RA(1), Ahrens JM, Kaiser ME, Federhart KS, Poon VY, Clagett-Dame M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, 433
Babcock Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The vitamin A metabolite, all-trans retinoic acid (atRA), is required for
embryonic development. atRA binds to the nuclear retinoic acid receptors and
regulates the transcription of specific target genes. In order to identify
atRA-induced genes that play a role in neural development, a subtractive library 
was created from SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, a human cell line that exhibits
changes in cell adhesion and neurite outgrowth after exposure to the vitamin A
acid. We report here the identification of 14 genes that are rapidly induced by
atRA (retinoic acid induced in neuroblastoma or RAINB), eight of which were
previously not known to be atRA responsive (BTBD11, calmin, cyclin M2, ephrin B2,
HOXD10, NEDD9, RAINB6 and tenascin R). mRNA regulation by atRA was confirmed in
SH-SY5Y cells by Northern blotting, and gene regulation was studied in additional
human cell lines using the quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The majority
of the atRA-responsive clones revealed in this screen are highly expressed in the
nervous system of developing rat embryos. Further, the expression of several of
these genes is perturbed in developing rat embryos exposed to excess atRA or
conversely, deprived of sufficient retinoid during early development. We propose 
that a subset of these genes lie downstream of atRA and its receptors in the
regulation of neurite outgrowth and cell adhesion in both neural and non-neural
tissues within the developing embryo.

PMID: 15318809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Dyn. 2004 Sep;231(1):43-56.

Ectopic expression of Hoxd10 in thoracic spinal segments induces motoneurons with
a lumbosacral molecular profile and axon projections to the limb.

Shah V(1), Drill E, Lance-Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Center for Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Hox genes encode anterior-posterior identity during central nervous system
development. Few studies have examined Hox gene function at lumbosacral (LS)
levels of the spinal cord, where there is extensive information on normal
development. Hoxd10 is expressed at high levels in the embryonic LS cord but not 
the thoracic cord. To test the hypothesis that restricted expression of Hoxd10
contributes to the attainment of an LS identity, and specifically an LS
motoneuron identity, Hoxd10 was ectopically expressed in thoracic segments in
chick embryos by means of in ovo electroporation. Regional motoneuron identity
was assessed after the normal period of motoneuron differentiation. Subsets of
motoneurons in transfected thoracic segments developed a molecular profile
normally shown by LS motoneurons, including Lim 1 and RALDH2 expression. In
addition, motoneurons in posterior thoracic segments showed novel axon
projections to two muscles in the anterodorsal limb, the sartorius and anterior
iliotibialis muscles. At thoracic levels, we also found a decrease in motoneuron 
numbers and a reduction in gonad size. These last findings suggest that early and
high levels of Hox expression impeded motoneuron development and
neural-mesodermal interactions. Despite these adverse effects, our data indicate 
that Hoxd10 expression is sufficient to induce LS motoneuron identity and axon
trajectories characteristic of motoneurons in the LS region.

PMID: 15305286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 Jul;75(1):92-6. Epub 2004 May 14.

A HOX gene mutation in a family with isolated congenital vertical talus and
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Shrimpton AE(1), Levinsohn EM, Yozawitz JM, Packard DS Jr, Cady RB, Middleton FA,
Persico AM, Hootnick DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, State University of New York, Upstate
Medical University, Syracuse, 13210, USA. shrimpta@upstate.edu

Congenital vertical talus (CVT), also known as "rocker-bottom foot" deformity, is
a dislocation of the talonavicular joint, with rigid dorsal dislocation of the
navicular over the neck of the talus. This condition is usually associated with
multiple other congenital deformities and only rarely is an isolated deformity.
The reported familial cases are consistent with an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance with incomplete penetrance. In contrast, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 
(CMT) is thought to be a completely distinct heterogeneous group of disorders,
with foot abnormalities that typically develop a high-arched "claw foot"
appearance later in life. In the present study, DNA was isolated from 36 members 
of a single upstate (northern) New York white family of Italian descent in which 
both CVT and CMT were segregating. Whole-genome linkage analysis with Affymetrix 
GeneChip Mapping 10K Array defined a 7-Mb critical region on chromosome 2q31,
which led to candidate-gene sequencing of six HOX genes and detection of a single
missense mutation, M319K (956T-->A), in the HOXD10 gene. In the study family,
this mutation was fully penetrant and exhibited significant evidence of linkage
(LOD 6.33; theta =0), and it very likely accounts for both CVT and CMT in
heterozygotes.

PMCID: PMC1182012
PMID: 15146389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jun;70(6):1870-6. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Gene expression profiling of neonatal mouse uterine development.

Hu J(1), Gray CA, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics and Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA.

Postnatal uterine development involves differentiation and development of the
endometrial glandular epithelium from the luminal epithelium as well as
development of the mesenchyme into the endometrial stroma and myometrium. This
period of development is critical because exposure of neonates to endocrine
disruptors compromises reproductive cycles and pregnancy in the adult. However,
the hormonal, cellular, and molecular mechanisms regulating postnatal uterine
development remain largely unknown. In order to identify candidate genes and gene
networks that regulate postnatal uterine development, uteri were collected from
CD-1 outbred mice on postnatal days (PND) 3, 6, 9, 12, and 15, and gene
expression profiling was conducted using Affymetrix mouse genome U74Av2 GeneChips
in study 1. Of the approximately 12,000 genes analyzed, 9002 genes were expressed
in the uterus and expression of 3012 genes increased or decreased 2-fold during
uterine development. In study 2, the uterine epithelium was enzymatically
separated from the stroma/myometrium on PNDs 3, 6, and 9, and gene expression
profiling was conducted using CodeLink UniSet Mouse I Expression Bioarrays.
Results from these two studies support the hypothesis that postnatal uterine
development is a complex process involving overlapping positive and negative
changes in uterine epithelial and stromal/myometrial gene expression. Candidate
genes regulating uterine development encode secreted factors (Wnt5a, Wnt7a),
transcription factors (Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Hoxd10, MSX-1), enzymes (matrix
metalloproteinases, cathepsin, carbonic anhydrase), growth factors (IGF-II, IGF
binding proteins), and components of the extracellular matrix (osteopontin) to
name a few. The candidate genes and gene networks identified by transcriptional
profiling provide an important foundation to discern and understand mechanisms
regulating postnatal uterine morphogenesis.

PMID: 14985250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Feb 1;75(3):307-19.

Identification of a Hoxd10-regulated transcriptional network and combinatorial
interactions with Hoxa10 during spinal cord development.

Hedlund E(1), Karsten SL, Kudo L, Geschwind DH, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

Hoxd10 is expressed in the posterior spinal cord and hindlimbs of the mouse.
Hoxd10, along with other Hox transcription factors, is thought to regulate the
activity of genes involved in nervous system patterning and motor neuron
development, but little is known about the downstream targets regulated by this
gene. cDNA microarrays were used to investigate the transcriptional network
regulated by Hoxd10 in homozygous knockout animals. Sixty-nine genes were
identified with altered expression levels in mutant spinal cords. Among these
were genes involved in such diverse cellular events as cellular communication,
cell cycle control, development and differentiation, and neuronal survival. The
expression of some of these genes was investigated using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and in situ hybridization. Nine 
genes showed changes in expression of the same sign and similar magnitude using
RT-PCR in Hoxd10 single mutant animals, with additional changes in expression
seen in Hoxa10/Hoxd10 double mutant animals. In situ hybridization studies also
demonstrated changes in expression consistent with microarray results. Analysis
of putative promoter regions for Hox protein binding sites suggested that some
genes may be direct Hoxd10 targets, whereas others likely are regulated through
intermediate steps. Using cDNA microarrays to study a single gene knockout during
critical developmental stages has identified a large number of genes regulated by
Hoxd10, many of which would not have been approached as candidates for Hox gene
regulation based on function or expression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14743444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):299-309. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb
zeugopod.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the 5' or posterior murine Hox genes (paralogous groups 9-13)
markedly affect the formation of the stylopod, zeugopod and autopod of both
forelimbs and hindlimbs. Targeted disruption of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 or Hoxa10,
Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 result in gross mispatterning of the radius and ulna or the
femur, respectively. Similarly, in mice with disruptions of both Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13, development of the forelimb and hindlimb autopod is severely curtailed.
Although these examples clearly illustrate the major roles played by the
posterior Hox genes, little is known regarding the stage or stages at which Hox
transcription factors intersect with the limb development program to ensure
proper patterning of the principle elements of the limb. Moreover, the cellular
and/or molecular bases for the developmental defects observed in these mutant
mice have not been described. In this study, we show that malformation of the
forelimb zeugopod in Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants is a consequence of
interruption at multiple steps during the formation of the radius and ulna. In
particular, reductions in the levels of Fgf8 and Fgf10 expression may be related 
to the observed delay in forelimb bud outgrowth that, in turn, leads to the
formation of smaller mesenchymal condensations. However, the most significant
defect appears to be the failure to form normal growth plates at the proximal and
distal ends of the zeugopod bones. As a consequence, growth and maturation of
these bones is highly disorganized, resulting in the creation of amorphous bony
elements, rather than a normal radius and ulna.

PMID: 14668414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):39-45. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

HOXC and HOXD gene expression in human endometrium: lack of redundancy with HOXA 
paralogs.

Akbas GE(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOXA genes, essential regulators of differentiation in the embryo, are also
essential for adult cyclic endometrial development and for endometrial
receptivity. Mice deficient in Hoxa10 or Hoxa11 exhibit reduced fertility because
of defects in implantation. We hypothesized that HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11, paralogs of HOXA10 and HOXA11, might also be involved in endometrial
development. Here, we showed that the expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11 was evident throughout the menstrual cycle in the endometrium by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the
secretory phase, expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, and HOXD11 decreased to 4% and
HOXD10 decreased to 25% of the proliferative phase expression (P < 0.001, P <
0.001, P < 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively). In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of each of these HOX genes primarily in the stroma and confirmed the
decreased expression in the secretory phase. HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and HOXD11
expression was not regulated by sex steroids in primary endometrial stromal cells
or Ishikawa cells. The expression and regulation of HOXC and HOXD genes varies
from that of HOXA10 and HOXA11. Whereas HOXA10 and HOXA11 are regulators of
endometrial differentiation, HOXC and HOXD genes likely regulate endometrial
proliferation. Paralogous HOX genes typically have a redundant function in
development; a novel evolutionary divergence of paralogous Hox genes has resulted
in HOXC and HOXD genes having distinct expression patterns, regulation, and
likely also distinct functions from HOXA genes. A network of HOX genes may be
involved in regulating multiple aspects of endometrial development, including
both proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 12954737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):99-115.

Programming neural Hoxd10: in vivo evidence that early node-associated signals
predominate over paraxial mesoderm signals at posterior spinal levels.

Omelchenko N(1), Lance-Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Studies of the programming of Hox patterns at anterior spinal levels suggest that
these events are accomplished through an integration of Hensen's node-derived and
paraxial mesoderm signaling. We have used in vivo tissue manipulation in the
avian embryo to examine the respective roles of node- derived and other local
signals in the programming of a Hox pattern at posterior spinal levels. Hoxd10 is
highly expressed in the lumbosacral (LS) spinal cord and adjacent paraxial
mesoderm. At stages of LS neural tube formation (stages 12-14), the tailbud
contains the remnants of Hensen's node and the primitive streak. Hoxd10
expression was analyzed after transposition of LS neural segments with and
without the tailbud, after isolation of normally positioned LS segments from the 
stage 13 tailbud, and after axial displacement of posterior paraxial mesoderm.
Data suggest that inductive signals from the tailbud are primarily responsible
for the programming of Hoxd10 at neural plate and the earliest neural tube
stages. After these stages, the LS neural tube appears to differ from more
anterior neural segments in its lack of dependence on Hox-inductive signals from 
local tissues, including paraxial mesoderm. Our data also suggest that a graded
system of repressive signals for posterior Hox genes is present at cervical and
thoracic levels and likely to originate from paraxial mesoderm.

PMID: 12941623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Neurobiol. 2003 Sep 15;56(4):328-37.

Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 coordinately regulate lumbar motor neuron patterning.

Lin AW(1), Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90024, USA.

The paralogous Hox genes Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 are expressed in overlapping domains
in the developing lumbar spinal cord and surrounding mesoderm. Independent
inactivation of these two genes alters the trajectory of spinal nerves and
decreases the complement of motor neurons present in the lumbar spinal cord,
whereas dual inactivation of these two genes has been shown to alter peripheral
nerve growth and development in the mouse hindlimb. We have examined the
organization and distribution of lumbar motor neurons in the spinal cords of
Hoxa10/Hoxd10 double mutant animals. Double mutant animals have decreased numbers
of lumbar motor neurons in both the medial and lateral motor columns. The
anteroposterior position of the lumbar motor column is shifted caudally in double
mutant animals, and the distribution of motor neurons is altered across
individual spinal segments. Distinctions between classes of motor neurons based
on positional specificity appear disrupted in double mutants. Double mutants also
demonstrate abnormal spinal cord vasculature and altered kidney placement and
size. Our observations suggest that Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 activity is required to
specify the position of the lumbar motor column and to provide segmental
specification and identity for the lumbar motor neurons.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12918017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. EMBO J. 2003 Jul 15;22(14):3715-24.

Early mitotic degradation of the homeoprotein HOXC10 is potentially linked to
cell cycle progression.

Gabellini D(1), Colaluca IN, Vodermaier HC, Biamonti G, Giacca M, Falaschi A,
Riva S, Peverali FA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare, CNR, via Abbiategrasso 207,I-27100 Pavia,
Italy.

Hox proteins are transcription factors involved in controlling axial patterning, 
leukaemias and hereditary malformations. Here, we show that HOXC10 oscillates in 
abundance during the cell cycle, being targeted for degradation early in mitosis 
by the ubiquitin-dependent proteasome pathway. Among abdominal-B subfamily
members, the mitotic proteolysis of HOXC10 appears unique, since the levels of
the paralogous HOXD10 and the related homeoprotein HOXC13 are constant throughout
the cell cycle. When two destruction box motifs (D-box) are mutated, HOXC10 is
stabilized and cells accumulate in metaphase. HOXC10 appears to be a new
prometaphase target of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), since its
degradation coincides with cyclin A destruction and is suppressed by expression
of a dominant-negative form of UbcH10, an APC-associated ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme. Moreover, HOXC10 co-immunoprecipitates the APC subunit CDC27, and its in 
vitro degradation is reduced in APC-depleted extracts or by competition with the 
APC substrate cyclin A. These data imply that HOXC10 is a homeoprotein with the
potential to influence mitotic progression, and might provide a link between
developmental regulation and cell cycle control.

PMCID: PMC165610
PMID: 12853486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Pathol. 2002 Dec;161(6):2099-109.

Sustained expression of homeobox D10 inhibits angiogenesis.

Myers C(1), Charboneau A, Cheung I, Hanks D, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of California 
at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are master regulatory genes that direct organogenesis and
maintain differentiated tissue function. As HoxD3 and HoxB3 promote angiogenesis,
we investigated whether endothelial cells use other Hox genes to maintain a
mature quiescent phenotype. HoxD10 expression was higher in quiescent as compared
to tumor-associated angiogenic endothelium. Microarray analysis of
HoxD10-overexpressing endothelial cells revealed a pattern of gene expression
consistent with a nonangiogenic phenotype. Moreover, sustained expression of
HoxD10 impaired endothelial cell migration and blocked angiogenesis induced by
basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor in the
chick chorioallantoic membrane in vivo. HoxD10-overexpressing human endothelial
cells also failed to form new vessels when implanted into immunocompromised mice.
These results indicate a role for HoxD10 in maintaining a nonangiogenic state in 
the endothelium.

PMCID: PMC1850921
PMID: 12466126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(20):7313-24.

Mouse Af9 is a controller of embryo patterning, like Mll, whose human homologue
fuses with Af9 after chromosomal translocation in leukemia.

Collins EC(1), Appert A, Ariza-McNaughton L, Pannell R, Yamada Y, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

Chromosomal translocation t(9;11)(p22;q23) in acute myeloid leukemia fuses the
MLL and AF9 genes. We have inactivated the murine homologue of AF9 to elucidate
its normal role. No effect on hematopoiesis was observed in mice with a null
mutation of Af9. However, an Af9 null mutation caused perinatal lethality, and
homozygous mice exhibited anomalies of the axial skeleton. Both the cervical and 
thoracic regions were affected by anterior homeotic transformation. Strikingly,
mice lacking functional Af9 exhibited a grossly deformed atlas and an extra
cervical vertebra. To determine the molecular mediators of this phenotype,
analysis of Hox gene expression by in situ hybridization showed that Af9 null
embryos have posterior changes in Hoxd4 gene expression. We conclude that the Af9
gene is required for normal embryogenesis in mice by controlling pattern
formation, apparently via control of Hox gene regulation. This is analogous to
the role of Mll, the murine homolog of human MLL, to which the Af9 gene fuses in 
acute myeloid leukemias.

PMCID: PMC139815
PMID: 12242306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):108-20.

In vivo evidence that BMP signaling is necessary for apoptosis in the mouse limb.

Guha U(1), Gomes WA, Kobayashi T, Pestell RG, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nueroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461, USA. guha@aecom.yu.edu

To determine the role of Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in murine
limb development in vivo, the keratin 14 promoter was used to drive expression of
the BMP antagonist Noggin in transgenic mice. Phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of Smad1/5 were dramatically reduced in limbs of the transgenic
animals, confirming the inhibition of BMP signaling. These mice developed
extensive limb soft tissue syndactyly and postaxial polydactyly. Apoptosis in the
developing limb necrotic zones was reduced with incomplete regression of the
interdigital tissue. The postaxial extra digit is also consistent with a role for
BMPs in regulating apoptosis. Furthermore, there was persistent expression of
Fgf8, suggesting a delay in the regression of the AER. However, Msx1 and Msx2
expression was unchanged in these transgenic mice, implying that induction of
these genes is not essential for mediating BMP-induced interdigital apoptosis in 
mice. These abnormalities were rescued by coexpressing BMP4 under the same
promoter in double transgenic mice, suggesting that the limb abnormalities are a 
direct effect of inhibiting BMP signaling.

PMID: 12217322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):96-107.

Duplication of the Hoxd11 gene causes alterations in the axial and appendicular
skeleton of the mouse.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5331, USA.

The Hox genes encode a group of transcription factors essential for proper
development of the mouse. Targeted mutation of the Hoxd11 gene causes reduced
male fertility, vertebral transformation, carpal bone fusions, and reductions in 
digit length. A duplication of the Hoxd11 gene was created with the expectation
that the consequences of restricted overexpression in the appropriate cells would
provide further insight into the function of the Hoxd11 gene product. Genetic
assays demonstrated that two tandem copies of Hoxd11 were functionally
indistinguishable from the normal two copies of the gene on separate chromosomes 
with respect to formation of the axial and appendicular skeleton. Extra copies of
Hoxd11 caused an increase in the lengths of some bones of the forelimb autopod
and a decrease in the number of lumbar vertebrae. Further, analysis of the Hoxd11
duplication demonstrated that the Hoxd11 protein can perform some functions
supplied by its paralogue Hoxa11. For example, the defects in forelimb bones are 
corrected when extra copies of Hoxd11 are present in the Hoxa11 homozygous mutant
background. Thus, it appears that Hoxd11 can quantitatively compensate for the
absence of Hoxa11 protein, and therefore Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are functionally
equivalent in the zeugopod. However, extra copies of Hoxd11 did not improve male 
or female fertility in Hoxa11 mutants. Interestingly, the insertion of an
additional Hoxd11 locus into the HoxD complex does not appear to affect the
expression patterns of the neighboring Hoxd10, -d12, or -d13 genes.

PMID: 12217321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 1;15(17):2209-14.

Large scale transgenic and cluster deletion analysis of the HoxD complex separate
an ancestral regulatory module from evolutionary innovations.

Spitz F(1), Gonzalez F, Peichel C, Vogt TF, Duboule D, Zákány J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The ancestral role of the Hox gene family is specifying morphogenetic differences
along the main body axis. In vertebrates, HoxD genes were also co-opted along
with the emergence of novel structures such as limbs and genitalia. We propose
that these functional recruitments relied on the appearance, or implementation,
of regulatory sequences outside of the complex. Whereas transgenic human and
murine HOXD clusters could function during axial patterning, in mice they were
not expressed outside the trunk. Accordingly, deletion of the entire cluster
abolished axial expression, whereas recently acquired regulatory controls were
preserved.

PMCID: PMC312772
PMID: 11544178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Development. 2001 Jun;128(12):2255-68.

Hoxd10 induction and regionalization in the developing lumbosacral spinal cord.

Lance-Jones C(1), Omelchenko N, Bailis A, Lynch S, Sharma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. clancej@pitt.edu

We have used Hoxd10 expression as a primary marker of the lumbosacral region to
examine the early programming of regional characteristics within the posterior
spinal cord of the chick embryo. Hoxd10 is uniquely expressed at a high level in 
the lumbosacral cord, from the earliest stages of motor column formation through 
stages of motoneuron axon outgrowth. To define the time period when this gene
pattern is determined, we assessed Hoxd10 expression after transposition of
lumbosacral and thoracic segments at early neural tube stages. We present
evidence that there is an early prepattern for Hoxd10 expression in the
lumbosacral neural tube; a prepattern that is established at or before stages of 
neural tube closure. Cells within more posterior lumbosacral segments have a
greater ability to develop high level Hoxd10 expression than the most anterior
lumbosacral segments or thoracic segments. During subsequent neural tube stages, 
this prepattern is amplified and stabilized by environmental signals such that
all lumbosacral segments acquire the ability to develop high levels of Hoxd10,
independent of their axial environment. Results from experiments in which
posterior neural segments and/or paraxial mesoderm segments were placed at
different axial levels suggest that signals setting Hoxd10 expression form a
decreasing posterior-to-anterior gradient. Our experiments do not, however,
implicate adjacent paraxial mesoderm as the only source of graded signals. We
suggest, instead, that signals from more posterior embryonic regions influence
Hoxd10 expression after the early establishment of a regional prepattern.
Concurrent analyses of patterns of LIM proteins and motor column organization
after experimental surgeries suggest that the programming of these
characteristics follows similar rules.

PMID: 11493545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32489-94. Epub 2001 Jun 29.

An Abd-B class HOX.PBX recognition sequence is required for expression from the
mouse Ren-1c gene.

Pan L(1), Xie Y, Black TA, Jones CA, Pruitt SC, Gross KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Expression from the mouse Ren-1(c) gene in As4.1 cells is dependent on a proximal
promoter element (PPE) located at approximately -60 and a 241-base pair enhancer 
region located at -2625 relative to the transcription start site. The PPE
(TAATAAATCAA) is identical to a consensus HOX.PBX binding sequence. Further,
PBX1b has been shown to be a component of a PPE-specific binding complex present 
in nuclear extracts from As4.1 cells. The binding affinities of different paralog
HOX members to the PPE were examined in the absence or presence of PBX1b. HOXB6, 
-B7, and -C8 failed to bind the PPE alone but showed weak affinity in the
presence of PBX1b. In contrast, HOXD10 and to a lesser degree HOXB9 bound the PPE
with high affinities regardless of whether PBX1b was present. Abd-B HOX members, 
including HOXD10, -A10, -A9, -B9, and -C9, are expressed in As4.1 cells. The
ability of HOX and PBX1b to form a ternary complex with PREP1 on the PPE is also 
demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. Point mutations in either the HOX or PBX 
half-site of the PPE disrupted the formation of the HOX.PBX complex and
dramatically decreased transcriptional activity of the Ren-1(c) gene
demonstrating that both the HOX and PBX half-sites are critical for mouse renin
gene expression. These results strongly implicate Abd-B class Hox genes and their
cofactors as major determinants of the sites of renin expression.

PMID: 11432851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 1;231(1):87-102.

The paralogous Hox genes Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 interact to pattern the mouse hindlimb
peripheral nervous system and skeleton.

Wahba GM(1), Hostikka SL, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Sciences, UCLA School of Medicine, 760 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, California
90024, USA.

The most 5' mouse Hoxa and Hoxd genes, which occupy positions 9-13 and which are 
related to the Drosophila AbdB gene, are all active in patterning developing
limbs. Inactivation of individual genes produces alterations in skeletal elements
of both forelimb and hindlimb; inactivation of some of these genes also alters
hindlimb innervation. Simultaneous inactivation of paralogous or nonparalogous
Hoxa and Hoxd genes produces more widespread alterations, suggesting that
combinatorial interactions between these genes are required for proper limb
patterning. We have examined the effects of simultaneous inactivation of Hoxa10
and Hoxd10 on mouse hindlimb skeletal and nervous system development. These
paralogous genes are expressed at lumbar and sacral levels of the developing
neural tube and surrounding axial mesoderm as well as in developing forelimb and 
hindlimb buds. Double-mutant animals demonstrated impaired locomotor behavior and
altered development of posterior vertebrae and hindlimb skeletal elements.
Alterations in hindlimb innervation were also observed, including truncations and
deletions of the tibial and peroneal nerves. Animals carrying fewer mutant
alleles show similar, but less extreme phenotypes. These observations suggest
that Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 coordinately regulate skeletal development and innervation
of the hindlimb.

PMID: 11180954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8623-33.

Cell signaling switches HOX-PBX complexes from repressors to activators of
transcription mediated by histone deacetylases and histone acetyltransferases.

Saleh M(1), Rambaldi I, Yang XJ, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

The Hoxb1 autoregulatory element comprises three HOX-PBX binding sites. Despite
the presence of HOXB1 and PBX1, this enhancer fails to activate reporter gene
expression in retinoic acid-treated P19 cell monolayers. Activation requires cell
aggregation in addition to RA. This suggests that HOX-PBX complexes may repress
transcription under some conditions. Consistent with this, multimerized HOX-PBX
binding sites repress reporter gene expression in HEK293 cells. We provide a
mechanistic basis for repressor function by demonstrating that a corepressor
complex, including histone deacetylases (HDACs) 1 and 3, mSIN3B, and N-CoR/SMRT, 
interacts with PBX1A. We map a site of interaction with HDAC1 to the PBX1 N
terminus and show that the PBX partner is required for repression by the HOX-PBX 
complex. Treatment with the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A not only
relieves repression but also converts the HOX-PBX complex to a net activator of
transcription. We show that this activation function is mediated by the
recruitment of the coactivator CREB-binding protein by the HOX partner.
Interestingly, HOX-PBX complexes are switched from transcriptional repressors to 
activators in response to protein kinase A signaling or cell aggregation.
Together, our results suggest a model whereby the HOX-PBX complex can act as a
repressor or activator of transcription via association with corepressors and
coactivators. The model implies that cell signaling is a direct determinant of
HOX-PBX function in the patterning of the animal embryo.

PMCID: PMC102167
PMID: 11046157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mech Dev. 2000 Aug;96(1):79-89.

Murine hoxd4 expression in the CNS requires multiple elements including a
retinoic acid response element.

Zhang F(1), Nagy Kovács E, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler,
Québec H3G 1Y6, Montréal, Canada.

We have identified a retinoic acid response element (RARE) within a neural
enhancer located 3' to the Hoxd4 gene. This RARE is required for the initiation
and maintenance of Hoxd4 transgene expression in neurectoderm, and for full
anteriorized expression upon retinoic acid (RA) treatment. Mutations within the
sequence TTTTCTG, located 2 bp downstream of the RARE, posteriorized transgene
activity. However, the onset of transgene expression and its response to RA were 
indistinguishable from wild type. While the TTTTCTG motif resembles a CDX binding
site, human CDX1 protein did not interact with this element in vitro. Three
additional regions were also shown to control transgene expression in
neurectoderm, establishing that multiple elements constitute the Hoxd4 neural
enhancer.

PMID: 10940626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 15;216(2):595-610.

Targeted disruption of Hoxd9 and Hoxd10 alters locomotor behavior, vertebral
identity, and peripheral nervous system development.

de la Cruz CC(1), Der-Avakian A, Spyropoulos DD, Tieu DD, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California at Los Angeles School of
Medicine 90024, USA.

The five most 5' HoxD genes, which are related to the Drosophila Abd-B gene, play
an important role in patterning axial and appendicular skeletal elements and the 
nervous system of developing vertebrate embryos. Three of these genes, Hoxd11,
Hoxd12, and Hoxd13, act synergistically to pattern the hindlimb autopod. In this 
study, we examine the combined effects of two additional 5' HoxD genes, Hoxd9 and
Hoxd10. Both of these genes are expressed posteriorly in overlapping domains in
the developing neural tube and axial mesoderm as well as in developing limbs.
Locomotor behavior in animals carrying a double mutation in these two genes was
altered; these alterations included changes in gait, mobility, and adduction.
Morphological analysis showed alterations in axial and appendicular skeletal
structure, hindlimb peripheral nerve organization and projection, and distal
hindlimb musculature. These morphological alterations are likely to provide the
substrate for the observed alterations in locomotor behavior. The alterations
observed in double-mutant mice are distinct from the phenotypes observed in mice 
carrying single mutations in either gene, but exhibit most of the features of
both individual phenotypes. This suggests that the combined activity of two
adjacent Hox genes provides more patterning information than activity of each
gene alone. These observations support the idea that adjacent Hox genes with
overlapping expression patterns may interact functionally to provide patterning
information to the same regions of developing mouse embryos.

PMID: 10642795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Nov;19(11):7577-88.

PBX and MEIS as non-DNA-binding partners in trimeric complexes with HOX proteins.

Shanmugam K(1), Green NC, Rambaldi I, Saragovi HU, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

HOX, PBX, and MEIS transcription factors bind DNA through a homeodomain. PBX
proteins bind DNA cooperatively as heterodimers with MEIS family members and also
with HOX proteins from paralog groups 1 to 10. MEIS proteins cooperatively bind
DNA with ABD-B class HOX proteins of groups 9 and 10. Here, we examine aspects of
dimeric and higher-order interactions between these three homeodomain classes.
The most significant results can be summarized as follows. (i) Most of PBX N
terminal to the homeodomain is required for efficient cooperative binding with
HOXD4 and HOXD9. (ii) MEIS and PBX proteins form higher-order complexes on a
heterodimeric binding site. (iii) Although MEIS does not cooperatively bind DNA
with ANTP class HOX proteins, it does form a trimer as a non-DNA-binding partner 
with DNA-bound PBX-HOXD4. (iv) The N terminus of HOXD4 negatively regulates
trimer formation. (v) MEIS forms a similar trimer with DNA-bound PBX-HOXD9. (vi) 
A related trimer (where MEIS is a non-DNA-binding partner) is formed on a
transcriptional promoter within the cell. (vii) We observe an additional trimer
class involving non-DNA-bound PBX and DNA-bound MEIS-HOXD9 or MEIS-HOXD10
heterodimers that is enhanced by mutation of the PBX homeodomain. (viii) In this 
latter trimer, PBX is likely to contact both MEIS and HOXD9/D10. (ix) The
stability of DNA binding by all trimers is enhanced relative to the heterodimers.
These findings suggest novel functions for PBX and MEIS in modulating the
function of DNA-bound MEIS-HOX and PBX-HOX heterodimers, respectively.

PMCID: PMC84774
PMID: 10523646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4817-26.

Transient establishment of anteroposterior polarity in the zebrafish pectoral fin
bud in the absence of sonic hedgehog activity.

Neumann CJ(1), Grandel H, Gaffield W, Schulte-Merker S, Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Spemannstrasse 35/III, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany. carl.neumann@tuebingen.mpg.de.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the posterior vertebrate limb bud mesenchyme
and directs anteroposterior patterning and growth during limb development. Here
we report an analysis of the pectoral fin phenotype of zebrafish sonic you
mutants, which disrupt the shh gene. We show that Shh is required for the
establishment of some aspects of anteroposterior polarity, while other aspects of
anteroposterior polarity are established independently of Shh, and only later
come to depend on Shh for their maintenance. We also demonstrate that Shh is
required for the activation of posterior HoxD genes by retinoic acid. Finally, we
show that Shh is required for normal development of the apical ectodermal fold,
for growth of the fin bud, and for formation of the fin endoskeleton.

PMID: 10518498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol. 1999 Apr 1;208(1):157-65.

Hox gene expression in limbs: colinearity by opposite regulatory controls.

Hérault Y(1), Beckers J, Gérard M, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, Geneva 4, 1211, Switzerland.

Genes of the HoxD complex have a crucial role in the morphogenesis of vertebrate 
limbs. During development, their functional domains are colinear with their
genomic positions within the HoxD cluster such that Hoxd13 and Hoxd12 are
necessary for digit development, whereas Hoxd11 and Hoxd10 are involved in making
forearms. Mutational analyses of these genes have demonstrated their importance
and illustrated the requirement for a precise control of their expression during 
early limb morphogenesis. To study the nature of this control, we have scanned
the posterior part of the HoxD complex with a targeted reporter transgene and
analyzed the response of this foreign promoter to limb regulatory influences. The
results suggest that this regulation is achieved through the opposite effects of 
two enhancer elements which would compete with each other for interacting with
nearby-located promoters. The physical position of a given gene within this
genomic interval of opposite regulations might thus determine its final
expression pattern. This model provides a conceptual link between the morphology 
of the future limb and the genetic organization of the Hox gene cluster, a
translation of a genomic context into a morphogenetic topology.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10075849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 1998 Sep-Oct;5(5):277-80.

Expression of HOXD10 gene in normal endometrium and endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Osborne J(1), Hu C, Hawley C, Underwood LJ, O'Brien TJ, Baker VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Hox genes encode DNA transcription regulatory proteins that contain a 
conserved 61 amino acid protein called the homeodomain. Although best known for
their role in cellular differentiation during embryonic development, aberrant
expression of these genes has been associated with hematologic and solid
neoplasms. The purpose of this study was to determine the relative expression of 
HOXD10 in human endometrial adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: mRNA was isolated from 7 normal endometrial specimens and 28 endometrial
adenocarcinoma specimens. cDNA was synthesized using random hexamer primers. The 
expression of HOXD10 relative to beta-tubulin (internal control) was assessed by 
densitometric comparison of co-amplified Phosphorus-32 (32P) labeled gene
products separated by agarose gel electrophoresis. Direct sequencing of purified 
HOXD10 polymerase chain reaction product was also performed.
RESULTS: The sequence of the purified HOXD10 product corresponds to the known DNA
sequence reported in the National Institute of Health Gene Bank. mRNA expression 
of HOXD10 relative to beta-tubulin is significantly lower in endometrial
carcinomas than in normal endometrium. Furthermore, the ratio of HOXD10 to
beta-tubulin expression varies inversely with the histologic grade of the tumor
(P = .0009).
CONCLUSION: Cancer is a multistep process involving the aberrant expression of
genes that regulate cell growth and differentiation. Human HOXD10 gene expression
is altered in endometrial carcinoma and varies with the histologic grade of
differentiation. This observation supports the theory that homeobox genes play a 
role in oncogenesis.

PMID: 9773404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Genes Dev. 1998 Jan 15;12(2):261-73.

Functional and regulatory interactions between Hox and extradenticle genes.

Azpiazu N(1), Morata G.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular Centro Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas-Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

The homeobox gene extradenticle (exd) acts as a cofactor of Hox function both in 
Drosophila and vertebrates. It has been shown that the distribution of the Exd
protein is developmentally regulated at the post-translational level; in the
regions where exd is not functional Exd is present only in the cell cytoplasm,
whereas it accumulates in the nuclei of cells requiring exd function. We show
that the subcellular localization of Exd is regulated by the BX-C genes and that 
each BX-C gene can prevent or reduce nuclear translocation of Exd to different
extents. In spite of this negative regulation, two BX-C genes, Ultrabithorax and 
abdominal-A, require exd activity for their maintenance and function. We propose 
that mutual interactions between Exd and BX-C proteins ensure the correct amounts
of interacting molecules. As the Hoxd10 gene has the same properties as
Drosophila BX-C genes, we suggest that the control mechanism of subcellular
distribution of Exd found in Drosophila probably operates in other organisms as
well.

PMCID: PMC316439
PMID: 9436985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4505-14.

Targeted disruption of Hoxd-10 affects mouse hindlimb development.

Carpenter EM(1), Goddard JM, Davis AP, Nguyen TP, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
90024, USA.

Targeted disruption of the Hoxd-10 gene, a 5' member of the mouse HoxD linkage
group, produces mice with hindlimb-specific defects in gait and adduction. To
determine the underlying causes of this locomotor defect, mutant mice were
examined for skeletal, muscular and neural abnormalities. Mutant mice exhibit
alterations in the vertebral column and in the bones of the hindlimb. Sacral
vertebrae beginning at the level of S2 exhibit homeotic transformations to adopt 
the morphology of the next most anterior vertebra. In the hindlimb, there is an
anterior shift in the position of the patella, an occasional production of an
anterior sesamoid bone, and an outward rotation of the lower part of the leg, all
of which contribute to the defects in locomotion. No major alterations in
hindlimb musculature were observed, but defects in the nervous system were
evident. There was a decrease in the number of spinal segments projecting nerve
fibers through the sacral plexus to innervate the musculature of the hindlimb.
Deletion of a hindlimb nerve was seen in some animals, and a shift was evident in
the position of the lumbar lateral motor column. These observations suggest a
role for the Hoxd-10 gene in establishing regional identity within the spinal
cord and imply that patterning of the spinal cord may have intrinsic components
and is not completely imposed by the surrounding mesoderm.

PMID: 9409668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Development. 1997 Aug;124(16):3135-46.

HOXD4 and regulation of the group 4 paralog genes.

Morrison A(1), Ariza-McNaughton L, Gould A, Featherstone M, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

From an evolutionary perspective, it is important to understand the degree of
conservation of cis-regulatory mechanisms between paralogous Hox genes. In this
study, we have used transgenic analysis of the human HOXD4 locus to identify one 
neural and two mesodermal 3' enhancers that are capable of mediating the proper
anterior limits of expression in the hindbrain and paraxial mesoderm (somites),
respectively. In addition to directing expression in the central nervous system
(CNS) up to the correct rhombomere 6/7 boundary in the hindbrain, the neural
enhancer also mediates a three rhombomere anterior shift from this boundary in
response to retinoic acid (RA), mimicking the endogenous Hoxd4 response. We have 
extended the transgenic analysis to Hoxa4 identifying mesodermal, neural and
retinoid responsive components in the 3' flanking region of that gene, which
reflect aspects of endogenous Hoxa4 expression. Comparative analysis of the
retinoid responses of Hoxd4, Hoxa4 and Hoxb4 reveals that, while they can be
rapidly induced by RA, there is a window of competence for this response, which
is different to that of more 3' Hox genes. Mesodermal regulation involves
multiple regions with overlapping or related activity and is complex, but with
respect to neural regulation and response to RA, Hoxb4 and Hoxd4 appear to be
more closely related to each other than Hoxa4. These results illustrate that much
of the general positioning of 5' and 3' flanking regulatory regions has been
conserved between three of the group 4 paralogs during vertebrate evolution,
which most likely reflects the original positioning of regulatory regions in the 
ancestral Hox complex.

PMID: 9272954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 25;272(30):19081-7.

Residues flanking the HOX YPWM motif contribute to cooperative interactions with 
PBX.

Shanmugam K(1), Featherstone MS, Saragovi HU.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that are major determinants of embryonic
patterning. Recently, we and others have shown that specific recognition of
target sites in DNA is partly achieved through cooperative interaction with the
extradenticle/pre-B-cell transformation-related gene (EXD/PBX) family of
homeodomain-containing proteins. This interaction is mediated by the YPWM motif
present N-terminal to the homeodomain in HOX proteins. In the present study, we
use YPWM peptides to confirm the importance of this motif for mediating HOX/PBX
interactions. We also used a novel monoclonal antibody directed against the YPWM 
to show that occlusion of this motif abrogates cooperativity with PBX. In
addition, we present evidence that residues flanking the YPWM, both N-terminally 
and C-terminally, stabilize the HOX.PBX cooperative complex. Because these
flanking residues are also conserved among paralogs, they are likely to help
distinguish the specificity of HOX/PBX interactions. Our data further show that
the relative importance of individual residues within and flanking the YPWM is
dependent on the identity of position 6 of the cooperative binding site
(TGATTNATGG). These results suggest that interactions between PBX and the YPWM
motif are modified by a base pair predicted to contact the N-terminal arm of the 
HOX homeodomain.

PMID: 9228093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8635-43.

Distinct HOX N-terminal arm residues are responsible for specificity of DNA
recognition by HOX monomers and HOX.PBX heterodimers.

Phelan ML(1), Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Dimerization with extradenticle or PBX homeoproteins dramatically improves DNA
binding by HOX transcription factors, indicating that recognition by such
complexes is important for HOX specificity. For HOX monomeric binding, a major
determinant of specificity is the flexible N-terminal arm. It makes base-specific
contacts via the minor groove, including one to the 1st position of a 5'-TNAT-3' 
core by a conserved arginine (Arg-5). Here we show that Arg-5 also contributes to
the stability of HOX.PBX complexes, apparently by forming the same DNA contact.
We further show that heterodimers of PBX with HOXA1 or HOXD4 proteins have
different specificities at another position recognized by the N-terminal arm (the
2nd position in the TNAT core). Importantly, N-terminal arm residues 2 and 3,
which distinguish the binding of HOXA1 and HOXD4 monomers, play no role in the
specificity of their complexes with PBX. In addition, HOXD9 and HOXD10, which are
capable of binding both TTAT and TAAT sites as monomers, can cooperate with PBX1A
only on a TTAT site. These data suggest that some DNA contacts made by the
N-terminal arm are altered by interaction with PBX.

PMID: 9079695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 12;93(23):13036-41.

Evolutionary analyses of hedgehog and Hoxd-10 genes in fish species closely
related to the zebrafish.

Zardoya R(1), Abouheif E, Meyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, State University of New York, Stony Brook
11794-5245, USA.

The study of development has relied primarily on the isolation of mutations in
genes with specific functions in development and on the comparison of their
expression patterns in normal and mutant phenotypes. Comparative evolutionary
analyses can complement these approaches. Phylogenetic analyses of Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) and Hoxd-10 genes from 18 cyprinid fish species closely related to the
zebrafish provide novel insights into the functional constraints acting on Shh.
Our results confirm and extend those gained from expression and crystalline
structure analyses of this gene. Unexpectedly, exon 1 of Shh is found to be
almost invariant even in third codon positions among these morphologically
divergent species suggesting that this exon encodes for a functionally important 
domain of the hedgehog protein. This is surprising because the main functional
domain of Shh had been thought to be that encoded by exon 2. Comparisons of Shh
and Hoxd-10 gene sequences and of resulting gene trees document higher
evolutionary constraints on the former than on the latter. This might be
indicative of more general evolutionary patterns in networks of developmental
regulatory genes interacting in a hierarchical fashion. The presence of four
members of the hedgehog gene family in cyprinid fishes was documented and their
homologies to known hedgehog genes in other vertebrates were established.

PMCID: PMC24042
PMID: 8917540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genes Dev. 1996 Sep 15;10(18):2326-34.

In vivo targeted mutagenesis of a regulatory element required for positioning the
Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-10 expression boundaries.

Gérard M(1), Chen JY, Gronemeyer H, Chambon P, Duboule D, Zákány J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Switzerland.

Vertebrate Hox genes are required for the proper organization of structures along
the rostrocaudal axis. Hoxd-11 is expressed in the posterior part of the embryo, 
up to the level of prevertebra 27, and its expression boundary is reproduced by a
Hoxd-11/lacZ transgene. Expression of this transgene anterior to prevertebra 27
is prevented by the silencing activity of a cis-acting element, region IX. Using 
transgenic mice, we show that Hoxd-11 repression by region IX is necessary to
position the sacrum properly. This silencing activity depends on phylogenetically
conserved sequences able to bind in vitro retinoic acid receptors and COUP-TFs.
ES cells were used to generate mice carrying a subtle mutation that abolishes
binding of nuclear receptors to region IX. Mutant mice display an anterior shift 
of their lumbosacral transition inherited as a codominant trait. In mutant
embryos, expression of both Hoxd-11 and Hoxd-10 mRNAs in the prevertebral column 
is anteriorized. These results illustrate the sharing, in cis, of a single
regulatory element in order to establish the expression boundaries of two
neighboring Hoxd genes.

PMID: 8824591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Development. 1996 Jun;122(6):1895-907.

In vitro and transgenic analysis of a human HOXD4 retinoid-responsive enhancer.

Morrison A(1), Moroni MC, Ariza-McNaughton L, Krumlauf R, Mavilio F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute of Medical
Research, London, UK.

Expression of vertebrate Hox genes is regulated by retinoids in cell culture and 
in early embryonic development. We have identified a 185-bp retinoid-responsive
transcriptional enhancer 5' of the human HOXD4 gene, which regulates inducibility
of the gene in embryonal carcinoma cells through a pattern of DNA-protein
interaction on at least two distinct elements. One of these elements contains a
direct repeat mediating ligand-dependent interaction with retinoic acid
receptors, and is necessary though not sufficient for the enhancer function. The 
HOXD4 enhancer directs expression of a lacZ reporter gene in the neural tube of
transgenic mouse embryos in a time-regulated and regionally restricted fashion,
reproducing part of the anterior neuroectodermal expression pattern of the
endogenous Hoxd-4 gene. Administration of retinoic acid to developing embryos
causes alterations in the spatial restriction of the transgene expression domain,
indicating that the HOXD4 enhancer is also a retinoid-responsive element in vivo.
The timing of the retinoic acid response differs from that seen with more 3' Hox 
genes, in that it occurs much later. This shows that the temporal window of
competence in the ability to respond to retinoic acid differs between Hox genes
and can be linked to specific enhancers. Mutations in the direct repeat or in a
second element in the enhancer affect both retinoid response in culture and
developmental regulation in embryos, suggesting that co-operative interactions
between different factors mediate the enhancer activity. These data provide
further support for a role of endogenous retinoids in regulation and spatial
restriction of Hox gene expression in the central nervous system.

PMID: 8674428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mech Dev. 1996 Jan;54(1):9-21.

Teleost HoxD and HoxA genes: comparison with tetrapods and functional evolution
of the HOXD complex.

van der Hoeven F(1), Sordino P, Fraudeau N, Izpisúa-Belmonte JC, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

In tetrapods, Hox genes are essential for the proper organization and development
of axial structures. Experiments involving Hox gene inactivations have revealed
their particularly important functions in the establishment of morphological
transitions within metameric series such as the vertebral column. Teleost fish
show a much simpler range of axial (trunk or appendicular) morphologies, which
prompted us to investigate the nature of the Hox system in these lower
vertebrates. Here, we show that fish have a family of Hox genes, very similar in 
both number and general organization, to that of tetrapods. Expression studies,
carried out with HoxD and HoxA genes, showed that all vertebrates use the same
general scheme, involving the colinear activation of gene expression in both
space and time. Comparisons between tetrapods and fish allowed us to propose a
model which accounts for the primary function of this gene family. In this model,
a few ancestral Hox genes were involved in the determination of polarity in the
digestive tract and were further recruited in more elaborate axial structures.

PMID: 8808402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):3989-97.

Cooperative interactions between HOX and PBX proteins mediated by a conserved
peptide motif.

Phelan ML(1), Rambaldi I, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Homeoprotein products of the Hox/HOM gene family pattern the animal embryo
through the transcriptional regulation of target genes. We have previously shown 
that the labial group protein HOXA-1 has intrinsically weak DNA-binding activity 
due to residues in the N-terminal arm of its homeodomain (M. L. Phelan, R.
Sadoul, and M. S. Featherstone, Mol. Cell. Biol. 14:5066-5075, 1994). This
observation, among others, suggests that HOX and HOM proteins require cofactors
for stable interactions with DNA. We have demonstrated that a putative HOX
cofactor, PBX1A, participates in cooperative DNA binding with HOXA-1 and the
Deformed group protein HOXD-4. Three Abdominal-B class HOX proteins failed to
cooperate with PBX1A. We mapped the interacting domain of HOXD-4 to the YPWMK
pentapeptide motif, a conserved sequence found N terminal to the homeodomain of
HOXA-1 and many other homeoproteins but absent from the Abdominal-B class. The
naturally occurring fusion of the transcriptional activation domain of E2A with
PBX1 creates an oncoprotein implicated in human pre-B-cell leukemias (M. P.
Kamps, C. Murre, X.-H. Sun, and D. Baltimore, Cell 60:547-555, 1990; J. Nourse,
J. D. Mellentin, N. Galili, J. Wilkinson, E. Starbridge, S. D. Smith, and M. L.
Cleary, Cell 60:535-545, 1990). A pentapeptide mutation that abolished
cooperative interaction with PBX1A in vitro also abrogated synergistic
transcriptional activation with the E2A/PBX oncoprotein. The direct contact of
PBX family members by the HOX pentapeptide is likely to play an important role in
developmental and oncogenic processes.

PMCID: PMC230638
PMID: 7623795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Lab Invest. 1994 Nov;71(5):663-70.

Expression of AbdB-type homeobox genes in human tumors.

Redline RW(1), Hudock P, MacFee M, Patterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (HOX) genes of the ANT-C/BX-C type control rostral-caudal
patterning during embryogenesis. Previous work has shown that tissues express
unique HOX gene expression profiles that persist upon transplantation to distant 
sites. These properties suggest that analysis of HOX genes may be useful for the 
diagnosis and evaluation of primary and metastatic tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed normal and neoplastic tissues for the expression
of three AbdB-type HOX genes; HOXD10, HOXA9, and HOXC9 to evaluate three
hypotheses: (a) that tumors express HOX genes found in their tissue of origin,
(b) that metastatic tumors continue to express HOX genes found in the primary
tumor, and (c) that the level of HOX expression is related to tumor grade.
RESULTS: Malignant tumors gave consistent patterns of HOX gene expression that
paralleled their tissues of origin. Normal kidney and Wilm's tumors expressed all
three genes. Other renal tumors expressed distinct permutations of the three
genes. One epithelial Wilm's tumor expressed only an aberrant 0.3 kb HOXD10
transcript. Outside of the kidney, HOXD10 was most characteristic of uterine
tumors, HOXA9 of colonic adenocarcinomas, and HOXC9 of two groups of tumors:
neoplasms derived from neural crest and mesenchymal tumors derived from
intermediate mesoderm. Metastatic tumors retained their HOX gene expression
profiles and did not express HOX genes transcribed at the site of metastasis.
While modulation of HOX gene expression was observed in some poorly
differentiated tumors this was not a consistent measure of tumor grade.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene profile was a reliable indicator of histologic subtype in a
variety of tumors and in selected cases provided useful diagnostic information.
Persistent expression in metastatic tumors confirmed that HOX expression profiles
are potentially useful for diagnosing tumors of unknown origin. Continued
analysis of the relationship between level of expression and tumor grade/behavior
is indicated.

PMID: 7967520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Sep 13;1219(1):219-22.

The nucleotide sequence of the murine Hox-D3 (Hox-4.1) gene reveals extensive
identity with the human protein.

Brown WM(1), Zhou L, Taylor GR.

Author information: 
(1)Skin Biology Research Center of Johnson & Johnson, R.W. Johnson Pharmaceutical
Research Institute, Raritan, NJ 08869.

We report the sequence of the murine Hox-D3 gene, formerly referred to as Hox-4, 
Hox-4.1 and Hox-4A. This gene is located on murine chromosome 2 in the Hox-D
complex. The predicted Hox-D3 protein comprises 417 amino acids and displays 95% 
identity to the human protein. We have demonstrated that Hox-D3 is expressed in
the skin, kidney and thymus, but not in lung, liver, spleen or stomach.

PMID: 7916214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. EMBO J. 1991 Dec;10(13):4177-87.

HOX4 genes encode transcription factors with potential auto- and cross-regulatory
capacities.

Zappavigna V(1), Renucci A, Izpisúa-Belmonte JC, Urier G, Peschle C, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Heidelberg, FRG.

We have looked for the binding of several HOX4 complex homeoproteins in the
genomic region containing the HOX4C promoter, between the human HOX4C and HOX4D
genes. The HOX4C, HOX4D and Hox-4.3 homeoproteins bind to a phylogenetically
highly conserved DNA fragment, which is located in the proximal part of this
intergenic region and contains multiple binding sites for these HOX4 proteins.
Using cotransfection experiments, we show that this endogenous DNA sequence can
mediate transactivation by the HOX4D and HOX4C proteins and that this effect
requires the presence of TAAT-related binding sites. The Hox-4.3 protein, in
contrast, is unable to activate and can repress the activation observed with the 
two other proteins. These results show that the HOX4D and HOX4C genes are genuine
sequence-specific transcription factors and suggest that, as in Drosophila,
cross-regulatory interactions between these genes might be essential for their
proper expression.

PMCID: PMC453170
PMID: 1756725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


