
1. Elife. 2016 Apr 1;5. pii: e11792. doi: 10.7554/eLife.11792.

Spatial sequestration and detoxification of Huntingtin by the ribosome quality
control complex.

Yang J(1), Hao X(1), Cao X(1), Liu B(1), Nyström T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg,
Göteborg, Sweden. (2)Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.

Huntington disease (HD) is a neurological disorder caused by polyglutamine
expansions in mutated Huntingtin (mHtt) proteins, rendering them prone to form
inclusion bodies (IB). We report that in yeast, such IB formation is a
factor-dependent process subjected to age-related decline. A genome-wide,
high-content imaging approach, identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase, Ltn1 of the
ribosome quality control complex (RQC) as a key factor required for IB formation,
ubiquitination, and detoxification of model mHtt. The failure of ltn1<U+2206> cells to
manage mHtt was traced to another RQC component, Tae2, and inappropriate control 
of heat shock transcription factor, Hsf1, activity. Moreover, super-resolution
microscopy revealed that mHtt toxicity in RQC-deficient cells was accompanied by 
multiple mHtt aggregates altering actin cytoskeletal structures and retarding
endocytosis. The data demonstrates that spatial sequestration of mHtt into IBs is
policed by the RQC-Hsf1 regulatory system and that such compartmentalization,
rather than ubiquitination, is key to mHtt detoxification.

PMID: 27033550  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Methods. 2016 Mar 25. pii: S1046-2023(16)30055-X. doi:
10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.03.021. [Epub ahead of print]

A fast protocol for purification of translating mRNAs.

Ross D(1), Altmann M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine (IBMM), Bühlstrasse 28, 3012 
Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: daniela.ross@ibmm.unibe.ch. (2)Institute
of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine (IBMM), Bühlstrasse 28, 3012 Bern,
Switzerland. Electronic address: michael.altmann@ibmm.unibe.ch.

We present a protocol that enables easy extraction of translating mRNAs by
purification of tagged ribosomes and associated mRNAs. By studying three
different examples of stress influenced genes, we demonstrate the effectiveness
and compare our rapid method to an older protocol [1].

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27020892  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Exp Cell Res. 2016 Mar 23. pii: S0014-4827(16)30061-1. doi:
10.1016/j.yexcr.2016.03.021. [Epub ahead of print]

Huntingtin interacting protein HYPK is a negative regulator of heat shock
response and is downregulated in models of Huntington's Disease.

Das S(1), Bhattacharyya NP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography & Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, India. Electronic address:
mail2srijit@gmail.com. (2)Crystallography & Molecular Biology Division, Saha
Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, India; Biomedical
Genomics Centre, PG Polyclinic Building (3rd floor), 5, Suburbun Hospital Road,
Kolkata 700020, India. Electronic address: nitai_sinp@yahoo.com.

Huntingtin interacting protein HYPK (Huntingtin Yeast Partner K) is an
intrinsically unstructured protein having chaperone-like activity and can
suppress mutant huntingtin aggregates and toxicity in cell model of Huntington's 
Disease (HD). Heat shock response is an adaptive mechanism of cells characterized
by upregulation of heat shock proteins by heat-induced activation of heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1). The trans-activation ability of HSF1 is arrested upon
restoration of proteostasis. We earlier identified HYPK as a heat-inducible
protein and transcriptional target of HSF1. Here we show that HYPK can act as
negative regulator of heat shock response by repressing transcriptional activity 
of HSF1. As part of its role as a repressor of heat shock response, HYPK can also
inhibit HSF1-dependent trans-activation of its own promoter. HYPK is
downregulated in cell and animal model of HD. We further show that
transcriptional downregulation of HYPK in HD cell model is a consequence of
reduced occupancy of HSF1 in HYPK promoter. Moreover, presence of mutant
huntingtin inhibits effective induction of HYPK in response to heat shock. Taken 
together, our findings reveal that HYPK can suppress heat shock response via an
autoregulatory loop and downregulation of HYPK in HD is caused by impaired
transcriptional activity of HSF1 in presence of mutant huntingtin.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27017930  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2016 Mar 23:ajpregu.00494.2015. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00494.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Twelve hours of heat stress induces inflammatory signaling in porcine skeletal
muscle.

Ganesan S(1), Reynolds C, Hollinger K(2), Pearce SC(3), Gabler NK(3), Baumgard
LH(3), Rhoads RP(4), Selsby JT(5).

Author information: 
(1)iowa state university. (2)University of Washington. (3)Iowa State University. 
(4)Virginia Tech. (5)Iowa State University jselsby@iastate.edu.

Heat stress causes morbidity and mortality in humans and animals and threatens
food security by limiting livestock productivity. Inflammatory signaling may
contribute to heat stress-mediated skeletal muscle dysfunction. Previously we
discovered increased circulating endotoxin and intramuscular oxidative stress and
TNFa protein abundance but not inflammatory signaling following 24 and 72 hours
of heat stress. Thus, the purpose of this investigation was to clarify the role
of inflammatory signaling in heat stressed skeletal muscle. Crossbred gilts
(n=8/group) were assigned to either thermal neutral (24° C), heat stress (37° C),
or pair-fed thermal neutral (24° C) conditions for 12 hours. Following treatment,
animals were euthanized and the semitendinosus red (STR) and white (STW) were
recovered. Heat stress did not alter inflammatory signaling in STW. In STR,
relative heat shock protein abundance was similar between groups as was nuclear
content of HSF1. In whole homogenate, relative abundance of the NF-<U+03BA>B activator
IKKa was increased by heat stress though abundance of NF-<U+03BA>B was similar between
groups. Relative abundance of phosphorylated NF-<U+03BA>B was increased by heat stress
in nuclear fractions. AP-1 signaling was similar between groups. While there were
few differences in transcript expression between thermal neutral and heat stress,
80 and 56% of measured transcripts driven by NF-<U+03BA>B or AP-1, respectively, were
increased by heat stress compared to pair-fed thermal neutral. Heat stress also
caused a reduction in IL-6 transcript and relative protein abundance. These data 
demonstrate that short-term heat stress causes inflammatory signaling through
NF-<U+03BA>B in oxidative, but not glycolytic, skeletal muscle.

Copyright © 2015, American Journal of Physiology - Regulatory, Integrative and
Comparative Physiology.

PMID: 27009052  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Curr Genomics. 2015 Aug;16(4):279-91. doi: 10.2174/1389202916666150313230812.

Genome-wide Scanning and Characterization of Sorghum bicolor L. Heat Shock
Transcription Factors.

Nagaraju M(1), Reddy PS(2), Kumar SA(1), Srivastava RK(2), Kishor PB(1), Rao
DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad 500 007, India;
(2)International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT),
Patancheru-502324, Hyderabad, India.

A genome-wide scanning of Sorghum bicolor resulted in the identification of 25
SbHsf genes. Phylogenetic analysis shows the ortholog genes that are clustered
with only rice, representing a common ancestor. Promoter analysis revealed the
identification of different cis-acting elements that are responsible for abiotic 
as well as biotic stresses. Hsf domains like DBD, NLS, NES, and AHA have been
analyzed for their sequence similarity and functional characterization. Tissue
specific expression patterns of Hsfs in different tissues like mature embryo,
seedling, root, and panicle were studied using real-time PCR. While Hsfs4 and 22 
are highly expressed in panicle, 4 and 9 are expressed in seedlings. Sorghum
plants were exposed to different abiotic stress treatments but no expression of
any Hsf was observed when seedlings were treated with ABA. High level expression 
of Hsf1 was noticed during high temperature as well as cold stresses, 4 and 6
during salt and 5, 6, 10, 13, 19, 23 and 25 during drought stress. This
comprehensive analysis of SbHsf genes will provide an insight on how these genes 
are regulated in different tissues and also under different abiotic stresses and 
help to determine the functions of Hsfs during drought and temperature stress
tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4765522
PMID: 27006630  [PubMed]


6. J Neurosci Res. 2016 Mar 20. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23725. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of heat shock factor 1 maintains TAR DNA binding protein 43
solubility via induction of inducible heat shock protein 70 in cultured cells.

Lin PY(1,)(2,)(3), Folorunso O(1,)(2,)(3), Taglialatela G(1,)(4), Pierce
A(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)George and Cynthia Woods Mitchell Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, The
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas. (2)Sealy Center for Vaccine
Development, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas. (4)Department of Neurology, The University of
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.

TAR DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43) is a nuclear protein that has been shown to
have altered homeostasis in the form of neuronal nuclear and cytoplasmic
aggregates in some familial and almost all cases of sporadic amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis as well as 51% of frontotemporal lobar degeneration and 57% of
Alzheimer's disease cases. Heat shock proteins (HSPs), such as HSP70, recognize
misfolded or aggregated proteins and refold, disaggregate, or turn them over and 
are upregulated by the master transcription factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1).
Here, we explore the effect of HSF1 overexpression on proteotoxic stress-related 
alterations in TDP-43 solubility, proteolytic processing, and cytotoxicity. HSF1 
overexpression reduced TDP-43-positive puncta concomitantly with upregulating
HSP70 and HSP90 protein levels. HSF1 overexpression or pharmacological activation
sustained TDP-43 solubility and significantly reduced truncation of TDP-43 in
response to inhibition of the proteasome with Z-Leu-Leu-Leu-al, and this was
reversed by HSF1 inhibition. HSF1 activation conferred protection against
toxicity associated with TDP-43 C-terminal fragments without globally increasing 
the activity of the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) while concomitantly
reducing the induction of autophagy, suggesting that HSF1 protection is an early 
event. In support of this, inhibition of HSP70 ATPase activity further reduced
TDP-43 solubility. HSF1 knockout significantly increased TDP-43 insolubility and 
accelerated TDP-43 fragmentation in response to proteotoxic stress. Overall, this
study shows that HSF1 overexpression protects against TDP-43 pathology by
upregulation of chaperones, especially HSP70, rather than enhancing autophagy or 
the UPS during times of proteotoxic stress. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26994698  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2016 Mar 2;7:19. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2016.00019.
eCollection 2016.

Browning and Graying: Novel Transcriptional Regulators of Brown and Beige Fat
Tissues and Aging.

Mueller E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health , Bethesda, MD ,
USA.

Obesity represents a major risk factor for the development of a number of
metabolic disorders, including cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. Since 
the discovery that brown and beige fat cells exist in adult humans and contribute
to energy expenditure, increasing interest has been devoted to the understanding 
of the molecular switches turning on calorie utilization. It has been reported
that the ability of thermogenic tissues to burn energy declines during aging,
possibly contributing to the development of metabolic dysfunction late in life.
This review will focus on the recently identified transcriptional modulators of
brown and beige cells and will discuss the potential impact of some of these
thermogenic factors on age-associated metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4773441
PMID: 26973598  [PubMed]


8. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Mar 8. pii: ddw073. [Epub ahead of print]

A small-molecule Nrf1 and Nrf2 activator mitigates polyglutamine toxicity in
spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.

Bott LC(1), Badders NM(2), Chen KL(3), Harmison GG(3), Bautista E(3), Shih CC(4),
Katsuno M(5), Sobue G(5), Taylor JP(2), Dantuma NP(6), Fischbeck KH(3), Rinaldi
C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden Present address: Department of Molecular
Biosciences, Rice Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA laura.bott@northwestern.edu. (2)Department of Cell and
Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(3)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)AndroScience Corporation, Solana Beach, CA 92075,
USA. (5)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan. (6)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska 
Institutet, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Neurogenetics Branch, National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Present address:
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1
3QX, United Kingdom.

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA, also known as Kennedy's disease) is one
of nine neurodegenerative disorders that are caused by expansion of
polyglutamine-encoding CAG repeats. Intracellular accumulation of abnormal
proteins in these diseases, a pathological hallmark, is associated with defects
in protein homeostasis. Enhancement of the cellular proteostasis capacity with
small molecules has therefore emerged as a promising approach to treatment. Here 
we characterize a novel curcumin analog, ASC-JM17, as an activator of central
pathways controlling protein folding, degradation, and oxidative stress
resistance. ASC-JM17 acts on Nrf1, Nrf2, and Hsf1, to increase the expression of 
proteasome subunits, antioxidant enzymes, and molecular chaperones. We show that 
ASC-JM17 ameliorates toxicity of the mutant androgen receptor (AR) responsible
for SBMA in cell, fly, and mouse models. Knockdown of the Drosophila Nrf1 and
Nrf2 ortholog CncC, but not Hsf1, blocks the protective effect of ASC-JM17 on
mutant AR-induced eye degeneration in flies. Our observations indicate that
activation of the Nrf1/Nrf2 pathway is a viable option for pharmacological
intervention in SBMA and potentially other polyglutamine diseases.

Published by Oxford University Press 2016. This work is written by (a) US
Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

PMID: 26962150  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Mar 4;198:1-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular cloning of hsf1 and hsbp1 cDNAs, and the expression of hsf1, hsbp1 and 
hsp70 under heat stress in the sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus.

Xu D(1), Sun L(2), Liu S(3), Zhang L(3), Yang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Institute of
Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, PR China; University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, PR China. (2)Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and
Environmental Sciences, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Qingdao, PR China. Electronic address: sunlina713@163.com. (3)Key Laboratory of
Marine Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, PR China. (4)Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and
Environmental Sciences, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Qingdao, PR China. Electronic address: hshyang@ms.qdio.ac.cn.

The heat shock response (HSR) is known for the elevated synthesis of heat shock
proteins (HSPs) under heat stress, which is mediated primarily by heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1). Heat shock factor binding protein 1 (HSBP1) and feedback control
of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) are major regulators of the activity of HSF1. We
obtained full-length cDNA of genes hsf1 and hsbp1 in the sea cucumber
Apostichopus japonicus, which are the second available for echinoderm (after
Strongylocentrotus purpuratus), and the first available for holothurian. The
full-length cDNA of hsf1 was 2208bp, containing a 1326bp open reading frame
encoding 441 amino acids. The full-length cDNA of hsbp1 was 2850bp, containing a 
225bp open reading frame encoding 74 amino acids. The similarities of A.
japonicus HSF1 with other species are low, and much higher similarity identities 
of A. japonicus HSBP1 were shared. Phylogenetic trees showed that A. japonicus
HSF1 and HSBP1 were clustered with sequences from S. purpuratus, and fell into
distinct clades with sequences from mollusca, arthropoda and vertebrata. Analysis
by real-time PCR showed hsf1 and hsbp1 mRNA was expressed constitutively in all
tissues examined. The expression of hsf1, hsbp1 and hsp70 in the intestine at
26°C was time-dependent. The results of this study might provide new insights
into the regulation of heat shock response in this species.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26952354  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Brain. 2016 Mar 1. pii: aww028. [Epub ahead of print]

The heat shock response plays an important role in TDP-43 clearance: evidence for
dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Chen HJ(1), Mitchell JC(1), Novoselov S(2), Miller J(1), Nishimura AL(1), Scotter
EL(3), Vance CA(1), Cheetham ME(2), Shaw CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK. (2)UCL Institute 
of Ophthalmology, 11-43 Bath Street, London, UK. (3)Department of Pharmacology,
University of Auckland, New Zealand. (4)Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience
Institute, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College
London, London, UK chris.shaw@kcl.ac.uk.

Detergent-resistant, ubiquitinated and hyperphosphorylated Tar DNA binding
protein 43 (TDP-43, encoded by TARDBP) neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions are the
pathological hallmark in ~95% of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and ~60% of
frontotemporal lobar degeneration cases. We sought to explore the role for the
heat shock response in the clearance of insoluble TDP-43 in a cellular model of
disease and to validate our findings in transgenic mice and human amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis tissues. The heat shock response is a stress-responsive
protective mechanism regulated by the transcription factor heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), which increases the expression of chaperones that refold damaged
misfolded proteins or facilitate their degradation. Here we show that
manipulation of the heat shock response by expression of dominant active HSF1
results in a dramatic reduction of insoluble and hyperphosphorylated TDP-43 that 
enhances cell survival, whereas expression of dominant negative HSF1 leads to
enhanced TDP-43 aggregation and hyperphosphorylation. To determine which
chaperones were mediating TDP-43 clearance we over-expressed a range of heat
shock proteins (HSPs) and identified DNAJB2a (encoded by DNAJB2, and also known
as HSJ1a) as a potent anti-aggregation chaperone for TDP-43. DNAJB2a has a J
domain, allowing it to interact with HSP70, and ubiquitin interacting motifs,
which enable it to engage the degradation of its client proteins. Using
functionally deleted DNAJB2a constructs we demonstrated that TDP-43 clearance was
J domain-dependent and was not affected by ubiquitin interacting motif deletion
or proteasome inhibition. This indicates that TDP-43 is maintained in a soluble
state by DNAJB2a, leaving the total levels of TDP-43 unchanged. Additionally, we 
have demonstrated that the levels of HSF1 and heat shock proteins are
significantly reduced in affected neuronal tissues from a TDP-43 transgenic mouse
model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and patients with sporadic amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. This implies that the HSF1-mediated DNAJB2a/HSP70 heat shock
response pathway is compromised in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Defective
refolding of TDP-43 is predicted to aggravate the TDP-43 proteinopathy. The
finding that the pathological accumulation of insoluble TDP-43 can be reduced by 
the activation of HSF1/HSP pathways presents an exciting opportunity for the
development of novel therapeutics.

© The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain.

PMID: 26936937  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Mol Cell Probes. 2016 Feb 27. pii: S0890-8508(16)30019-6. doi:
10.1016/j.mcp.2016.02.009. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of crucial regulatory relationships between long non-coding RNAs
and protein-coding genes in lung squamous cell carcinoma.

Wu X(1), Ruan L(1), Yang Y(1), Mei Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. (2)Department of
Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. Electronic address: borismq@163.com.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to analyze the relationships of long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) and protein-coding genes in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC).
METHODS: RNA-seq data of LUSC deposited in the TCGA database were used to
identify differentially expressed protein-coding genes (DECGs) and differentially
expressed lncRNA genes (DE-lncRNAs) between LUSC samples and normal samples.
Functional enrichment analysis of DECGs was then performed. Subsequently, the
target genes and regulators of DE-lncRNAs were predicted from the DECGs.
Additionally, expression levels of target genes of DE-lncRNAs were validated by
RT-qPCR after the silence of DE-lncRNAs.
RESULTS: In total, 5162 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened from 
the LUSC samples, and there were seven upregulated lncRNA genes in the DEGs. The 
upregulated DECGs were enriched in GO terms like RNA binding and metabolic
process. Meanwhile, the downregulated DECGs were enriched in GO terms like cell
cycle. Furthermore, the lncRNAs PVT1 and TERC targeted multiple DECGs. PVT1
targeted genes related to cell cycle (e.g. POLA2, POLD1, MCM4, MCM5 and MCM6),
and reduced expression of PVT1 decreased expression of the genes. TERC regulated 
several genes (e.g. NDUFAB1, NDUFA11 and NDUFB5), and reduced expression of TERC 
increased expression of the genes. Additionally, PVT1 was regulated by multiple
transcription factors (TFs) identified from DECGs, such as HSF1; and TERC was
modulated by TFs, such as PIR.
CONCLUSION: A set of regulatory relationships between PVT1 and its targets and
regulators, as well as TERC and its targets and regulators, may play crucial
roles in the progress of LUSC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26928440  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Adv Cancer Res. 2016;129:89-106. doi: 10.1016/bs.acr.2015.08.002. Epub 2015 Oct
12.

Hsp90 in Cancer: Transcriptional Roles in the Nucleus.

Calderwood SK(1), Neckers L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address:
scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Hsp90 plays a key role in fostering metabolic pathways essential in tumorigenesis
through its functions as a molecular chaperone. Multiple oncogenic factors in the
membrane and cytoplasm are thus protected from degradation and destruction. Here,
we have considered Hsp90's role in transcription in the nucleus. Hsp90 functions 
both in regulating the activity of sequence-specific transcription factors such
as nuclear receptors and HSF1, as well as impacting more globally acting factors 
that act on chromatin and RNA polymerase II. Hsp90 influences transcription by
modulating histone modification mediated by its clients SMYD3 and trithorax/MLL, 
as well as by regulating the processivity of RNA polymerase II through negative
elongation factor. It is not currently clear how the transcriptional role of
Hsp90 may be influenced by the cancer milieu although recently discovered
posttranslational modification of the chaperone may be involved. Dysregulation of
Hsp90 may thus influence malignant processes both by modulating the function of
specific transcription factors and effects on more globally acting general
components of the transcriptional machinery.

© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26916002  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Physiol Sci. 2016 Feb 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Circadian adaptation to cell injury stresses: a crucial interplay of BMAL1 and
HSF1.

Tamaru T(1), Ikeda M(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Advanced Research Center for Medical Science,
Toho University School of Medicine, 5-21-16 Ohmori-nishi Ohta-ku, Tokyo,
143-8540, Japan. tetamaru@med.toho-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Physiology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Saitama Medical University, 38 Morohongo Moroyama-machi, Iruma-gun, 
Saitama, 350-0495, Japan. (3)Molecular Clock Project, Project Research Division, 
Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, 
Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1241, Japan.

The circadian clock system confers daily anticipatory physiological processes
with the ability to be reset by environmental cues. This "circadian adaptation
system" (CAS), driven by cell-autonomous molecular clocks, orchestrates various
rhythmic physiological processes in the entire body. Hence, the dysfunction of
these clocks exacerbates various diseases, which may partially be due to the
impairment of protective pathways. If this is the case, how does the CAS respond 
to cell injury stresses that are critical in maintaining health and life by
evoking protective pathways? To address this question, here we review and discuss
recent evidence revealing life-protective (pro-survival) molecular networks
between clock (e.g., BMAL1, CLOCK, and PER2) and adaptation (e.g., HSF1, Nrf2,
NF-<U+03BA>B, and p53) pathways, which are evoked by various cell injury stresses (e.g.,
heat, reactive oxygen species, and UV). The CK2 protein kinase-integrated
interplay of the BMAL1 (clock) and HSF1 (heat-shock response) pathways is one of 
the crucial events in CAS.

PMID: 26910317  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2016 Feb 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Determinants of rodent longevity in the chaperone-protein degradation network.

Rodriguez KA(1), Valentine JM(1,)(2), Kramer DA(3), Gelfond JA(4), Kristan DM(5),
Nevo E(6), Buffenstein R(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Sam and Anne Barshop Center for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (UTHSCSA), San Antonio, TX, 78229,
USA. (2)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, 
78229, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, 78229,
USA. (5)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University San
Marcos, San Marcos, CA, 92096, USA. (6)Institute of Evolution, University of
Haifa, Haifa, 3498838, Israel. (7)Sam and Anne Barshop Center for Longevity and
Aging Studies, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
(UTHSCSA), San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA. rbuffen@gmail.com. (8)Department of
Physiology, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA. rbuffen@gmail.com. (9)Calico,
1170 Veterans Blvd, San Francisco, CA, 94080, USA. rbuffen@gmail.com.

Proteostasis is an integral component of healthy aging, ensuring maintenance of
protein structural and functional integrity with concomitant impact upon health
span and longevity. In most metazoans, increasing age is accompanied by a decline
in protein quality control resulting in the accrual of damaged, self-aggregating 
cytotoxic proteins. A notable exception to this trend is observed in the
longest-lived rodent, the naked mole-rat (NMR, Heterocephalus glaber) which
maintains proteostasis and proteasome-mediated degradation and autophagy during
aging. We hypothesized that high levels of the proteolytic degradation may enable
better maintenance of proteostasis during aging contributing to enhanced species 
maximum lifespan potential (MLSP). We test this by examining proteasome activity,
proteasome-related HSPs, the heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) transcription factor, and
several markers of autophagy in the liver and quadriceps muscles of eight rodent 
species with divergent MLSP. All subterranean-dwelling species had higher levels 
of proteasome activity and autophagy, possibly linked to having to dig in soils
rich in heavy metals and where underground atmospheres have reduced oxygen
availability. Even after correcting for phylogenetic relatedness, a significant
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.02) positive correlation between MLSP, HSP25, HSF1, proteasome activity,
and autophagy-related protein 12 (ATG12) was observed, suggesting that the
proteolytic degradation machinery and maintenance of protein quality play a
pivotal role in species longevity among rodents.

PMID: 26894765  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Cell Death Dis. 2016 Feb 18;7:e2102. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2016.22.

The transcriptional coactivator PGC1a protects against hyperthermic stress via
cooperation with the heat shock factor HSF1.

Xu L(1), Ma X(1), Bagattin A(1), Mueller E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are required for the clearance of damaged and
aggregated proteins and have important roles in protein homeostasis. It has been 
shown that the heat shock transcription factor, HSF1, orchestrates the
transcriptional induction of these stress-regulated chaperones; however, the
coregulatory factors responsible for the enhancement of HSF1 function on these
target genes have not been fully elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that the
cold-inducible coactivator, PGC1a, also known for its role as a regulator of
mitochondrial and peroxisomal biogenesis, thermogenesis and cytoprotection from
oxidative stress, regulates the expression of HSPs in vitro and in vivo and
modulates heat tolerance. Mechanistically, we show that PGC1a physically
interacts with HSF1 on HSP promoters and that cells and mice lacking PGC1a have
decreased HSPs levels and are more sensitive to thermal challenges. Taken
together, our findings suggest that PGC1a protects against hyperthermia by
cooperating with HSF1 in the induction of a transcriptional program devoted to
the cellular protection from thermal insults.

PMID: 26890141  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Physiol. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.1113/JP270564. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of reactive oxygen species in age-related neuromuscular deficits.

Jackson MJ(1), McArdle A(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC-Arthritis Research UK Centre for Integrated research into Musculoskeletal 
Ageing (CIMA), Department of Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Ageing and
Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3GA, UK.

Although it is now clear that reactive oxygen species (ROS) are not the key
determinants of longevity, a number of studies have highlighted the key role that
these species play in age-related diseases and more generally in determining
individual health span. Age-related loss of skeletal muscle mass and function is 
a key contributor to physical frailty in older individuals and our current
understanding of the key areas in which ROS contribute to age-related deficits in
muscle is through defective redox signalling and key roles in maintenance of
neuromuscular integrity. This topical review will describe how ROS stimulate
adaptations to contractile activity in muscle that include up-regulation of
short-term stress responses, an increase in mitochondrial biogenesis and an
increase in some catabolic processes. These adaptations occur through stimulation
of redox-regulated processes that lead to activation of transcription factors
such as NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1 and HSF1 which mediate changes in gene expression. They are
attenuated during ageing and this appears to occur through an age-related
increase in mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide production. The potential for
redox-mediated cross-talk between motor neurons and muscle is also described to
illustrate how ROS released from muscle fibres during exercise may help maintain 
the integrity of axons and how the degenerative changes in neuromuscular
structure that occur with ageing may contribute to mitochondrial ROS generation
in skeletal muscle fibres. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26870901  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1862(4):601-10. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.02.005.
Epub 2016 Feb 6.

Altered S-nitrosothiol homeostasis provides a survival advantage to breast cancer
cells in HER2 tumors and reduces their sensitivity to trastuzumab.

Cañas A(1), López-Sánchez LM(2), Peñarando J(3), Valverde A(4), Conde F(5),
Hernández V(6), Fuentes E(7), López-Pedrera C(8), de la Haba-Rodríguez JR(9),
Aranda E(10), Rodríguez-Ariza A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, Maimonides Institute of Biomedical Research (IMIBIC),
Reina Sofía Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain; Spanish Cancer Network
(RTICC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
amandacanasrodriguez@gmail.com. (2)Oncology Department, Maimonides Institute of
Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain;
Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: lmlopezsanchez@gmail.com. (3)Oncology Department, Maimonides 
Institute of Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía Hospital, University of
Córdoba, Spain; Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jon_aries80@hotmail.com. (4)Oncology
Department, Maimonides Institute of Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía
Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain; Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
aracelivalverdeestepa@hotmail.es. (5)Oncology Department, Maimonides Institute of
Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain;
Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: fmcp@usal.es. (6)Oncology Department, Maimonides Institute of
Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain;
Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: vanessa-septiembre@hotmail.com. (7)Pathology Department,
IMIBIC, Reina Sofía Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain. Electronic address:
elena.fuentes.sspa@juntadeandalucia.es. (8)Research Unit, IMIBIC, Reina Sofía
Hospital, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain. Electronic address:
rosario.lopez.exts@juntadeandalucia.es. (9)Oncology Department, Maimonides
Institute of Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía Hospital, University of
Córdoba, Spain; Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: juahaba@gmail.com. (10)Oncology Department,
Maimonides Institute of Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía Hospital,
University of Córdoba, Spain; Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: earandaa@seom.org. (11)Oncology
Department, Maimonides Institute of Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), Reina Sofía
Hospital, University of Córdoba, Spain; Spanish Cancer Network (RTICC), Instituto
de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
antonio.rodriguez.exts@juntadeandalucia.es.

The monoclonal antibody trastuzumab against HER2/neu, which is overexpressed in
15-20% of breast cancers, has clinical efficacy but many patients do not respond 
to initial treatment or develop resistance during treatment. Nitric oxide (NO)
regulates cell signaling by targeting specific cysteine residues in proteins,
forming S-nitrosothiols (SNO) in a process known as S-nitrosylation. We
previously reported that molecular characteristics in breast cancer may dictate
the tumor response to impaired SNO homeostasis. In the present study, we explored
the role of SNO homeostasis in HER2 breast tumors. The antiproliferative action
of trastuzumab in HER2-overexpressing BT-474 and SKBR-3 cells was suppressed when
S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR/ADH5) activity, which plays a key role in
SNO homeostasis, was specifically inhibited with the pyrrole derivative compound 
N6022. Moreover, GSNOR inhibition restored the activation of survival signaling
pathways involved in the resistance to anti-HER2 therapies (AKT, Src and c-Abl
kinases and TrkA/NRTK1, TrkB/NRTK2, EphA1 and EphA3 receptors) and reduced the
apoptotic effect of trastuzumab. Accordingly, GSNOR inhibition augmented the
S-nitrosylation of apoptosis-related proteins, including Apaf-1, pSer73/63 c-Jun,
calcineurin subunit a and HSF1. In agreement with in vitro data,
immunohistochemical analyses of 51 breast tumors showed that HER2 expression was 
associated with lower expression of GSNOR protein. Moreover, gene expression
analysis confirmed that high ADH5/GSNOR gene expression was associated with high 
patient survival rates in HER2 tumors. In conclusion, our data provide evidence
of molecular mechanisms contributing to the progression of HER2+ breast cancers
and could facilitate the development of therapeutic options to counteract
resistance to anti-HER2 therapies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26854735  [PubMed - in process]


18. Pharm Biol. 2016 Jan 20:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Flavokawains A and B from kava (Piper methysticum) activate heat shock and
antioxidant responses and protect against hydrogen peroxide-induced cell death in
HepG2 hepatocytes.

Pinner KD(1), Wales CT(1), Gristock RA(1), Vo HT(1), So N(1), Jacobs AT(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences , Daniel K. Inouye College of
Pharmacy, University of Hawaii at Hilo , Hilo , HI , USA ; (2)b Cancer Biology
Program, University of Hawaii Cancer Center , Honolulu , HI , USA.

Context Flavokawains are secondary metabolites from the kava plant (Piper
methysticum Forst. f., Piperaceae) that have anticancer properties and
demonstrated oral efficacy in murine cancer models. However, flavokawains also
have suspected roles in rare cases of kava-induced hepatotoxicity. Objective To
compare the toxicity flavokawains A and B (FKA, FKB) and monitor the resulting
transcriptional responses and cellular adaptation in the human hepatocyte cell
line, HepG2. Materials and methods HepG2 were treated with 2-100<U+2009>µM FKA or FKB
for 24-48<U+2009>h. Cellular viability was measured with calcein-AM and changes in
signalling and gene expression were monitored by luciferase reporter assay,
real-time PCR and Western blot of both total and nuclear protein extracts. To
test for subsequent resistance to oxidative stress, cells were pretreated with
50<U+2009>µM FKA, 10<U+2009>µM FKB or 10<U+2009>µM sulphoraphane (SFN) for 24<U+2009>h, followed by
0.4-2.8<U+2009>mM H2O2 for 48<U+2009>h, and then viability was assessed. Results FKA (=100<U+2009>µM) 
was not toxic to HepG2, whereas FKB caused significant cell death
(IC50=23.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.8<U+2009>µM). Both flavokawains activated Nrf2, increasing HMOX1 and GCLC
expression and enhancing total glutathione levels over 2-fold (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). FKA and
FKB also activated HSF1, increasing HSPA1A and DNAJA4 expression. Also,
flavokawain pretreatment mitigated cell death after a subsequent challenge with
H2O2, with FKA being more effective than FKB, and similar to SFN. Conclusions
Flavokawains promote an adaptive cellular response that protects hepatocytes
against oxidative stress. We propose that FKA has potential as a
chemopreventative or chemotherapeutic agent.

PMID: 26789234  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Elife. 2016 Jan 19;5. pii: e11576. doi: 10.7554/eLife.11576.

Molecular mechanism of thermosensory function of human heat shock transcription
factor Hsf1.

Hentze N(1), Le Breton L(1), Wiesner J(1), Kempf G(1), Mayer MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany.

The heat shock response is a universal homeostatic cell autonomous reaction of
organisms to cope with adverse environmental conditions. In mammalian cells, this
response is mediated by the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1, which is
monomeric in unstressed cells and upon activation trimerizes, and binds to
promoters of heat shock genes. To understand the basic principle of Hsf1
activation we analyzed temperature-induced alterations in the conformational
dynamics of Hsf1 by hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry. We found a
temperature-dependent unfolding of Hsf1 in the regulatory region happening
concomitant to tighter packing in the trimerization region. The transition to the
active DNA binding-competent state occurred highly cooperative and was
concentration dependent. Surprisingly, Hsp90, known to inhibit Hsf1 activation,
lowered the midpoint temperature of trimerization and reduced cooperativity of
the process thus widening the response window. Based on our data we propose a
kinetic model of Hsf1 trimerization.

PMCID: PMC4775227
PMID: 26785146  [PubMed - in process]


20. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Jan 16;17(1). pii: E119. doi: 10.3390/ijms17010119.

Cloning and Transcriptional Activity of the Mouse Omi/HtrA2 Gene Promoter.

Liu D(1), Liu X(2), Wu Y(3), Wang W(4), Ma X(5,)(6), Liu H(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. liudanzyh@126.com.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. liuxintea@126.com.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. wuyecat530@126.com. 
(4)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China. wangwen@ccmu.edu.cn.
(5)Beijing Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disturbance Related Cardiovascular
Disease, Beijing 100069, China. xin.ma@jefferson.edu. (6)Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
xin.ma@jefferson.edu. (7)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of 
Basic Medical Sciences, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, China.
liuhr2000@126.com. (8)Beijing Key Laboratory of Metabolic Disturbance Related
Cardiovascular Disease, Beijing 100069, China. liuhr2000@126.com.

HtrA serine peptidase 2 (HtrA2), also named Omi, is a pro-apoptotic protein that 
exhibits dramatic changes in expression levels in a variety of disorders,
including ischemia/reperfusion injury, cancer, and neurodegeneration. In our
study, Omi/HtrA2 protein levels were high in the heart, brain, kidney and liver, 
with elevated heart/brain expression in aging mice. A similar expression pattern 
was observed at the mRNA level, which suggests that the regulation of Omi/HtrA2
is predominately transcriptional. Promoter binding by transcription factors is
the main influencing factor of transcription, and to identify specific promoter
elements that contribute to the differential expression of mouse Omi/HtrA2, we
constructed truncated Omi/HtrA2 promoter/luciferase reporter vectors and analyzed
their relative luciferase activity; it was greatest in the promoter regions at
-1205~-838 bp and -146~+93 bp, with the -838~-649 bp region exhibiting negative
regulatory activity. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that the Omi/HtrA2 gene
promoter contains a CpG island at -709~+37 bp, and eight heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) sites, two Sp1 transcription factor (SP1)sites, one activator
protein (AP) site, seven p53 sites, and four YY1 transcription factor(YY1) sites 
were predicted in the core areas. Furthermore, we found that p53 and HSF1
specifically binds to the Omi/HtrA2 promoter using chromatin immunoprecipitation 
analysis. These results provide a foundation for understanding Omi/HtrA2
regulatory mechanisms, which could further understanding of HtrA-associated
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4730360
PMID: 26784188  [PubMed - in process]


21. Genetics. 2016 Mar;202(3):1013-27. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.185025. Epub 2016
Jan 15.

Small Heat Shock Proteins Are Novel Common Determinants of Alcohol and Nicotine
Sensitivity in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Johnson JR(1), Rajamanoharan D(1), McCue HV(1), Rankin K(1), Barclay JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Physiological Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, University 
of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, United Kingdom. (2)The Physiological Laboratory,
Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, 
United Kingdom barclayj@liverpool.ac.uk.

Addiction to drugs is strongly determined by multiple genetic factors. Alcohol
and nicotine produce distinct pharmacological effects within the nervous system
through discrete molecular targets; yet, data from family and twin analyses
support the existence of common genetic factors for addiction in general. The
mechanisms underlying addiction, however, are poorly described and common genetic
factors for alcohol and nicotine remain unidentified. We investigated the role
that the heat shock transcription factor, HSF-1, and its downstream effectors
played as common genetic modulators of sensitivity to addictive substances. Using
Caenorhabditis elegans, an exemplary model organism with substance dose-dependent
responses similar to mammals, we demonstrate that HSF-1 altered sensitivity to
both alcohol and nicotine. Using a combination of a targeted RNAi screen of
downstream factors and transgenic approaches we identified that these effects
were contingent upon the constitutive neuronal expression of HSP-16.48, a small
heat shock protein (HSP) homolog of human a-crystallin. Furthermore we
demonstrated that the function of HSP-16.48 in drug sensitivity surprisingly was 
independent of chaperone activity during the heat shock stress response. Instead 
we identified a distinct domain within the N-terminal region of the HSP-16.48
protein that specified its function in comparison to related small HSPs. Our
findings establish and characterize a novel genetic determinant underlying
sensitivity to diverse addictive substances.

Copyright © 2016 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4788107
PMID: 26773049  [PubMed - in process]


22. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 12;6:19174. doi: 10.1038/srep19174.

IER5 generates a novel hypo-phosphorylated active form of HSF1 and contributes to
tumorigenesis.

Asano Y(1,)(2), Kawase T(3,)(4), Okabe A(5), Tsutsumi S(5), Ichikawa H(6), Tatebe
S(4), Kitabayashi I(7), Tashiro F(4), Namiki H(2), Kondo T(1), Semba K(2),
Aburatani H(5), Taya Y(3), Nakagama H(8), Ohki R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rare Cancer Research, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Advanced
Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
169-8555, Japan. (3)Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (4)Department of
Biological Science and Technology, Faculty of Industrial Science and Technology, 
Tokyo University of Science, Niijuku 6-3-1, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo 125-8585, Japan.
(5)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.
(6)Department of Clinical Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (7)Division of Hematological
Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (8)Division of Cancer Development System, National Cancer 
Center Research Institute, Tsukiji 5-1-1, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

The transcription factors HSF1 and p53 both modulate the stress response, thereby
protecting and facilitating the recovery of stressed cells, but both have the
potential to promote tumor development. Here we show that a p53 target gene,
IER5, encodes an activator of HSF1. IER5 forms a ternary complex with HSF1 and
the phosphatase PP2A, and promotes the dephosphorylation of HSF1 at numbers of
serine and threonine residues, generating a novel, hypo-phosphorylated active
form of HSF1. IER5 is also transcriptionally upregulated in various cancers,
although this upregulation is not always p53-dependent. The IER5 locus is
associated with a so-called super enhancer, frequently associated with
hyperactivated oncogenes in cancer cell lines. Enhanced expression of IER5
induces abnormal HSF1 activation in cancer cells and contributes to the
proliferation of these cells under stressed conditions. These results reveal the 
existence of a novel IER5-mediated cancer regulation pathway that is responsible 
for the activation of HSF1 observed in various cancers.

PMCID: PMC4709660
PMID: 26754925  [PubMed - in process]


23. Chronobiol Int. 2016;33(1):85-97. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2015.1112395. Epub 2016
Jan 8.

Altered energy intake and the amplitude of the body temperature rhythm are
associated with changes in phase, but not amplitude, of clock gene expression in 
the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus in vivo.

Goh GH(1), Mark PJ(1), Maloney SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Anatomy, Physiology, and Human Biology, The University of Western 
Australia , Crawley , Australia.

Circadian rhythms in mammals are driven by a central clock in the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN). In vitro, temperature cycles within the physiological range can
act as potent entraining cues for biological clocks. We altered the body
temperature (Tc) rhythm in rats by manipulating energy intake (EI) to determine
whether EI-induced changes in Tc oscillations are associated with changes in SCN 
clock gene rhythms in vivo. Male Wistar rats (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>16 per diet) were maintained on
either an ad libitum diet (CON), a high energy cafeteria diet (CAF), or a calorie
restricted diet (CR), and Tc was recorded every 30 min for 6-7 weeks. SCN tissue 
was harvested from rats at zeitgeber time (ZT) 0, ZT6, ZT12, or ZT18. Expression 
of the clock genes Bmal1, Per2, Cry1, and Rev-erba, the heat shock transcription 
factor Hsf1, and the heat shock protein Hsp90aa1, were determined using qPCR. The
circadian profile of gene expression for each gene was characterized using
cosinor analysis. Compared to the CON rats, the amplitude of Tc was decreased in 
CAF rats by 0.1 °C (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and increased in CR rats by 0.3 °C (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001).
The amplitude of Hsp90aa1 expression was lowest in CAF rats and highest in CR
rats (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.045), but the amplitude of all of the clock genes and Hsf1 were
unaffected by diet (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.25). Compared to CON, phase advances of the Tc, Bmal1, 
and Per2 rhythms were observed with CR feeding (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), but CAF feeding
elicited no significant changes in phase. The present results indicate that in
vivo, the SCN is largely resistant to entrainment by EI-induced changes in the Tc
rhythm, although some phase entrainment may occur.

PMID: 26745660  [PubMed - in process]


24. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2016 Feb;23(2):147-54. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3150. Epub 2016 Jan
4.

Structures of HSF2 reveal mechanisms for differential regulation of human
heat-shock factors.

Jaeger AM(1), Pemble CW 4th(2), Sistonen L(3), Thiele DJ(1,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (2)Duke University Human Vaccine Institute
Macromolecular Crystallography Center, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, North Carolina, USA. (3)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Duke University School
of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Heat-shock transcription factor (HSF) family members function in stress
protection and in human diseases including proteopathies, neurodegeneration and
cancer. The mechanisms that drive distinct post-translational modifications,
cofactor recruitment and target-gene activation for specific HSF paralogs are
unknown. We present crystal structures of the human HSF2 DNA-binding domain (DBD)
bound to DNA, revealing an unprecedented view of HSFs that provides insights into
their unique biology. The HSF2 DBD structures resolve a new C-terminal helix that
directs wrapping of the coiled-coil domain around DNA, thereby exposing
paralog-specific sequences of the DBD surface for differential post-translational
modifications and cofactor interactions. We further demonstrate a direct
interaction between HSF1 and HSF2 through their coiled-coil domains. Together,
these features provide a new model for HSF structure as the basis for
differential and combinatorial regulation, which influences the transcriptional
response to cellular stress.

PMID: 26727490  [PubMed - in process]


25. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2016 Feb;23(2):140-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3149. Epub 2016 Jan 
4.

Structure of human heat-shock transcription factor 1 in complex with DNA.

Neudegger T(1), Verghese J(1), Hayer-Hartl M(1), Hartl FU(1), Bracher A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany.

Heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) has a central role in mediating the
protective response to protein conformational stresses in eukaryotes. HSF1
consists of an N-terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD), a coiled-coil oligomerization
domain, a regulatory domain and a transactivation domain. Upon stress, HSF1
trimerizes via its coiled-coil domain and binds to the promoters of heat shock
protein-encoding genes. Here, we present cocrystal structures of the human HSF1
DBD in complex with cognate DNA. A comparative analysis of the HSF1 paralog Skn7 
from Chaetomium thermophilum showed that single amino acid changes in the DBD can
switch DNA binding specificity, thus revealing the structural basis for the
interaction of HSF1 with cognate DNA. We used a crystal structure of the
coiled-coil domain of C. thermophilum Skn7 to develop a model of the active human
HSF1 trimer in which HSF1 embraces the heat-shock-element DNA.

PMID: 26727489  [PubMed - in process]


26. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Jan;37(1):56-62. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2414. Epub 2015 Nov
19.

The interactive association between heat shock factor 1 and heat shock proteins
in primary myocardial cells subjected to heat stress.

Tang S(1), Chen H(1), Cheng Y(1), Nasir MA(1), Kemper N(2), Bao E(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210095, P.R. China. (2)Institute for Animal Hygiene, Animal Welfare and
Farm Animal Behaviour, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation,
D-30559 Hannover, Germany.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a heat shock transcription factor that rapidly
induces heat shock gene transcription following thermal stress. In this study, we
subjected primary neonatal rat myocardial cells to heat stress in vitro to create
a model system for investigating the trends in expression and association between
various heat shock proteins (HSPs) and HSF1 under adverse environmental
conditions. After the cells were subjected to heat stress at 42°C for different
periods of time, HSP and HSF1 mRNA and protein levels were detected by qPCR and
western blot analysis in the heat-stressed cells. The HSF1 expression levels
significantly increased in the cells following 120 min of exposure to heat stess 
compared to the levels observed at the beginning of heat stress exposure. HSP90
followed a similar trend in expression to HSF1, whereas HSP70 followed an
opposite trend. However, no significant changes were observed in the
crystallin, alpha B (CRYAB, also known as HSP beta-5) expression levels during
the 480-min period of exposure to heat stress. The interaction between the HSPs
and HSF1 was analyzed by STRING 9.1, and it was found that HSF1 interacted with
HSP90 and HSP70, and that it did not play a role in regulating CRYAB expression. 
Based on our findings, HSP70 may suppress HSF1 in rat myocardial cells under
conditions of heat stress. Furthermore, our data demonstrate that HSF1 is not the
key factor for all HSPs, and this was particularly the case for CRYAB.

PMCID: PMC4687434
PMID: 26719858  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Microsc. 2015 Dec 22. doi: 10.1111/jmi.12363. [Epub ahead of print]

Wavelet transform analysis of chromatin texture changes during heat shock.

Herbomel G(1), Grichine A(1), Fertin A(2), Delon A(3), Vourc'h C(1), Souchier
C(1), Usson Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, IAB, University Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France. (2)CNRS, TIMC-IMAG, 
University Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France. (3)CNRS, LIPHY, University Grenoble 
Alpes, Grenoble, France.

Texture analysis can be a useful tool to investigate the organization of
chromatin. Approaches based on multiscale analysis and in particular the 'à trou'
wavelet analysis has already been used for microscopy (Olivo Marin). In order to 
analyse texture changes, the statistical properties of the wavelet coefficient
images were summarized by the first four statistical orders: mean, standard
deviation, skewness and kurtosis of the coefficient image histogram. The 'à trou'
transform provided a representation of the wavelet coefficients and texture
parameters with the same statistical robustness throughout the scale spaces. It
was applied for quantifying chromatin texture and heat-induced chromatin changes 
in living cells. We investigated the changes by both laser scanning and spinning 
disk confocal microscopies and compared the texture parameters before and after
increasing duration of heat shock exposure (15 min, 30 min and 1 h). Furthermore,
as activation of the heat shock response also correlates with a rapid
localization of HSF1 within a few nuclear structures termed nuclear stress bodies
(nSBs), we compared the dynamics of nSBs formation with that of textural changes 
during 1 h of continuous heat shock. Next, we studied the recovery phase
following a 1-h heat shock. Significant differences were observed, particularly
affecting the perinucleolar region, even for the shortest heat shock time
affecting mostly the skewness and standard deviation. Furthermore, progressive
changes could be observed according to the duration of heat shock, mostly
affecting fine details (pixel-wise changes) as revealed by the parameters,
obtained from the first- and second-order wavelet coefficients. 'A trou' wavelet 
texture analysis provided a sensitive and efficient tool to investigate minute
changes of chromatin.

© 2015 The Authors Journal of Microscopy © 2015 Royal Microscopical Society.

PMID: 26694695  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Aquat Toxicol. 2016 Jan;170:229-39. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.11.021. Epub 2015
Dec 2.

Sulfide exposure results in enhanced sqr transcription through upregulating the
expression and activation of HSF1 in echiuran worm Urechis unicinctus.

Liu X(1), Zhang Z(2), Ma X(1), Li X(1), Zhou D(1), Gao B(1), Bai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, College 
of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, College 
of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China.
Electronic address: zzfp107@ouc.edu.cn.

Sulfide is a natural, widely distributed, poisonous substance. Sulfide: quinone
oxidoreductase (SQR) is responsible for the initial oxidation of sulfide in
mitochondria. To study transcriptional regulation of sqr after sulfide exposure, 
a 2.6-kb sqr upstream sequence from echiuran worm Urechis unicinctus was cloned
by genome walking. Bioinformatics analysis showed 3 heat shock elements (HSEs) in
proximal promoter region of the sqr upstream sequence. Moreover, an Hsf1 cDNA in 
U. unicinctus (UuHsf1) was isolated with a full-length sequence of 2334<U+2009>bp and
its polyclonal antibody was prepared using U. unicinctus HSF1 (UuHSF1) expressed 
prokaryotically with whole sequence of its open reading frame (ORF). In vivo ChIP
and in vitro EMSA assays revealed UuHSF1 could interact with the sqr proximal
promoter region. Transient transfection and mutation assays indicated that UuHSF1
bound specifically to HSE (-155bp to -143bp) and enhanced the transcription of
sqr. Furthermore, sulfide treatment experiments demonstrated that sulfide could
increase the expression of HSF1 protein, and induce trimerization of the protein 
which binds to HSEs and then activate sqr transcription. Quantitative real-time
PCR analysis revealed sqr mRNA level increased significantly after U. unicinctus 
was exposed to sulfide for 6h, which corresponded to content changes of both
trimeric HSF1 and HSF1-HSE complex. We concluded that UuHSF1 is a transcription
factor of sqr and sulfide could induce sqr transcription by upregulating the
expression and activation of HSF1 in U. unicinctus exposed to sulfide.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26675369  [PubMed - in process]


29. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2015 Oct;43(10):894-9.

[Exercise preconditioning attenuates pressure overload-induced pathological
cardiac hypertrophy: potential role of HSF1 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 signaling].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu T(1), Li T, Yang F, Han Q, Zou L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, No. 401 Hospital of PLA, Qingdao 266071,
China. (2)Email: zouliangjiansh@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of exercise preconditioning (EP) on pressure
overload-induced pathological cardiac hypertrophy and explore related mechanisms.
METHODS: Ten-week-old male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 80) were randomly divided
into four groups via random number table method: sham, TAC, EP + sham and EP +
TAC. Two EP groups were subjected to 4 weeks of treadmill training, and followed 
by sham and TAC operations. Eight weeks after the surgery, mean arterial pressure
(MAP), cardiac morphology, mRNA expressions of the B-type natriuretic peptide
(BNP) and heat shock protein (HSP) 70 and protein expression of the BNP, heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), HSP70, nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65, and
interleukin-2 (IL-2) were examined.
RESULTS: (1) Pathological cardiac hypertrophy index: eight weeks after TAC, MAP, 
heart size, HW/BW, cross-sectional area of the cardiomyocytes (CSA) and mRNA and 
protein expressions of BNP in the LV were all significantly higher in the TAC and
EP + TAC groups than respective sham groups (all P < 0.05). HW/BW, CSA, and mRNA 
and protein expressions of BNP in the LV were significantly lower in EP + TAC
group than in TAC group (all P < 0.05). (2) mRNA and protein expressions of HSF1 
and HSP70 and nuclear HSF1 levels were significantly downregulated post TAC,
however, EP treatment significantly increased the expression of HSF1 and nuclear 
HSF1 levels in TAC rats (all P < 0.05). (3) mRNA and protein expressions of NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 and IL-2 were significantly increased in the TAC and EP + TAC groups compared
with the respective sham groups (all P < 0.05), which were significantly
downregulated in EP + TAC group compared to TAC group (all P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EP could effectively reduce the cardiac hypertrophic responses
induced by TAC possibly through upregulating the expressions of HSF1 and HSP70
and inhibiting the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and its nuclear translocation.

PMID: 26652992  [PubMed - in process]


30. Microrna. 2015;4(3):185-93.

Heat Shock Factor 1-Regulated miRNAs Can Target Huntingtin and Suppress
Aggregates of Mutant Huntingtin.

Das S, Bhattacharyya NP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Genomics Centre PG Polyclinic Building (3rd floor) 5, Suburbun
Hospital Road Kolkata-700020, India. nitai_sinp@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of chaperone
network in mammalian cells and can protect cells from adverse effects of
misfolded proteins by rapidly inducing expression of multiple heat shock proteins
(HSPs) and other cytoprotective proteins. HSF1 also regulates transcription of
microRNAs (miRNAs) in heat shock-dependent manner and these miRNAs are likely to 
regulate diverse cellular processes by acting as downstream effectors of HSF1.
METHODS: The study was aimed at understanding the effect of HSF1-regulated miRNAs
on huntingtin expression and Huntington's Disease (HD) pathogenesis, if any. The 
cumulative effect of all HSF1-regulated miRNAs on huntingtin expression was
measured by quantitative real-time PCR and luciferase reporter assay and effect
of miRNAs on mutant huntingtin aggregates was determined by aggregate counting
assay.
RESULTS: Our study reveals that HSF1-regulated miRNAs cumulatively target
huntingtin and reduce its expression in HD cell model. We also identify 4
huntingtin-targeting miRNAs viz. miR-125b, miR-146a, miR-150 and miR-214 as
candidate miRNAs responsible for observed inhibitory effect of HSF1 on huntingtin
expression. We further demonstrate that HSF1-regulated miRNAs together can
suppress aggregates of mutant huntingtin in cell model of HD.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the protective effect of HSF1 in the context of HD
is a consequence of synergistic induction of HSPs and HSF1-regulated
huntingtin-targeting miRNAs. Moreover, the suppressive effect of HSF1-regulated
miRNAs on mutant huntingtin aggregates indicates their potential as therapeutic
agents for the treatment of HD.

PMID: 26634350  [PubMed - in process]


31. Genome Biol. 2015 Dec 3;16:267. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0825-8.

Loss of function of myosin chaperones triggers Hsf1-mediated transcriptional
response in skeletal muscle cells.

Etard C(1), Armant O(1), Roostalu U(2), Gourain V(1), Ferg M(1), Strähle U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Campus Nord, PO box, Karlsruhe, Germany. (2)Present address: Institute of
Inflammation and Repair, Michael Smith Bldg, University of Manchester, Oxford
Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK. (3)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Campus Nord, PO box, Karlsruhe, Germany.
uwe.straehle@kit.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in myosin chaperones Unc45b and Hsp90aa1.1 as well as in
the Unc45b-binding protein Smyd1b impair formation of myofibrils in skeletal
muscle and lead to the accumulation of misfolded myosin. The concomitant
transcriptional response involves up-regulation of the three genes encoding these
proteins, as well as genes involved in muscle development. The transcriptional
up-regulation of unc45b, hsp90aa1.1 and smyd1b is specific to zebrafish mutants
with myosin folding defects, and is not triggered in other zebrafish myopathy
models.
RESULTS: By dissecting the promoter of unc45b, we identify a Heat shock factor 1 
(Hsf1) binding element as a mediator of unc45b up-regulation in myofibers lacking
myosin folding proteins. Loss-of-function of Hsf1 abolishes unc45b up-regulation 
in mutants with defects in myosin folding.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data show that skeletal muscle cells respond to 
defective myosin chaperones with a complex gene program and suggest that this
response is mediated by Hsf1 activation.

PMCID: PMC4668643
PMID: 26631063  [PubMed - in process]


32. Trends Cell Biol. 2016 Jan;26(1):17-28. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2015.10.011. Epub 2015
Nov 18.

HSF1: Guardian of Proteostasis in Cancer.

Dai C(1), Sampson SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. Electronic
address: Chengkai.Dai@jax.org. (2)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar
Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Proteomic instability is causally related to human diseases. In guarding proteome
stability, the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)-mediated proteotoxic stress response
plays a pivotal role. Contrasting with its beneficial role of enhancing cell
survival, recent findings have revealed a compelling pro-oncogenic role for HSF1.
However, the mechanisms underlying the persistent activation and function of HSF1
within malignancy remain poorly understood. Emerging evidence reveals that
oncogenic signaling mobilizes HSF1 and that cancer cells rely on HSF1 to avert
proteomic instability and repress tumor-suppressive amyloidogenesis. In
aggregate, these new developments suggest that cancer cells endure chronic
proteotoxic stress and that proteomic instability is intrinsically associated
with the malignant state, a characteristic that could be exploited to combat
cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4722819 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26597576  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Med Genet. 2016 Feb;53(2):132-7. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103232. Epub 2015 
Nov 6.

Leukoencephalopathy and early death associated with an Ashkenazi-Jewish founder
mutation in the Hikeshi gene.

Edvardson S(1), Kose S(2), Jalas C(3), Fattal-Valevski A(4), Watanabe A(2), Ogawa
Y(2), Mamada H(2), Fedick AM(5), Ben-Shachar S(6), Treff NR(7), Shaag A(1), Bale 
S(8), Gärtner J(9), Imamoto N(2), Elpeleg O(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadassah, Hebrew
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. (2)Cellular Dynamics Laboratory,
RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, Japan. (3)Bonei Olam, Center for Rare Jewish 
Genetic Disorders, Brooklyn, New York, USA. (4)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Dana
Children Hospital, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, affiliated to Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. (5)Department of Microbiology
and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Piscataway,
Basking Ridge, New Jersey, USA. (6)Genetic Institute, Tel-Aviv Medical Center,
affiliated to Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(7)Reproductive Medicine Associates of New Jersey Basking Ridge, Basking Ridge,
New Jersey, USA. (8)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA. (9)Division of Pediatric
Neurology, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical
Center, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Leukodystrophies are genetic white matter disorders affecting the
formation or maintenance of myelin. Among the recently discovered genetic defects
associated with leukodystrophies, several genes converge on a common mechanism
involving protein transcription/translation and ER stress response.
METHODS: The genetic basis of a novel congenital leukodystrophy, associated with 
early onset spastic paraparesis, acquired microcephaly and optic atrophy was
studied in six patients from three unrelated Ashkenazi-Jewish families. To this
end we used homozygosity mapping, exome analysis, western blot (Hikeshi,
HSF1-pS326 and b-actin) in patient fibroblasts, indirect immunofluorescence
(HSP70 and HSF1) in patient fibroblasts undergoing heat shock stress, nuclear
injection of plasmids expressing Hikeshi or EGFP in patient fibroblasts, in situ 
hybridization and Immunoblot analysis of Hikeshi in newborn and adult mouse
brain.
RESULTS: All the patients were homozygous for a missense mutation, p.Val54Leu, in
C11ORF73 encoding HSP70 nuclear transporter protein, Hikeshi. The mutation
segregated with the disease in the families and was carried by 1:200
Ashkenazi-Jewish individuals. The mutation was associated with undetectable level
of Hikeshi in the patients' fibroblasts and with lack of nuclear HSP70 during
heat shock stress, a phenomenon which was reversed upon the introduction of
normal human Hikeshi to the patients cells. Hikeshi was found to be expressed in 
central white matter of mouse brain.
CONCLUSIONS: These data underscore the importance of Hikeshi for HSP70 relocation
into the nucleus. It is likely that in the absence of Hikeshi, HSP70 cannot
attenuate the multiple heat shock induced nuclear phenotypes, leaving the cells
unprotected during heat shock stress. We speculate that the sudden death of three
of the six patients following a short febrile illness and the life-threatening
myo-pericarditis in the fourth are the result of excess extra-nuclear HSP70 level
which initiates cytokine release or provide target for natural killer cells.
Alternatively, nuclear HSP70 might play an active role in stressed cells
protection.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26545878  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Transl Med. 2015 Nov 5;13:347. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0714-7.

HALT & REVERSE: Hsf1 activators lower cardiomyocyt damage; towards a novel
approach to REVERSE atrial fibrillation.

Lanters EA(1), van Marion DM(2), Kik C(3), Steen H(4), Bogers AJ(5), Allessie
MA(6), Brundel BJ(7,)(8), de Groot NM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Ba 579, Erasmus Medical Center, 's Gravendijkwal
230, 3015, CE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. e.lanters@erasmusmc.nl. (2)Department 
of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, EB71, University Institute for Drug
Exploration (GUIDE), University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30 001, 9700, RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.
d.m.s.van.marion@umcg.nl. (3)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Bd 557,
Erasmus Medical Center, 's Gravendijkwal 230, 3015, CE, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. c.kik@erasmusc.nl. (4)Nyken Therapeutics B.V., L.J. Zielstraweg 2,
9713, GX, Groningen, The Netherlands. hermansteen@nyken.com. (5)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Bd 557, Erasmus Medical Center, 's Gravendijkwal 230,
3015, CE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a.j.j.c.bogers@erasmusmc.nl. (6)Department 
of Cardiology, Ba 579, Erasmus Medical Center, 's Gravendijkwal 230, 3015, CE,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.allessie@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (7)Department of 
Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, EB71, University Institute for Drug
Exploration (GUIDE), University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, PO Box 30 001, 9700, RB, Groningen, The Netherlands.
b.j.j.m.brundel@umcg.nl. (8)Department of Physiology, Institute for
Cardiovascular Research, VU University Medical Center, Van der Boechorststraat 7,
1081, BT, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. b.j.j.m.brundel@umcg.nl. (9)Department of
Cardiology, Ba 579, Erasmus Medical Center, 's Gravendijkwal 230, 3015, CE,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. n.m.s.degroot@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation is a progressive arrhythmia, the exact mechanism 
underlying the progressive nature of recurrent AF episodes is still unknown.
Recently, it was found that key players of the protein quality control system of 
the cardiomyocyte, i.e. Heat Shock Proteins, protect against atrial fibrillation 
progression by attenuating atrial electrical and structural remodeling
(electropathology). HALT & REVERSE aims to investigate the correlation between
electropathology, as defined by endo- or epicardial mapping, Heat Shock Protein
levels and development or recurrence of atrial fibrillation following pulmonary
vein isolation, or electrical cardioversion or cardiothoracic surgery.
STUDY DESIGN: This study is a prospective observational study. Three separate
study groups are defined: (1) cardiothoracic surgery, (2) pulmonary vein
isolation and (3) electrical cardioversion. An intra-operative high-resolution
epicardial (group 1) or endocardial (group 2) mapping procedure of the atria is
performed to study atrial electropathology. Blood samples for Heat Shock Protein 
determination are obtained at baseline and during the follow-up period at 3
months (group 2), 6 months (groups 1 and 2) and 1 year (group 1 and 2). Tissue
samples of the right and left atrial appendages in patients in group 1 are
analysed for Heat Shock Protein levels and for tissue characteristics. Early post
procedural atrial fibrillation is detected by continuous rhythm monitoring,
whereas late post procedural atrial fibrillation is documented by either
electrocardiogram or 24-h Holter registration.
CONCLUSION: HALT & REVERSE aims to identify the correlation between Heat Shock
Protein levels and degree of electropathology. The study outcome will contribute 
to novel diagnostic tools for the early recognition of clinical atrial
fibrillation.
TRIAL REGISTRATIONS: Rotterdam Medical Ethical Committee MEC-2014-393, Dutch
Trial Registration NTR4658.

PMCID: PMC4635598
PMID: 26541406  [PubMed - in process]


35. Oncol Rep. 2016 Jan;35(1):235-42. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4381. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Sirtuin inhibitors, EX527 and AGK2, suppress cell migration by inhibiting HSF1
protein stability.

Kim HW(1), Kim SA(2), Ahn SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Dentistry, Chosun University, Gwangju
501-759, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Oriental
Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju 780-714, Republic of Korea.

The histone deacetylases (HDACs), Sirtuin 1 (Sirt1) and Sirt2, play crucial roles
in many biological processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis. HDAC inhibitors have been considered as a potential therapeutic
approach for various types of cancers. Here, we demonstrated that the Sirt1 and
Sirt2 inhibitors EX527 and AGK2 suppressed cell growth and caused G1 phase arrest
by inhibiting the expression of Cdk6 and/or Cdk4. An agar colony formation assay 
revealed that EX527 and AGK2 decreased colony formation in soft agar.
Furthermore, EX527 and AGK2 pretreatment inhibited the expression of HSF1 and
HSP27 and induced HSF1 ubiquitination. Sirt1 overexpression increased HSF1
expression and/or stabilization and induced cell migration in a scratch assay.
Overall, these results indicate that EX527 and AGK2 suppress cell growth and
migration by inhibiting HSF1 protein stability.

PMID: 26530275  [PubMed - in process]


36. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 30;10(10):e0141786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141786.
eCollection 2015.

Client Proteins and Small Molecule Inhibitors Display Distinct Binding
Preferences for Constitutive and Stress-Induced HSP90 Isoforms and Their
Conformationally Restricted Mutants.

Prince TL(1), Kijima T(1), Tatokoro M(1), Lee S(2), Tsutsumi S(1), Yim K(1),
Rivas C(1), Alarcon S(2), Schwartz H(1), Khamit-Kush K(1), Scroggins BT(3), Beebe
K(1), Trepel JB(2), Neckers L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America. (2)Developmental Therapeutics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States of America. (3)Radiation Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.

The two cytosolic/nuclear isoforms of the molecular chaperone HSP90,
stress-inducible HSP90a and constitutively expressed HSP90ß, fold, assemble and
maintain the three-dimensional structure of numerous client proteins. Because
many HSP90 clients are important in cancer, several HSP90 inhibitors have been
evaluated in the clinic. However, little is known concerning possible unique
isoform or conformational preferences of either individual HSP90 clients or
inhibitors. In this report, we compare the relative interaction strength of both 
HSP90a and HSP90ß with the transcription factors HSF1 and HIF1a, the kinases
ERBB2 and MET, the E3-ubiquitin ligases KEAP1 and RHOBTB2, and the HSP90
inhibitors geldanamycin and ganetespib. We observed unexpected differences in
relative client and drug preferences for the two HSP90 isoforms, with HSP90a
binding each client protein with greater apparent affinity compared to HSP90ß,
while HSP90ß bound each inhibitor with greater relative interaction strength
compared to HSP90a. Stable HSP90 interaction was associated with reduced client
activity. Using a defined set of HSP90 conformational mutants, we found that some
clients interact strongly with a single, ATP-stabilized HSP90 conformation, only 
transiently populated during the dynamic HSP90 chaperone cycle, while other
clients interact equally with multiple HSP90 conformations. These data suggest
different functional requirements among HSP90 clientele that, for some clients,
are likely to be ATP-independent. Lastly, the two inhibitors examined, although
sharing the same binding site, were differentially able to access distinct HSP90 
conformational states.

PMCID: PMC4627809
PMID: 26517842  [PubMed - in process]


37. Neuroendocrinology. 2015 Oct 30. [Epub ahead of print]

Heat Shock Factor 1-Deficiency Affects Systemic Body Temperature Regulation.

Ingenwerth M(1), Noichl E, Stahr A, Korf HW, Reinke H, von Gall C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy II, Faculty of Medicine, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Dx00FC;sseldorf, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a ubiquitous heat-sensitive
transcription factor that mediates heat shock protein transcription in response
to cellular stress, such as increased temperature, in order to protect against
misfolded proteins. In this study, we analysed the effect of HSF1-deficiency on
core body temperature regulation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Body temperature, locomotor activity, and food consumption 
of Wildtype mice and HSF1-deficient mice were recorded. Prolactin and TSH levels 
were measured by ELISA. Gene expression in brown adipose tissue was analysed by
quantitative realtime PCR. Hypothalamic HSF1 and its co-localization with
tyrosine hydroxylase was analysed using confocal laser scanning microscopy.
RESULTS: HSF1-deficient mice showed an increase in core body temperature
(hyperthermia), decreased overall locomotor activity, and decreased levels of
prolactin in pituitary and blood plasma reminiscent of cold adaptation. HSF1
could be detected in various hypothalamic regions involved in temperature
regulation, suggesting a potential role of HSF1 in hypothalamic thermoregulation.
Moreover, HSF1 co-localizes with tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate limiting enzyme
in dopamine synthesis, suggesting a potential role of HSF1 in the hypothalamic
control prolactin release. In brown adipose tissue, levels of prolactin receptor 
and uncoupled protein 1 were increased in HSF1-deficient mice consistent with an 
up-regulation of heat production.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest a role of HSF1 in systemic thermoregulation.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26513256  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. J Transl Med. 2015 Oct 28;13:338. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0703-x.

Higher heat shock factor 1 expression in tumor stroma predicts poor prognosis in 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients.

Liao Y(1), Xue Y(2), Zhang L(3), Feng X(4), Liu W(5), Zhang G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, No. 132 Waihuandong Road, University Town,
Guangzhou, 510006, China. yuehua33@163.com. (2)Department of Microbial and
Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, 
No. 132 Waihuandong Road, University Town, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
xuedongzhe@126.com. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. zhanglin@sysucc.org.cn. (4)Department
of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-Sen University, No. 132 Waihuandong Road, University Town, Guangzhou, 510006,
China. fxw0110@163.com. (5)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. liuwl@sysucc.org.cn.
(6)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, No. 132 Waihuandong Road, University Town,
Guangzhou, 510006, China. zhangge@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a powerful, multifaceted modifier of
carcinogenesis. However, the clinical significance and biologic function of HSF1 
in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) remain unknown.
METHODS: HSF1 was detected in ESCC cell lines, fibroblast cell lines and ESCC
xenograft tumors and human ESCC tissues by real-time RT-PCR and western blotting.
HSF1 protein expression was analyzed by immunochemistry in 134 ESCC patients
followed by correlation with clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: HSF1 expression is weak in fibroblast cell 3T3 and moderate in ESCC cell
Eca109, but increasing expression of HSF1 was observed in both of 3T3 and Eca109 
cells when they interplayed with each other. In Eca109 xenograft tumors, both
tumor cells and stromal fibroblasts showed stronger expression of HSF1. In ESCC
patients, the HSF1 expression in tumor or in stromal cells was significantly
associated with tumor stage, lymph node metastasis and clinical stage.
Multivariate analysis demonstrated a significant negative correlation between
disease-free survival (DFS), overall survival (OS) and the HSF1 expression in
stromal cells (P < 0.05) but not in tumor cells. Additionally, the expression of 
HSF1 in tumor cells or stromal cells was an independent factor for DFS (P = 0.032
or P = 0.012) and OS (P = 0.017 or P = 0.013) in metastatic ESCC patients but not
for locoregional ESCC. ESCC patients with low HSF1 in both tumor cells and
stromal cells had the longest survivals (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The interaction of tumor cells and stromal fibroblasts increases the
expression of HSF1 reciprocally in tumor microenvironment. The HSF1 expression in
stromal cells was significantly associated with poor prognosis of ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4625739
PMID: 26511079  [PubMed - in process]


39. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2016 Feb;26(1):29-43. doi: 10.1089/nat.2015.0566. Epub 2015
Oct 28.

Anti-Transcription Factor RNA Aptamers as Potential Therapeutics.

Mondragón E(1), Maher LJ 3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine , Rochester, Minnesota.

Transcription factors (TFs) are DNA-binding proteins that play critical roles in 
regulating gene expression. These proteins control all major cellular processes, 
including growth, development, and homeostasis. Because of their pivotal role,
cells depend on proper TF function. It is, therefore, not surprising that TF
deregulation is linked to disease. The therapeutic drug targeting of TFs has been
proposed as a frontier in medicine. RNA aptamers make interesting candidates for 
TF modulation because of their unique characteristics. The products of in vitro
selection, aptamers are short nucleic acids (DNA or RNA) that bind their targets 
with high affinity and specificity. Aptamers can be expressed on demand from
transgenes and are intrinsically amenable to recognition by nucleic acid-binding 
proteins such as TFs. In this study, we review several natural prokaryotic and
eukaryotic examples of RNAs that modulate the activity of TFs. These examples
include 5S RNA, 6S RNA, 7SK, hepatitis delta virus-RNA (HDV-RNA), neuron
restrictive silencer element (NRSE)-RNA, growth arrest-specific 5 (Gas5), steroid
receptor RNA activator (SRA), trophoblast STAT utron (TSU), the 3' untranslated
region of caudal mRNA, and heat shock RNA-1 (HSR1). We then review examples of
unnatural RNA aptamers selected to inhibit TFs nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B),
TATA-binding protein (TBP), heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and runt-related
transcription factor 1 (RUNX1). The field of RNA aptamers for DNA-binding
proteins continues to show promise.

PMCID: PMC4753637
PMID: 26509637  [PubMed - in process]


40. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Oct 19;14(4):12746-55. doi: 10.4238/2015.October.19.18.

A SNP in the 3'-UTR of HSF1 in dairy cattle affects binding of target
bta-miR-484.

Li QL(1), Zhang ZF(2), Xia P(1), Wang YJ(1), Wu ZY(1), Jia YH(1), Chang SM(1),
Chu MX(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Edible and Medicinal Fungi Research and Development 
Center, Langfang Teachers University, Langfang, China. (2)Veterinary
Administration Office, Langfang Agricultural Bureau, Langfang, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Germplasm Innovation of Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing, China.

The heat shock transcription factor 1 gene (HSF1) plays a key role in the heat
stress response. We previously found a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in
the 3'-untranslated region (g.4693G>T) of HSF1 that was related to thermo
tolerance in Chinese Holstein cattle through association analysis. However, it is
not known whether other SNPs also affect thermo tolerance.In this study a novel
SNP, g.1451G>T, was identified by DNA sequencing and genotyped using creating
restriction site-polymerase chain reaction methodology. The g.1451G>T polymorphic
site met Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P > 0.05). Association analysis demonstrated
that this SNP had no effect on thermo tolerance traits in Holstein cattle.
Findings of the study compared to the analysis of g.4693 G>T further indicated
that g.4693 G>T may play an important role in thermo tolerance, although the
mechanism is not clear. RNA hybrid and Targetscan prediction showed that the
minimum free energy hybridization of bta-miR-484 with HSF1 3'-UTR was -31.9
kcal/mol and g.4693 G>T was in the seed sequence of bovine HSF1 that binds to
bta-miR-484. Analysis by Luciferase assay indicated that HSF1 expression was
directly targeted by bta-miR-484 in HEK 293T cells, and the Rluc/luc ratio of
wildtype (GG) was lower than that of the mutant (TT) (P < 0.05). These results
suggest that g.4693 G>T affects binding of HSF1 to bta-miR-484.

PMID: 26505425  [PubMed - in process]


41. Anticancer Res. 2015 Nov;35(11):6063-7.

Active Hexose-correlated Compound Down-regulates Heat Shock Factor 1, a
Transcription Factor for HSP27, in Gemcitabine-resistant Human Pancreatic Cancer 
Cells.

Tokunaga M(1), Baron B(1), Kitagawa T(1), Tokuda K(1), Kuramitsu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan. (2)Departments of
Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan climates@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Active hexose-correlated compound (AHCC) is an extract of a
basidiomycete mushroom that enhances the therapeutic effects and reduces the
side-effects of chemotherapy. Our previous studies demonstrated that heat-shock
protein 27 (HSP27) was involved in gemcitabine-resistance of pancreatic cancer
cells and it was down-regulated by AHCC-treatment. However, how AHCC
down-regulated HSP27 is unknown. In the present study, we focused on two
transcription factors reported to induce HSP27, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and
high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) and investigated the effect of AHCC on their
expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: KLM1-R cells were treated with AHCC and the protein
expression of HSF1 and HMGB1 were analyzed by western blotting.
RESULTS: The protein expression of HSF1 in KLM1-R was down-regulated by AHCC
treatment. On the other hand, the protein expression of HMGB1 was not reduced in 
KLM1-R cells after AHCC treatment.
CONCLUSION: The possibility that AHCC down-regulated HSP27 through
down-regulation of the HSF1, was herein shown.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26504030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Jan 15;25(2):211-22. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv445. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

NEDD4-mediated HSF1 degradation underlies a-synucleinopathy.

Kim E(1), Wang B(1), Sastry N(2), Masliah E(3), Nelson PT(4), Cai H(2), Liao
FF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 874 Union Avenue/Crowe 401,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA. (2)Transgenics Section, National Institute on Aging,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Department of
Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, 800 South Limestone
Street, Lexington, KY 40536, USA and. (5)Department of Pharmacology and
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, 874 Union Avenue/Crowe 401, Memphis, TN 38163, USA, fliao@uthsc.edu.

Cellular protein homeostasis is achieved by a delicate network of molecular
chaperones and various proteolytic processes such as ubiquitin-proteasome system 
(UPS) to avoid a build-up of misfolded protein aggregates. The latter is a common
denominator of neurodegeneration. Neurons are found to be particularly vulnerable
to toxic stress from aggregation-prone proteins such as a-synuclein. Induction of
heat-shock proteins (HSPs), such as through activated heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) via Hsp90 inhibition, is being investigated as a therapeutic
option for proteinopathic diseases. HSF1 is a master stress-protective
transcription factor which activates genes encoding protein chaperones (e.g.
iHsp70) and anti-apoptotic proteins. However, whether and how HSF1 is
dysregulated during neurodegeneration has not been studied. Here, we discover
aberrant HSF1 degradation by aggregated a-synuclein (or a-synuclein-induced
proteotoxic stress) in transfected neuroblastoma cells. HSF1 dysregulation via
a-synuclein was confirmed by in vivo assessment of mouse and in situ studies of
human specimens with a-synucleinopathy. We demonstrate that elevated NEDD4 is
implicated as the responsible ubiquitin E3 ligase for HSF1 degradation through
UPS. Furthermore, pharmacologically induced SIRT1-mediated deacetylation can
attenuate aberrant NEDD4-mediated HSF1 degradation. Indeed, we define the
acetylation status of the Lys 80 residue located in the DNA-binding domain of
HSF1 as a critical factor in modulating HSF1 protein stability in addition to its
previously identified role in the transcriptional activity. Together with the
finding that preserving HSF1 can alleviate a-synuclein toxicity, this study
strongly suggests that aberrant HSF1 degradation is a key neurodegenerative
mechanism underlying a-synucleinopathy.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4706110
PMID: 26503960  [PubMed - in process]


43. ACS Chem Biol. 2016 Jan 15;11(1):200-10. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.5b00740. Epub
2015 Nov 19.

Transportable, Chemical Genetic Methodology for the Small Molecule-Mediated
Inhibition of Heat Shock Factor 1.

Moore CL(1), Dewal MB(1), Nekongo EE(1), Santiago S(1), Lu NB(1), Levine SS(2),
Shoulders MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, United States. (2)BioMicro Center, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology , Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

Proteostasis in the cytosol is governed by the heat shock response. The master
regulator of the heat shock response, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and key
chaperones whose levels are HSF1-regulated have emerged as high-profile targets
for therapeutic applications ranging from protein misfolding-related disorders to
cancer. Nonetheless, a generally applicable methodology to selectively and
potently inhibit endogenous HSF1 in a small molecule-dependent manner in disease 
model systems remains elusive. Also problematic, the administration of even
highly selective chaperone inhibitors often has the side effect of activating
HSF1 and thereby inducing a compensatory heat shock response. Herein, we report a
ligand-regulatable, dominant negative version of HSF1 that addresses these
issues. Our approach, which required engineering a new dominant negative HSF1
variant, permits dosable inhibition of endogenous HSF1 with a selective small
molecule in cell-based model systems of interest. The methodology allows us to
uncouple the pleiotropic effects of chaperone inhibitors and environmental toxins
from the concomitantly induced compensatory heat shock response. Integration of
our method with techniques to activate HSF1 enables the creation of cell lines in
which the cytosolic proteostasis network can be up- or down-regulated by
orthogonal small molecules. Selective, small molecule-mediated inhibition of HSF1
has distinctive implications for the proteostasis of both chaperone-dependent
globular proteins and aggregation-prone intrinsically disordered proteins.
Altogether, this work provides critical methods for continued exploration of the 
biological roles of HSF1 and the therapeutic potential of heat shock response
modulation.

PMID: 26502114  [PubMed - in process]


44. FEBS Lett. 2015 Nov 30;589(23):3679-85. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.10.013. Epub 
2015 Oct 20.

Immediate-early response 5 (IER5) interacts with protein phosphatase 2A and
regulates the phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 kinase and heat shock
factor 1.

Kawabata S(1), Ishita Y(1), Ishikawa Y(1), Sakurai H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. (2)Division of
Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Science, 5-11-80 
Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. Electronic address:
hsakurai@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Immediate-early response 5 (IER5) is a growth factor-inducible protein with
homology to the N-terminus of IER2. Deletion analysis shows that a large region
of IER5, including the N-terminal region, is involved in cell growth and stress
resistance. The N-terminal region mediates IER5 oligomerization and binding to
the B55 regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). IER5 physically
interacts with the PP2A target proteins ribosomal protein S6 kinase (S6K) and
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and the interactions are essential for the reduced
phosphorylation of S6K and HSF1. Our data indicate that oligomeric IER5 regulates
PP2A activity and cell growth.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26496226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37930-47. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6122.

The novel combination of dual mTOR inhibitor AZD2014 and pan-PIM inhibitor
AZD1208 inhibits growth in acute myeloid leukemia via HSF pathway suppression.

Harada M(1,)(2), Benito J(3), Yamamoto S(2), Kaur S(4), Arslan D(4), Ramirez
S(3), Jacamo R(3), Platanias L(4), Matsushita H(5), Fujimura T(6,)(7), Kazuno
S(6), Kojima K(8), Tabe Y(2,)(3), Konopleva M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Environmental and Gender Specific Medicine, Juntendo
University of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Juntendo University of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Section of Molecular Hematology
and Therapy, Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Robert H. Lurie 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
Illinois, USA. (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan. (6)BioMedical Research Center, Juntendo University of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Laboratory of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Tohoku
Pharmaceutical University, Miyagi, Japan. (8)Hematology, Respiratory Medicine and
Oncology, Department of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan.

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling is a critical pathway in the
biology of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Proviral integration site for moloney
murine leukemia virus (PIM) serine/threonine kinase signaling takes part in
various pathways exerting tumorigenic properties. We hypothesized that the
combination of a PIM kinase inhibitor with an mTOR inhibitor might have
complementary growth-inhibitory effects against AML. The simultaneous inhibition 
of the PIM kinase by pan-PIM inhibitor AZD1208 and of mTOR by selective mTORC1/2 
dual inhibitor AZD2014 exerted anticancer properties in AML cell lines and in
cells derived from primary AML samples with or without supportive stromal cell
co-culture, leading to suppressed proliferation and increased apoptosis. The
combination of AZD1208 and AZD2014 rapidly activated AMPKa, a negative regulator 
of translation machinery through mTORC1/2 signaling in AML cells; profoundly
inhibited AKT and 4EBP1 activation; and suppressed polysome formation. Inhibition
of both mTOR and PIM counteracted induction of heat-shock family proteins,
uncovering the master negative regulation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the
dominant transcription factor controlling cellular stress responses. The novel
combination of the dual mTOR inhibitor and pan-PIM inhibitor synergistically
inhibited AML growth by effectively reducing protein synthesis through heat shock
factor pathway suppression.

PMCID: PMC4741975
PMID: 26473447  [PubMed - in process]


46. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Oct 14;12:189. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0406-5.

Requirement for endogenous heat shock factor 1 in inducible nitric oxide synthase
induction in murine microglia.

Huang C(1,)(2), Lu X(3,)(4), Tong L(5,)(6), Wang J(7,)(8), Zhang W(9,)(10), Jiang
B(11,)(12), Yang R(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu 
Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. 5887218@qq.com. (2)Key Laboratory
of Inflammation and Molecular Drug Targets of Jiangsu Province, Nantong
University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China.
5887218@qq.com. (3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nantong
University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China.
418796584@qq.com. (4)Key Laboratory of Inflammation and Molecular Drug Targets of
Jiangsu Province, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 
226001, China. 418796584@qq.com. (5)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Pharmacy, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, 
China. 815964117@qq.com. (6)Key Laboratory of Inflammation and Molecular Drug
Targets of Jiangsu Province, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu
Province, 226001, China. 815964117@qq.com. (7)Department of Pharmacology, School 
of Pharmacy, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province,
226001, China. 372899487@qq.com. (8)Key Laboratory of Inflammation and Molecular 
Drug Targets of Jiangsu Province, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong,
Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. 372899487@qq.com. (9)Department of Pharmacology,
School of Pharmacy, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu
Province, 226001, China. asicampa@aliyun.com. (10)Key Laboratory of Inflammation 
and Molecular Drug Targets of Jiangsu Province, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu
Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. asicampa@aliyun.com.
(11)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nantong University, #19 Qixiu
Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. 532059984@qq.com. (12)Key
Laboratory of Inflammation and Molecular Drug Targets of Jiangsu Province,
Nantong University, #19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China.
532059984@qq.com. (13)Department of Anesthesiology, Affiliated Hospital of
Nantong University, Jiangsu Province, #20Xisi Road, Nantong, Jiangsu Province,
226001, China. 172916178@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) makes a great contribution to 
host defense and inflammation. In many settings, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces
iNOS expression through activation of the inhibitor of <U+03BA>B-a (I<U+03BA>B-a)-nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) cascade, whereas interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) acts through Janus kinase
(JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) signals. Heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1), a major regulator of heat shock protein transcription, has
been shown to regulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), but it remains obscure
whether and how HSF1 affects iNOS induction.
METHODS: Western blot was used to measure the protein expression. The mRNA level 
was measured by real-time PCR. Silence of HSF1 was achieved by small interfering 
RNA. Nitric oxide (NO) content and NF-<U+03BA>B binding activity were assayed by
commercial kits. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was used to measure the
binding activity of NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT1 to iNOS promoters.
RESULTS: HSF1 inhibition or knockdown prevented the LPS- and/or IFN-<U+03B3>-stimulated 
iNOS protein expression in cultured microglia. HSF1 inhibition blocked iNOS mRNA 
transcription. These inhibitory effects of HSF1 inhibition on iNOS expression
were confirmed in brain tissues from endotoxemic mice. Further analysis showed
that HSF1 inhibition had no effect on I<U+03BA>B-a degradation and NF-<U+03BA>B or STAT1
phosphorylation in LPS/IFN-<U+03B3>-stimulated cells. The nuclear transport of active
NF-<U+03BA>B or STAT1 was also not affected by HSF1 inhibition, but HSF1 inhibition
reduced the binding of NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT1 to their DNA elements. In addition, HSF1
inhibition reduced NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT1 bindings to iNOS promoter inside the
LPS/IFN-<U+03B3>-stimulated cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This preventing effect of HSF1 inhibition on iNOS mRNA transcription
presents the necessary role of HSF1 in iNOS induction.

PMCID: PMC4607096
PMID: 26467650  [PubMed - in process]


47. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 20;112(42):E5669-78. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1516219112. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Direct link between metabolic regulation and the heat-shock response through the 
transcriptional regulator PGC-1a.

Minsky N(1), Roeder RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065 roeder@rockefeller.edu.

In recent years an extensive effort has been made to elucidate the molecular
pathways involved in metabolic signaling in health and disease. Here we show,
surprisingly, that metabolic regulation and the heat-shock/stress response are
directly linked. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a
(PGC-1a), a critical transcriptional coactivator of metabolic genes, acts as a
direct transcriptional repressor of heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), a key regulator
of the heat-shock/stress response. Our findings reveal that heat-shock protein
(HSP) gene expression is suppressed during fasting in mouse liver and in primary 
hepatocytes dependent on PGC-1a. HSF1 and PGC-1a associate physically and are
colocalized on several HSP promoters. These observations are extended to several 
cancer cell lines in which PGC-1a is shown to repress the ability of HSF1 to
activate gene-expression programs necessary for cancer survival. Our study
reveals a surprising direct link between two major cellular transcriptional
networks, highlighting a previously unrecognized facet of the activity of the
central metabolic regulator PGC-1a beyond its well-established ability to boost
metabolic genes via its interactions with nuclear hormone receptors and nuclear
respiratory factors. Our data point to PGC-1a as a critical repressor of
HSF1-mediated transcriptional programs, a finding with possible implications both
for our understanding of the full scope of metabolically regulated target genes
in vivo and, conceivably, for therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4620912 [Available on 2016-04-20]
PMID: 26438876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Oct 2;14(4):11771-9. doi: 10.4238/2015.October.2.11.

Thermotherapy-induced reduction in glioma invasiveness is mediated by tumor
necrosis factor-alpha.

Qin LJ(1), Zhang T(2), Jia YS(3), Zhang YB(2), Zhang YX(2), Wang HT(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, North China University of Science and
Technology, Tangshan, China qinlijuan_l@163.com. (2)School of Basic Medical
Sciences, North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, China.
(3)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, North China University of Science and
Technology, Tangshan, China.

Thermotherapy has been proven to be effective for the treatment of various
tumors, including glioma. We determined whether tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-a) is involved in the regulation of the biological processes of glioma
development. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
immunocytochemistry were used to investigate the levels of TNF-a mRNA and heat
shock factor-1 (HSF1) protein, respectively, in glioma cells. Radioimmunoassay
was used to dynamically monitor the contents of TNF-a in the nutrient fluid of C6
cells after thermotherapy treatment. Crystal violet staining was used to
determine glioma invasiveness. The most obvious increases in HSF1 protein and
TNF-a mRNA in C6 cells were observed at 30 and 60 min after thermotherapy,
respectively. In addition, the radioactivity of TNF-a in the culture fluid of the
C6 cells reached a peak after 120 min of thermotherapy. In addition, glioma
invasiveness decreased and the concentration of TNF-a reached a maximum after 120
min of thermotherapy. Our results show that the decrease in
thermotherapy-mediated glioma invasiveness is due to the accelerated release of
TNF-a, which could promote the release of HSF1 from neurospongioma cells.

PMID: 26436502  [PubMed - in process]


49. Br J Nutr. 2015 Dec 28;114(12):1965-74. doi: 10.1017/S0007114515003803. Epub 2015
Oct 5.

Effect of dietary manganese on antioxidant status and expression levels of
heat-shock proteins and factors in tissues of laying broiler breeders under
normal and high environmental temperatures.

Zhu YW(1), Lu L(1), Li WX(1), Zhang LY(1), Ji C(2), Lin X(3), Liu HC(3), Odle
J(3), Luo XG(1).

Author information: 
(1)1Mineral Nutrition Research Division,Institute of Animal Science,Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences,Beijing 100193,People's Republic of China.
(2)2College of Animal Science and Technology,China Agricultural
University,Beijing 100193,People's Republic of China. (3)3Department of Animal
Science,North Carolina State University,Raleigh,NC 27695,USA.

To investigate the effect of Mn on antioxidant status and expression levels of
heat-shock proteins/factors in tissues of laying broiler breeders subjected to
heat challenge, we used a completely randomised design (n 6) with a factorial
arrangement of 2 environmental temperatures (normal, 21 (sem 1)°C and high, 32
(sem 1)°C)×3 dietary Mn treatments (an Mn-unsupplemented basal diet (CON), or a
basal diet supplemented with 120 mg Mn/kg diet as inorganic Mn sulphate (iMn) or 
organic Mn proteinate (oMn)). There were no interactions (P>0·10) between
environmental temperature and dietary Mn in all of the measured indices. High
temperature decreased (P<0·003) Mn content, and also tended (P=0·07) to decrease 
copper zinc superoxide dismutase (CuZnSOD) activity in the liver and heart.
However, an increased manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) activity (P<0·05)
and a slight increase of malondialdehyde level (P=0·06) were detected in breast
muscle. Up-regulated (P<0·05) expression levels of heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) and
HSF3 mRNA and heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) mRNA and protein were found in all
three tissues. Broiler breeders fed either iMn or oMn had higher tissue Mn
content (P<0·0001), heart MnSOD and CuZnSOD activities (P<0·01) and breast muscle
MnSOD protein levels (P<0·05), and lower (P<0·05) breast muscle HSP70 mRNA and
protein levels than those fed CON. Broiler breeders fed oMn had higher (P<0·03)
bone Mn content than those fed iMn. These results indicate that high temperature 
decreases Mn retention and increases HSP70 and HSF1, HSF3 expression levels in
tissues of laying broiler breeders. Furthermore, dietary supplementation with Mn 
in either source may enhance heart antioxidant ability and inhibit the expression
of HSP70 in breast muscle. Finally, the organic Mn appears to be more available
than inorganic Mn for bone in laying broiler breeders regardless of environmental
temperatures.

PMID: 26435464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Nat Prod. 2015 Oct 23;78(10):2481-7. doi: 10.1021/acs.jnatprod.5b00633. Epub
2015 Oct 2.

Chalcones from Angelica keiskei: Evaluation of Their Heat Shock Protein Inducing 
Activities.

Kil YS(1), Choi SK(1), Lee YS(1), Jafari M(2), Seo EK(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans
University , Seoul 120-750, Korea. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of California , Irvine, California 92697, United States.

Five new chalcones,
4,2',4'-trihydroxy-3'-[(2E,5E)-7-methoxy-3,7-dimethyl-2,5-octadienyl]chalcone
(1),
(±)-4,2',4'-trihydroxy-3'-[(2E)-6-hydroxy-7-methoxy-3,7-dimethyl-2-octenyl]chalco
ne (2),
4,2',4'-trihydroxy-3'-[(2E)-3-methyl-5-(1,3-dioxolan-2-yl)-2-pentenyl]chalcone
(3), 2',3'-furano-4-hydroxy-4'-methoxychalcone (4), and
(±)-4-hydroxy-2',3'-(2,3-dihydro-2-methoxyfurano)-4'-methoxychalcone (5), were
isolated from the aerial parts of Angelica keiskei Koidzumi together with eight
known chalcones, 6-13, which were identified as
(±)-4,2',4'-trihydroxy-3'-[(6E)-2-hydroxy-7-methyl-3-methylene-6-octenyl]chalcone
(6), xanthoangelol (7), xanthoangelol F (8), xanthoangelol G (9),
4-hydroxyderricin (10), xanthoangelol D (11), xanthoangelol E (12), and
xanthoangelol H (13), respectively. Chalcones 1-13 were evaluated for their
promoter activity on heat shock protein 25 (hsp25, murine form of human hsp27).
Compounds 1 and 6 activated the hsp25 promoter by 21.9- and 29.2-fold of
untreated control at 10 µM, respectively. Further protein expression patterns of 
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), HSP70, and HSP27 by 1 and 6 were examined. Compound 6
increased the expression of HSF1, HSP70, and HSP27 by 4.3-, 1.5-, and 4.6-fold of
untreated control, respectively, without any significant cellular cytotoxicities,
whereas 1 did not induce any expression of these proteins. As a result, 6 seems
to be a prospective HSP inducer.

PMID: 26431394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Toxicol In Vitro. 2016 Mar;31:158-66. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2015.09.025. Epub 2015
Sep 30.

Ginsenoside Rg3 induces FUT4-mediated apoptosis in H. pylori CagA-treated gastric
cancer cells by regulating SP1 and HSF1 expressions.

Aziz F(1), Wang X(2), Liu J(3), Yan Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalian Medical University,
Liaoning Core Lab of Glycobiology and Glycoengineering, Dalian 116044, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116011, China. Electronic address: 
jiweiliudl@126.com. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalian
Medical University, Liaoning Core Lab of Glycobiology and Glycoengineering,
Dalian 116044, China. Electronic address: yanqiu63@126.com.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) cytotoxin associated antigen A (CagA) plays a
significant role in the development of gastric cancer. Ginsenoside Rg3 is a
herbal medicine which inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in
various cancer cells. Fucosylation plays important roles in cancer biology as
increased fucosylation levels of glycoproteins and glycolipids have been reported
in many cancers. Fucosyltransferase IV (FUT4) is an essential enzyme, catalyzes
the synthesis of LewisY oligosaccharides and is regulated by specificity protein 
1 (SP1) and heat shock factor protein 1 (HSF1) transcription factors. Herein, we 
studied the mechanism action of Rg3 apoptosis induction in gastric cancer cells. 
We treated the gastric cancer cells with CagA followed by Rg3, and analyzed their
ability to induce apoptosis by evaluating the role of FUT4 as well as SP1 and
HSF1 expressions by Western blot, flow cytometry and ELISA. We found that Rg3
significantly induced apoptosis in CagA treated gastric cancer cells, as
evidenced by nuclear staining of 4-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and
Annexin-V/PI double-labeling. In addition, Rg3 significantly increased the
expression of pro-apoptotic proteins and triggered the activation of caspase-3,
-8, and -9 and PARP. Moreover, Rg3-induced apoptotic mechanisms indicated that
Rg3 inhibited FUT4 expression through SP1 upregulation and HSF1 downregulation.
Hence, Rg3 therapy is an effective strategy for gastric cancer treatment.
Furthermore SP1 and HSF1 may serve as potential diagnostic and therapeutic
targets for gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26427350  [PubMed - in process]


52. Bull Math Biol. 2015 Aug;77(8):1457-92. doi: 10.1007/s11538-015-0092-6. Epub 2015
Sep 29.

Parameter Estimation for Gene Regulatory Networks from Microarray Data: Cold
Shock Response in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Dahlquist KD(1), Fitzpatrick BG(2), Camacho ET(3), Entzminger SD(2), Wanner
NC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Loyola Marymount University, 1 LMU Drive, MS 8888, Los 
Angeles, CA, 90045, USA. kdahlquist@lmu.edu. (2)Department of Mathematics, Loyola
Marymount University, 1 LMU Drive, UH 2700, Los Angeles, CA, 90045, USA.
(3)School of Mathematical and Natural Sciences, Arizona State University, Mail
Code 2352, P.O. Box 37100, Phoenix, AZ, 85069-7100, USA.

We investigated the dynamics of a gene regulatory network controlling the cold
shock response in budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The medium-scale
network, derived from published genome-wide location data, consists of 21
transcription factors that regulate one another through 31 directed edges. The
expression levels of the individual transcription factors were modeled using mass
balance ordinary differential equations with a sigmoidal production function.
Each equation includes a production rate, a degradation rate, weights that denote
the magnitude and type of influence of the connected transcription factors
(activation or repression), and a threshold of expression. The inverse problem of
determining model parameters from observed data is our primary interest. We fit
the differential equation model to published microarray data using a penalized
nonlinear least squares approach. Model predictions fit the experimental data
well, within the 95% confidence interval. Tests of the model using randomized
initial guesses and model-generated data also lend confidence to the fit. The
results have revealed activation and repression relationships between the
transcription factors. Sensitivity analysis indicates that the model is most
sensitive to changes in the production rate parameters, weights, and thresholds
of Yap1, Rox1, and Yap6, which form a densely connected core in the network. The 
modeling results newly suggest that Rap1, Fhl1, Msn4, Rph1, and Hsf1 play an
important role in regulating the early response to cold shock in yeast. Our
results demonstrate that estimation for a large number of parameters can be
successfully performed for nonlinear dynamic gene regulatory networks using
sparse, noisy microarray data.

PMCID: PMC4636536
PMID: 26420504  [PubMed - in process]


53. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 3;6(34):36202-18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5343.

Sensitization of multidrug-resistant human cancer cells to Hsp90 inhibitors by
down-regulation of SIRT1.

Kim HB(1), Lee SH(1), Um JH(2), Oh WK(3), Kim DW(4), Kang CD(1), Kim SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Pusan National University School of Medicine,
Yangsan 626-870, Korea. (2)Korea Mouse Metabolic Phenotyping Center, Lee Gil Ya
Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Incheon 406-840, Korea.
(3)Korea Bioactive Natural Material Bank, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-818, Korea. (4)Department of Microbiology, College of
Natural Sciences, Chang Won National University, Chang Won 641-773, Korea.

The effectiveness of Hsp90 inhibitors as anticancer agents was limited in
multidrug-resistant (MDR) human cancer cells due to induction of heat shock
proteins (Hsps) such as Hsp70/Hsp27 and P-glycoprotein (P-gp)-mediated efflux. In
the present study, we showed that resistance to Hsp90 inhibitors of MDR human
cancer cells could be overcome with SIRT1 inhibition. SIRT1 knock-down or SIRT1
inhibitors (amurensin G and EX527) effectively suppressed the resistance to Hsp90
inhibitors (17-AAG and AUY922) in several MDR variants of human lymphoblastic
leukemia and human breast cancer cell lines. SIRT1 inhibition down-regulated the 
expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and subsequently Hsps and facilitated
Hsp90 multichaperone complex disruption via hyperacetylation of Hsp90/Hsp70.
These findings were followed by acceleration of ubiquitin ligase CHIP-mediated
mutant p53 (mut p53) degradation and subsequent down-regulation of P-gp in
17-AAG-treated MDR cancer cells expressing P-gp and mut p53 after inhibition of
SIRT1. Therefore, combined treatment with Hsp90 inhibitor and SIRT1 inhibitor
could be a more effective therapeutic approach for Hsp90 inhibitor-resistant MDR 
cells via down-regulation of HSF1/Hsps, mut p53 and P-gp.

PMID: 26416354  [PubMed - in process]


54. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 24;10(9):e0138975. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138975.
eCollection 2015.

Differences in Susceptibility to Heat Stress along the Chicken Intestine and the 
Protective Effects of Galacto-Oligosaccharides.

Varasteh S(1), Braber S(2), Akbari P(1), Garssen J(3), Fink-Gremmels J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Veterinary Pharmacy, Pharmacology and Toxicology, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Division of Pharmacology, Utrecht Institute
for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (2)Division of Veterinary Pharmacy, Pharmacology and Toxicology,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Division of Pharmacology,
Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Nutricia Research, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

High ambient temperatures negatively affect the human well-being as well as
animal welfare and production. The gastrointestinal tract is predominantly
responsive to heat stress. The currently available information about the
multifaceted response to heat stress within different parts of the intestine is
limited, especially in avian species. Hence, this study aims to evaluate the heat
stress-induced sequence of events in the intestines of chickens. Furthermore, the
gut health-promoting effect of dietary galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) was
investigated in these heat stress-exposed chickens. Chickens were fed a control
diet or diet supplemented with 1% or 2.5% GOS (6 days) prior to and during a
temperature challenge for 5 days (38-39°C, 8h per day). The parameters measured
in different parts of the intestines included the genes (qPCR) HSF1, HSF3, HSP70,
HSP90, E-cadherin, claudin-1, claudin-5, ZO-1, occludin, TLR-2, TLR-4, IL-6,
IL-8, HO-1, HIF-1a) and their associated proteins HSP70, HSP90 and pan-cadherin
(western blots). In addition, IL-6 and IL-8 plasma concentrations were measured
by ELISA. In the jejunum, HSF3, HSP70, HSP90, E-cadherin, claudin-5, ZO-1, TLR-4,
IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA expression and HSP70 protein expression were increased after
heat stress exposure and a more pronounced increase in gene expression was
observed in ileum after heat stress exposure, and in addition HSF1, claudin-1 and
HIF-1a mRNA levels were upregulated. Furthermore, the IL-8 plasma levels were
decreased in chickens exposed to heat stress. Interestingly, the heat
stress-related effects in the jejunum were prevented in chickens fed a GOS diet, 
while dietary GOS did not alter these effects in ileum. In conclusion, our
results demonstrate the differences in susceptibility to heat stress along the
intestine, where the most obvious modification in gene expression is observed in 
ileum, while dietary GOS only prevent the heat stress-related changes in jejunum.

PMCID: PMC4581695
PMID: 26402906  [PubMed - in process]


55. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31767-79. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5167.

Targeting HSF1 disrupts HSP90 chaperone function in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Ganguly S(1), Home T(1), Yacoub A(1), Kambhampati S(1), Shi H(2), Dandawate P(1),
Padhye S(3), Saluja AK(4), McGuirk J(1), Rao R(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS, USA. (2)Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (3)Interdisciplinary Science and Technology
Research Academy, University of Pune, Pune, Maharashtra, India. (4)University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

CLL is a disease characterized by chromosomal deletions, acquired copy number
changes and aneuploidy. Recent studies have shown that overexpression of Heat
Shock Factor (HSF) 1 in aneuploid tumor cells can overcome deficiencies in heat
shock protein (HSP) 90-mediated protein folding and restore protein homeostasis. 
Interestingly, several independent studies have demonstrated that HSF1 expression
and activity also affects the chaperoning of HSP90 kinase clients, although the
mechanism underlying this observation is unclear. Here, we determined how HSF1
regulates HSP90 function using CLL as a model system. We report that HSF1 is
overexpressed in CLL and treatment with triptolide (a small molecule inhibitor of
HSF1) induces apoptosis in cultured and primary CLL B-cells. We demonstrate that 
knockdown of HSF1 or its inhibition with triptolide results in the reduced
association of HSP90 with its kinase co-chaperone cell division cycle 37 (CDC37),
leading to the partial depletion of HSP90 client kinases, Bruton's Tyrosine
Kinase (BTK), c-RAF and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). Treatment with
triptolide or HSF1 knockdown disrupts the cytosolic complex between HSF1, p97,
HSP90 and the HSP90 deacetylase- Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). Consequently,
HSF1 inhibition results in HSP90 acetylation and abrogation of its chaperone
function. Finally, tail vein injection of Mec-1 cells into Rag2-/-IL2R<U+03B3>c-/- mice 
followed by treatment with minnelide (a pro-drug of triptolide), reduced
leukemia, increased survival and attenuated HSP90-dependent survival signaling in
vivo. In conclusion, our study provides a strong rationale to target HSF1 and
test the activity of minnelide against human CLL.

PMCID: PMC4741638
PMID: 26397138  [PubMed - in process]


56. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 21;16:719. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1903-8.

Depletion of yeast PDK1 orthologs triggers a stress-like transcriptional
response.

Pastor-Flores D(1,)(2), Ferrer-Dalmau J(3,)(4), Bahí A(5,)(6), Boleda M(7,)(8),
Biondi RM(9), Casamayor A(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group PhosphoSites, Medizinische Klinik I, Universitätsklinikum
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt, Germany.
d.pastor-flores@dkfz.de. (2)Present address: Division of Redox Regulation, German
Cancer Research Center, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120,
Heidelberg, Germany. d.pastor-flores@dkfz.de. (3)Departament de Bioquímica i
Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Veterinària, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Cerdanyola 08193, Barcelona, Spain. jofre.ferrerdalmau@gmail.com. (4)Institut de 
Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola 08193,
Barcelona, Spain. jofre.ferrerdalmau@gmail.com. (5)Departament de Bioquímica i
Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Veterinària, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Cerdanyola 08193, Barcelona, Spain. anbasala@gmail.com. (6)Institut de
Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola 08193,
Barcelona, Spain. anbasala@gmail.com. (7)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia
Molecular, Facultat de Veterinària, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola
08193, Barcelona, Spain. marti.boleda@gmail.com. (8)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine
(LECA), UMR 5553, CNRS-Université Joseph Fourie, BP 53, 38041, Grenoble, France. 
marti.boleda@gmail.com. (9)Research Group PhosphoSites, Medizinische Klinik I,
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt, Germany.
biondi@med.uni-frankfurt.de. (10)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, 
Facultat de Veterinària, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola 08193,
Barcelona, Spain. antonio.casamayor@uab.cat. (11)Institut de Biotecnologia i
Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola 08193, Barcelona,
Spain. antonio.casamayor@uab.cat.

BACKGROUND: Pkh proteins are the PDK1 orthologs in S. cerevisiae. They have
redundant and essential activity and are responsible for the phosphorylation of
several members of the AGC family of protein kinases. Pkh proteins have been
involved in several cellular functions, including cell wall integrity and
endocytosis. However the global expression changes caused by their depletion are 
still unknown.
RESULTS: A doxycycline-repressible tetO7 promoter driving the expression of PKH2 
in cells carrying deletions of the PKH1 and PKH3 genes allowed us to
progressively deplete cells from Pkh proteins when treated with doxycycline.
Global gene expression analysis indicate that depletion of Pkh results in the
up-regulation of genes involved in the accumulation of glycogen and also of those
related to stress responses. Moreover, genes involved in the ion transport were
quickly down-regulated when the levels of Pkh decreased. The reduction in the
mRNA levels required for protein translation, however, was only observed after
longer doxycycline treatment (24 h). We uncovered that Pkh is important for the
proper transcriptional response to heat shock, and is mostly required for the
effects driven by the transcription factors Hsf1 and Msn2/Msn4, but is not
required for down-regulation of the mRNA coding for ribosomal proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: By using the tetO7 promoter we elucidated for the first time the
transcriptomic changes directly or indirectly caused by progressive depletion of 
Pkh. Furthermore, this system enabled the characterization of the transcriptional
response triggered by heat shock in wild-type and Pkh-depleted cells, showing
that about 40 % of the observed expression changes were, to some degree,
dependent on Pkh.

PMCID: PMC4578605
PMID: 26391581  [PubMed - in process]


57. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2015 Sep 14;6(1):42. doi: 10.1186/s40104-015-0041-0.
eCollection 2015.

No effect of exogenous melatonin on development of cryopreserved metaphase II
oocytes in mouse.

Li W(1), Cheng K(2), Zhang Y(3), Meng Q(4), Zhu S(2), Zhou G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University (Chengdu Campus), Wenjiang, 611130
P.R. China ; Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science
and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193 P.R. China.
(2)Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
Logan, Utah USA. (3)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal 
Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University (Chengdu Campus),
Wenjiang, 611130 P.R. China. (4)Nanjing Biomedical Research Institute of Nanjing 
University, Nanjing, 210089 P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: This study was conducted to investigate effect of exogenous melatonin
on the development of mouse mature oocytes after cryopreservation.
RESULTS: First, mouse metaphase II (MII) oocytes were vitrified in the
open-pulled straws (OPS). After warming, they were cultured for 1 h in M2 medium 
containing melatonin at different concentrations (0, 10(-9), 10(-7), 10(-5),
10(-3) mol/L). Then the oocytes were used to detect reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and glutathione (GSH) levels (fluorescence microscopy), and the developmental
potential after parthenogenetic activation. The experimental results showed that 
the ROS level and cleavage rate in 10(-3) mol/L melatonin group was significantly
lower than that in melatonin-free group (control). The GSH levels and blastocyst 
rates in all melatonin-treated groups were similar to that in control. Based on
the above results, we detected the expression of gene Hsp90aa1, Hsf1, Hspa1b,
Nrf2 and Bcl-x1 with qRT-PCR in oocytes treated with 10(-7), or 10(-3) mol/L
melatonin and untreated control. After warming and culture for 1 h, the oocytes
showed higher Hsp90aa1 expression in 10(-7) mol/L melatonin-treated group than in
the control (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05); the Hsf1, Hsp90aa1 and Bcl-x1 expression were
significantly decreased in 10(-3) mol/L melatonin-treated group when compared to 
the control. Based on the above results and previous research, we detected the
development of vitrified-warmed oocytes treated with either 10(-7) or 0 mol/L
melatonin by in vitro fertilization. No difference was observed between them.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the supplementation of melatonin (10(-9)
to 10(-3) mol/L) in culture medium and incubation for 1 h did not improve the
subsequent developmental potential of vitrified-warmed mouse MII oocytes, even if
there were alteration in gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4568589
PMID: 26380081  [PubMed]


58. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 1;338(2):183-93. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.005. Epub
2015 Sep 8.

Rosiglitazone activation of PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent signaling is neuroprotective in
mutant huntingtin expressing cells.

Chiang MC(1), Cheng YC(2), Nicol CJ(3), Lin KH(4), Yen CH(5), Chen SJ(6), Huang
RN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Science and Engineering, Fu Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City 242, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cmcphd@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chang Gung
University, Tao Yuan 333, Taiwan. (3)Departments of Pathology & Molecular
Medicine and Biomedical & Molecular Sciences, and Cancer Biology and Genetics
Division, Cancer Research Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada K7L
3N6. (4)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, Chinese Culture University, Taipei
111, Taiwan. (5)Department of International Business, Ming Chuan University,
Taipei 111, Taiwan. (6)Department of Life Science and Institute of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, College of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan. (7)Department of Entomology and Research Center for Plant-Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) is a crucial
transcription factor for neuroprotection in several brain diseases. Using a mouse
model of Huntington's Disease (HD), we recently showed that PPAR<U+03B3> not only played
a major function in preventing HD, but also oral intake of a PPAR<U+03B3> agonist
(thiazolidinedione, TZD) significantly reduced the formation of mutant Huntingtin
(mHtt) aggregates in the brain (e.g., cortex and striatum). The molecular
mechanisms by which PPAR<U+03B3> exerts its HD neuroprotective effects remain
unresolved. We investigated whether the PPAR<U+03B3> agonist (rosiglitazone) mediates
neuroprotection in the mHtt expressing neuroblastoma cell line (N2A). Here we
show that rosiglitazone upregulated the endogenous expression of PPAR<U+03B3>, its
downstream target genes (including PGC1a, NRF-1 and Tfam) and mitochondrial
function in mHtt expressing N2A cells. Rosiglitazone treatment also significantly
reduced mHtt aggregates that included ubiquitin (Ub) and heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), as assessed by a filter-retardation assay, and increased the levels of
the functional ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), HSF1 and heat shock protein
27/70 (HSP27/70) in N2A cells. Moreover, rosiglitazone treatment normalized
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensors Bip, CHOP and ASK1, and significantly
increased N2A cell survival. Taken together, these findings unveil new insights
into the mechanisms by which activation of PPAR<U+03B3> signaling protects against the
HD-mediated neuronal impairment. Further, our data also support the concept that 
PPAR<U+03B3> may be a novel therapeutic target for treating HD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26362846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2016 Mar;73(5):1067-84. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-2036-6. Epub
2015 Sep 11.

Hsp70-1: upregulation via selective phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 during
coxsackieviral infection and promotion of viral replication via the AU-rich
element.

Qiu Y(1,)(2), Ye X(1,)(2), Hanson PJ(1,)(2), Zhang HM(1,)(2), Zong J(2), Cho
B(2), Yang D(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, 2211 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada. (2)Centre for Heart
Lung Innovation, University of British Columbia and St. Paul's Hospital, 1081
Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z 1Y6, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, 2211 Wesbrook Mall,
Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada. decheng.yang@hli.ubc.ca. (4)Centre for Heart Lung
Innovation, University of British Columbia and St. Paul's Hospital, 1081 Burrard 
Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z 1Y6, Canada. decheng.yang@hli.ubc.ca.

Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3) is the primary pathogen of viral myocarditis. Upon
infection, CVB3 exploits the host cellular machineries, such as chaperone
proteins, to benefit its own infection cycles. Inducible heat shock 70-kDa
proteins (Hsp70s) are chaperone proteins induced by various cellular stress
conditions. The internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) within Hsp70 mRNA allows
Hsp70 to be translated cap-independently during CVB3 infection when global
cap-dependent translation is compromised. The Hsp70 protein family contains two
major members, Hsp70-1 and Hsp70-2. This study showed that Hsp70-1, but not
Hsp70-2, was upregulated during CVB3 infection both in vitro and in vivo. Then a 
novel mechanism of Hsp70-1 induction was revealed in which CaMKII<U+03B3> is activated
by CVB3 replication and leads to phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
specifically at Serine 230, which enhances Hsp70-1 transcription. Meanwhile,
phosphorylation of Ser230 induces translocation of HSF1 from the cytoplasm to
nucleus, thus blocking the ERK1/2-mediated phosphorylation of HSF1 at Ser307, a
negative regulatory process of Hsp70 transcription, further contributing to
Hsp70-1 upregulation. Finally, we demonstrated that Hsp70-1 upregulation, in
turn, stabilizes CVB3 genome via the AU-rich element (ARE) harbored in the 3'
untranslated region of CVB3 genomic RNA.

PMID: 26361762  [PubMed - in process]


60. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29712-24. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5073.

Heat shock factor 1, an inhibitor of non-homologous end joining repair.

Kang GY(1), Kim EH(2), Lee HJ(2), Gil NY(3), Cha HJ(3), Lee YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul
120-750, Korea. (2)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological
and Medical Sciences, Seoul 139-706, Korea. (3)College of Natural Sciences,
Department of Life Sciences, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, Korea.

A novel role for HSF1 as an inhibitor of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair
activity was identified. HSF1 interacted directly with both of the N-terminal
sequences of the Ku70 and Ku86 proteins, which inhibited the endogenous
heterodimeric interaction between Ku70 and Ku86. The blocking of the Ku70 and
Ku86 interaction by HSF1 induced defective NHEJ repair activity and ultimately
activated genomic instability after ionizing radiation (IR), which was similar to
effects seen in Ku70 or Ku80 knockout cells. The binding activity between HSF1
and Ku70 or Ku86 was dependent on DNA damage response such as IR exposure, but
not on the heat shock mediated transcriptional activation of HSF1. Moreover, the 
posttranslational modification such as phosphorylation, acetylation and
sumoylation of HSF1 did not alter the binding activities of HSF1-Ku70 or
HSF1-Ku86. Furthermore, the defect in DNA repair activity by HSF1 was observed
regardless of p53 status. Rat mammary tumors derived using
dimethylbenz(a)anthracence revealed that high levels of HSF1 expression which
correlate with aggressive malignancy, interfered with the binding of Ku70-Ku80.
This data suggests that HSF1 interacts with both Ku70 and Ku86 to induce
defective NHEJ repair activity and genomic instability, which in turn suggests a 
novel mechanism of HSF1-mediated cellular carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4745757
PMID: 26359349  [PubMed - in process]


61. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):6517-26. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4300. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Defective heat shock factor 1 inhibits the growth of fibrosarcoma derived from
simian virus 40/T antigen-transformed MEF cells.

Jiang Q(1), Zhang Z(1), Li S(1), Wang Z(1), Ma Y(1), Hu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Key Laboratory of Engineering Antibody Medicine, Henan International
Union Laboratory of Antibody Medicine and Chaperone, Henan University School of
Medicine, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, P.R. China.

Heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) serves an important role in regulating the
proliferation of human tumor cell lines in vitro and tissue specific
tumorigenesis in certain mouse models. However, its role in viral-oncogenesis
remains to be fully elucidated. In the current study, the role of Hsf1 in
fibroblastoma derived from simian virus 40/T antigen (SV40/TAG)-transformed mouse
embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cell lines was investigated. Knockout of Hsf1
inhibited MEF cell proliferation in vitro and fibroblastoma growth and metastasis
to the lungs in vivo in nude mice. Knockout of Hsf1 increased the protein
expression levels of p53 and phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein (pRb), however
reduced the expression of heat shock protein 25 (Hsp25) in addition to the
expression of the angiogenesis markers vascular endothelial growth factor,
cluster of differentiation 34 and factor VIII related antigen. Furthermore,
immunoprecipitation indicated that knockout of Hsf1 inhibited the association
between SV40/TAG and p53 or pRb. These data suggest that Hsf1 is involved in the 
regulation of SV40/TAG-derived fibroblastoma growth and metastasis by modulating 
the association between SV40/TAG and tumor suppressor p53 and pRb. The current
study provides further evidence that Hsf1 may be a novel therapeutic target in
the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4626195
PMID: 26352782  [PubMed - in process]


62. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2015 Dec;215(4):191-203. doi: 10.1111/apha.12600. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

Deficiency of heat shock transcription factor 1 suppresses heat stress-associated
increase in slow soleus muscle mass of mice.

Ohno Y(1), Egawa T(2,)(3), Yokoyama S(1), Nakai A(4), Sugiura T(5), Ohira Y(6),
Yoshioka T(7), Goto K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiology, School of Health Sciences, Toyohashi SOZO
University, Toyohashi, Japan. (2)Department of Physiology, Graduate School of
Health Sciences, Toyohashi SOZO University, Toyohashi, Japan. (3)Research Fellow 
of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Ube, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Education, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan. (6)Graduate
School of Health and Sports Science, Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, Japan.
(7)Hirosaki Gakuin University, Hirosaki, Japan.

AIM: Effects of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) deficiency on heat
stress-associated increase in slow soleus muscle mass of mice were investigated.
METHODS: Both HSF1-null and wild-type mice were randomly assigned to control and 
heat-stressed groups. Mice in heat-stressed group were exposed to heat stress (41
°C for 60 min) in an incubator without anaesthesia.
RESULTS: Significant increase in wet and dry weights, and protein content of
soleus muscle in wild-type mice was observed seven days after the application of 
the heat stress. However, heat stress had no impact on soleus muscle mass in
HSF1-null mice. Neither type of mice exhibited much effect of heat stress on HSF 
mRNA expression (HSF1, HSF2 and HSF4). On the other hand, heat stress upregulated
heat shock proteins (HSPs) at the mRNA (HSP72) and protein (HSP72 and HSP110)
levels in wild-type mice, but not in HSF1-null mice. The population of
Pax7-positive nuclei relative to total myonuclei of soleus muscle in wild-type
mice was significantly increased by heat stress, but not in HSF1-null mice.
Furthermore, the absence of HSF1 gene suppressed heat stress-associated
phosphorylation of Akt and p70 S6 kinase (p-p70S6K) in soleus muscle.
CONCLUSION: Heat stress-associated increase in skeletal muscle mass may be
induced by HSF1 and/or HSF1-mediated stress response that activates muscle
satellite cells and Akt/p70S6K signalling pathway.

© 2015 Scandinavian Physiological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26347147  [PubMed - in process]


63. Cell Metab. 2015 Oct 6;22(4):695-708. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.08.005. Epub 2015 
Sep 3.

Celastrol Protects against Obesity and Metabolic Dysfunction through Activation
of a HSF1-PGC1a Transcriptional Axis.

Ma X(1), Xu L(1), Alberobello AT(1), Gavrilova O(2), Bagattin A(1), Skarulis
M(3), Liu J(4), Finkel T(4), Mueller E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Mouse Metabolism Core, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Clinical Endocrine Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)Center for Molecular Medicine, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)Genetics of
Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Electronic address: elisabettam@niddk.nih.gov.

Altering the balance between energy intake and expenditure is a potential
strategy for treating obesity and metabolic syndrome. Nonetheless, despite years 
of progress in identifying diverse molecular targets, biological-based therapies 
are limited. Here we demonstrate that heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) regulates energy
expenditure through activation of a PGC1a-dependent metabolic program in adipose 
tissues and muscle. Genetic modulation of HSF1 levels altered white fat
remodeling and thermogenesis, and pharmacological activation of HSF1 via
celastrol was associated with enhanced energy expenditure, increased
mitochondrial function in fat and muscle and protection against obesity, insulin 
resistance, and hepatic steatosis during high-fat diet regimens. The beneficial
metabolic changes elicited by celastrol were abrogated in HSF1 knockout
mice. Overall, our findings identify the temperature sensor HSF1 as a regulator
of energy metabolism and demonstrate that augmenting HSF1 via celastrol
represents a possible therapeutic strategy to treat obesity and its myriad
metabolic consequences.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26344102  [PubMed - in process]


64. Elife. 2015 Sep 1;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.08467.

Compromising the 19S proteasome complex protects cells from reduced flux through 
the proteasome.

Tsvetkov P(1), Mendillo ML(2), Zhao J(3), Carette JE(4), Merrill PH(5), Cikes
D(6), Varadarajan M(1), van Diemen FR(7), Penninger JM(6), Goldberg AL(3),
Brummelkamp TR(7), Santagata S(1), Lindquist S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, United States. (3)Department of Cell Biology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States. (4)Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, United States.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, United States. (6)Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian
Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Netherlands 
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Proteasomes are central regulators of protein homeostasis in eukaryotes.
Proteasome function is vulnerable to environmental insults, cellular protein
imbalance and targeted pharmaceuticals. Yet, mechanisms that cells deploy to
counteract inhibition of this central regulator are little understood. To find
such mechanisms, we reduced flux through the proteasome to the point of toxicity 
with specific inhibitors and performed genome-wide screens for mutations that
allowed cells to survive. Counter to expectation, reducing expression of
individual subunits of the proteasome's 19S regulatory complex increased
survival. Strong 19S reduction was cytotoxic but modest reduction protected cells
from inhibitors. Protection was accompanied by an increased ratio of 20S to 26S
proteasomes, preservation of protein degradation capacity and reduced proteotoxic
stress. While compromise of 19S function can have a fitness cost under basal
conditions, it provided a powerful survival advantage when proteasome function
was impaired. This means of rebalancing proteostasis is conserved from yeast to
humans.

PMCID: PMC4551903
PMID: 26327695  [PubMed - in process]


65. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):25202-16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4513.

Adenomatous polyposis coli mutants dominantly activate Hsf1-dependent cell stress
pathways through inhibition of microtubule dynamics.

Davies AE(1), Kortright K(1), Kaplan KB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of California, Davis, CA,
USA.

Cancer cells up-regulate cell stress pathways, including the protein chaperone
Hsp90. Increases in Hsp90 are believed "buffer" mutant protein activities
necessary for cancer phenotypes. Activation of the cell stress pathway also
alters the transcriptional landscape of cells in ways that are critical for
cancer progression. However, it is unclear when and how the cell stress pathway
is de-regulated during cancer progression. Here we report that mutations in
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) found in colorectal cancer activate cell stress 
pathways in mouse intestinal crypt cells, prior to loss of heterozygosity at APC 
or to the appearance of canonical intestinal cancer markers. Hsp90 levels are
elevated in normal APC heterozygote crypt cells and further elevated in
non-cancer cells adjacent to dysplasias, suggesting that the Hsp90 stress pathway
marks the "cancer-field" effect. Expression of mutant APC in normal human
epithelial cells is sufficient to activate a cell stress pathway via
perturbations in microtubule dynamics. Inhibition of microtubule dynamics is
sufficient to activate an Hsf1-dependent increase in gene transcription and
protein levels. We suggest that the early activation of this Hsf1 dependent cell 
stress pathway by mono-allelic mutations in APC can affect cell programming in a 
way that contributes to cancer onset.

PMCID: PMC4694825
PMID: 26320184  [PubMed - in process]


66. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29963-74. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4676.

Tonantzitlolone cytotoxicity toward renal cancer cells is PKC<U+03B8>- and
HSF1-dependent.

Sourbier C(1), Scroggins BT(2), Mannes PZ(1), Liao PJ(1), Siems K(3), Wolf D(3), 
Beutler JA(4), Linehan WM(1), Neckers L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Radiation Oncology Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)AnalytiCon Discovery GmbH, D-14473 Potsdam, Germany. (4)Molecular Targets
Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA.

Elucidating the targets and mechanism of action of natural products is
strategically important prior to drug development and assessment of potential
clinical applications. In this report, we elucidated the main targets and
mechanism of action of the natural product tonantzitlolone (TZL) in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC). We identified TZL as a dual PKCa and PKC<U+03B8> activator
in vitro, although in CCRCC cells its activity was mostly PKC<U+03B8>-dependent. Through
activation of PKC<U+03B8>, TZL induced an insulin resistant phenotype by inhibiting IRS1
and the PI3K/Akt pathway. Simultaneously, TZL activated the heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) transcription factor driving glucose dependency. Thus, similar to the
selective PKC<U+03B8> activator englerin A, TZL induces a metabolic catastrophe in
CCRCC, starving cells of glucose while simultaneously increasing their glycolytic
dependency.

PMCID: PMC4745775
PMID: 26298773  [PubMed - in process]


67. Exp Anim. 2015;64(4):397-406. doi: 10.1538/expanim.15-0023. Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Non-Hsp genes are essential for HSF1-mediated maintenance of whole body
homeostasis.

Hayashida N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

Mammalian tissues are always exposed to diverse threats from pathological
conditions and aging. Therefore, the molecular systems that protect the cells
from these threats are indispensable for cell survival. A variety of diseases,
including neurodegenerative diseases, cause intracellular damage and disturb
homeostasis. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) positively regulates heat
shock protein (Hsp) and maintains the precise folding of proteins. Moreover, HSF1
induces the non-Hsp genes expression, and degrades damaged/misfolded protein.
Recently, my colleagues and I revealed non-Hsp genes have more protective roles
than Hsps at the cellular level. However, whether these protective systems are
similarly important to cellular defense in each tissue is still elusive. In this 
study, I compared polyglutamine (polyQ) protein aggregations/inclusion
development in each tissue of WT- and HSF1KO-Huntington's disease (HD) mice, and 
examined the expression of the eight non-Hsp HSF1 target genes that have a strong
suppressive effect on polyQ protein aggregation. Of these genes, Nfatc2, Pdzk3,
Cryab, Csrp2, and Prame were detected in most tissues, but the other genes were
not. Surprisingly, the obvious effect of HSF1 deficiency on the expression of
these five genes was detected in only heart, spleen, and stomach. In addition,
polyQ protein aggregations/inclusion was not detected in any tissues of WT-HD and
HSF1KO-HD mice, but higher level of pre-aggregative polyQ protein was detected in
HSF1KO-HD tissues. These results indicate non-Hsp genes are indispensable for the
maintenance of intracellular homeostasis in mammalian tissues, resulting in whole
body homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4637377
PMID: 26251235  [PubMed - in process]


68. J Mol Graph Model. 2015 Sep;61:141-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jmgm.2015.07.003. Epub 2015 
Jul 22.

Molecular docking and dynamic simulation evaluation of Rohinitib - Cantharidin
based novel HSF1 inhibitors for cancer therapy.

Agarwal T(1), Annamalai N(2), Khursheed A(3), Maiti TK(4), Arsad HB(5), Siddiqui 
MH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur,
Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India. Electronic address:
tarun3agarwal5@gmail.com. (2)Advanced Medical and Dental Institute, Universiti
Sains Malaysia, 13200, Bertam, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia. Electronic address:
nithyanny90@hotmail.com. (3)Advanced Centre for Bioengineering and Bioinformatics
(ACBB), Integral Research Centre (IRC), Department of Bioengineering, Integral
University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226026, India. Electronic address:
akhursheed12@gmail.com. (4)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India. Electronic address:
tkmaiti@hijli.iitkgp.ernet.in. (5)Advanced Medical and Dental Institute,
Universiti Sains Malaysia, 13200, Bertam, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia. Electronic
address: hasni@amdi.usm.edu.my. (6)Advanced Centre for Bioengineering and
Bioinformatics (ACBB), Integral Research Centre (IRC), Department of
Bioengineering, Integral University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 226026, India.
Electronic address: mohdharis.siddiqui@gmail.com.

Recent developments in the target based cancer therapies have identified HSF1 as 
a novel non oncogenic drug target. The present study delineates the design and
molecular docking evaluation of Rohinitib (RHT) - Cantharidin (CLA) based novel
HSF1 inhibitors for target-based cancer therapy. Here, we exploited the
pharmacophoric features of both the parent ligands for the design of novel hybrid
HSF1 inhibitors. The RHT-CLA ligands were designed and characterized for ADME/Tox
features, interaction with HSF1 DNA binding domain and their pharmacophoric
features essential for interaction. From the results, amino acid residues Ala17, 
Phe61, His63, Asn65, Ser68, Arg71 and Gln72 were found crucial for HSF1
interaction with the Heat shock elements (HSE). The hybrid ligands had better
affinity towards the HSF1 DNA binding domain, in comparison to RHT or CLA and
interacted with most of the active site residues. Additionally, the HSF1-ligand
complex had a reduced affinity towards HSE in comparison to native HSF1. Based on
the results, ligand RC15 and RC17 were non carcinogenic, non mutagenic,
completely biodegradable under aerobic conditions, had better affinity for HSF1
(1.132 and 1.129 folds increase respectively) and diminished the interaction of
HSF1 with HSE (1.203 and 1.239 folds decrease respectively). The simulation
analysis also suggested that the ligands formed a stable complex with HSF1,
restraining the movement of active site residues. In conclusion, RHT-CLA hybrid
ligands can be used as a potential inhibitor of HSF1 for non-oncogene target
based cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26245696  [PubMed - in process]


69. Cytokine. 2015 Nov;76(1):53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.07.026. Epub 2015 Aug 1.

Making many from few: IL-12p40 as a model for the combinatorial assembly of
heterodimeric cytokines.

Abdi K(1), Singh NJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Twinbrook II 12441 Parklawn Dr.,
Rockville, MD 20852, United States. (2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, 685 W Baltimore St, HSF1, Room 380,
Baltimore, MD 21201, United States. Electronic address: nsingh@som.umaryland.edu.

How dendritic cells (DCs) gather information from the local milieu at a site of
infection or injury and communicate this to influence adaptive immunity is not
well understood. We and others have reported that soon after microbial encounter,
DCs secrete the p40 subunit of IL-12, by itself, in a monomeric form. Based on
recent data that this p40 monomer subsequently associates with p35 released from 
other cells to generate functional IL-12, we proposed that p40 can function as a 
DC-derived probe which samples the composition of the local milieu by looking for
other binding partners. In this opinion, we discuss how such a sampling function 
might generate an elaborate combinatorial "code" of heterodimeric cytokines,
capable of conveying location-specific information to cells downstream of DC
activation, including NK and T cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573263 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26242928  [PubMed - in process]


70. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5872-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4157. Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Roles of heat shock factor 1 in isoproterenol-induced myocardial fibrosis in
mice.

Xie Y(1), Zhang L(1), Zhang B(2), Fang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Chenzhou No. 1 People's Hospital, Chenzhou,
Hunan 423000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Histoembryology, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Internal Cardiology, Changsha No. 1 People's Hospital, Changsha,
Hunan 410078, P.R. China.

Although it is well known that isoproterenol (ISO) causes myocardial hypertrophy 
and myocardial fibrosis in rats, it has remained elusive whether heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1) has a role in this process. The present study aimed to
investigate the possible roles of HSF1 in ISO-induced fibrosis in mice. It was
found that after administration of ISO in Kunming and HSF1-/+ mice, there was a
large number of fibers deposited around blood vessels and among cardiocytes,
accompanied with an obvious increase in the protein expressions of type I or III 
collagen and heat shock protein 47 (HSP47), as indicated by western blot
analysis. After intervention with insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1),
myocardial fibrosis was significantly attenuated, with a paralleled decrease in
the expression of collagen and HSP47 in the mice. However, in HSF1-/- mice, fiber
hyperplasy was not observed after injection of ISO, and the levels of type I or
III collagen and HSP47 were not significantly increased at the protein and mRNA
level. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that after subcutaneous injection of ISO 
into the back of Kunming and HSF1-/+ mice, large amounts of HSF1 protein were
localized to the nucleus, and there was an increase in phosphorylated HSF1 as
indicated by western blot and immunohistochemical analysis, respectively.
Intervention with IGF-1 inhibited HSF1 activation mediated by ISO. These results 
suggested that HSF1 is required for myocardial fibrosis in ISO-treated mice, and 
the underlying molecular mechanism may involve the regulation of HSP47.

PMID: 26239834  [PubMed - in process]


71. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug;153(1):57-66. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3521-1.
Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Heat shock factor 1 induces cancer stem cell phenotype in breast cancer cell
lines.

Wang B(1), Lee CW, Witt A, Thakkar A, Ince TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Braman Family 
Breast Cancer Institute and Interdisciplinary Stem Cell Institute, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) has long been recognized as the master transcription
factor that regulates heat shock proteins (HSPs).  More recently HSF1 has been
associated with a broader role in regulating response to a variety of cellular
stresses beyond heat-shock.  We previously found that high HSF1 expression is
associated with poor outcome in lung, breast and colon cancers. Importantly,
however, the HSF1 signature correlated with poor outcome in these studies was not
related to the heat shock response, which suggested that tumor outcome associated
with high HSF expression may be due to processes other than stress response.
Hence, we explored the question whether high HSF1 expression might be associated 
with the cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotype. To do so, we examined the association 
of HSF1 with CSC phenotype by FACS and immunofluorescence. In addition, we
evaluated the effects of HSF1 over-expression and knock-down on sphere formation 
and CSC marker expression in breast cancer cell lines. Here, we report results
demonstrating that high HSF1 not only correlates with CSC marker expression, but 
inducible HSF1 over-expression augments and HSF1 knock-down inhibits CSC
phenotype. Furthermore, HSF1 expression confers resistance to chemotherapeutic
drugs and increases CSC frequency. In conclusion, our study indicates that one of
the potential HSP-independent HSF1 driven mechanisms that may contribute to poor 
outcome in human tumors involves regulation of the CSC phenotype. Hence,
therapeutic inhibition of HSF1 may be one route to target CSCs in human tumors.

PMCID: PMC4536274
PMID: 26223813  [PubMed - in process]


72. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(10):1564-72. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b15-00352. Epub 2015 Jul
22.

Protective HSP70 Induction by Z-Ligustilide against Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation
Injury via Activation of the MAPK Pathway but Not of HSF1.

Yu J(1), Jiang Z, Ning L, Zhao Z, Yang N, Chen L, Ma H, Li L, Fu Y, Zhu H, Qi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southwest University.

Heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) is known to function as a protective molecular
chaperone that is massively induced in response to misfolded proteins following
cerebral ischemia. The objective of this study was to characterize HSP70
induction by Z-ligustilide and explore its potential role in protection against
cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury. Our results demonstrated that the
intranasal administration of Z-ligustilide reduced infarct volume and improved
neurological function in a rat stroke model. Meanwhile, Z-ligustilide enhanced
the cell viability of PC12 cells insulted by oxygen-glucose
deprivation-reoxygenation (OGD-Reoxy) and decreased apoptotic and necrotic cell
death. Importantly, Z-ligustilide induced HSP70 expression both in vitro and in
vivo. Although heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) nuclear translocation was promoted by
Z-ligustilide, HSP70-based heat-shock element (HSE)-binding luciferase activity
was not activated, and HSP70 expression responsive to Z-ligustilide was not
attenuated by HSE decoy oligonucleotides. However, Z-ligustilide significantly
activated the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs).
Further inhibition of MAPK activity by specific inhibitors attenuated HSP70
induction by Z-ligustilide. Meanwhile, downregulation of HSP70 using KNK437, an
HSP70 synthesis inhibitor, or small hairpin RNA (shRNA) significantly attenuated 
the protection of Z-ligustilide against OGD-Reoxy-induced injury. Moreover, the
application of specific inhibitors of MAPKs also achieved similar results.
Finally, Z-ligustilide alleviated the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins
induced by OGD-Reoxy, which was inhibited by HSP70-shRNA. Taken together, our
results demonstrated that Z-ligustilide may induce protective HSP70 expression
via the activation of the MAPK pathway, but not canonical HSF1 transcription.
HSP70 plays a key role in the protection of Z-ligustilide against
OGD-Reoxy-induced injury.

PMID: 26212861  [PubMed - in process]


73. BMC Syst Biol. 2015 Jul 27;9:42. doi: 10.1186/s12918-015-0185-8.

Complex regulation of Hsf1-Skn7 activities by the catalytic subunits of PKA in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae: experimental and computational evidences.

Pérez-Landero S(1), Sandoval-Motta S(2), Martínez-Anaya C(3), Yang R(4),
Folch-Mallol JL(5), Martínez LM(6), Ventura L(7), Guillén-Navarro K(8),
Aldana-González M(9), Nieto-Sotelo J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 04510, México,
D.F., Mexico. slandero@gmail.com. (2)Instituto de Ciencias Físicas, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, 62210, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
motta@icf.unam.mx. (3)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, 62210, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico. cma@ibt.unam.mx. (4)Present
Address: Department of Anesthesiology, Pharmacology & Therapeutics, The
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, V6T 1Z4, BC, Canada.
yrying@mail.ubc.ca. (5)Present Address: Centro de Investigación en Biotecnología,
Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Morelos, 62209, Cuernavaca, Mor., Mexico.
jordi@uaem.mx. (6)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, 62210, Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico. luzma@ibt.unam.mx. (7)Present
Address: Grupo La Florida México, Tlalnepantla, 54170, Edo. de Méx., Mexico.
lventura@grupolaflorida.com. (8)Present Address: El Colegio de la Frontera Sur,
30700, Tapachula, Chis., Mexico. kguillen@ecosur.mx. (9)Instituto de Ciencias
Físicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 62210, Cuernavaca, Morelos,
Mexico. max@icf.unam.mx. (10)Instituto de Biología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, 04510, México, D.F., Mexico. jorge.nieto@ib.unam.mx.

BACKGROUND: The cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulatory network (PKA-RN)
regulates metabolism, memory, learning, development, and response to stress.
Previous models of this network considered the catalytic subunits (CS) as a
single entity, overlooking their functional individualities. Furthermore, PKA-RN 
dynamics are often measured through cAMP levels in nutrient-depleted cells
shortly after being fed with glucose, dismissing downstream physiological
processes.
RESULTS: Here we show that temperature stress, along with deletion of PKA-RN
genes, significantly affected HSE-dependent gene expression and the dynamics of
the PKA-RN in cells growing in exponential phase. Our genetic analysis revealed
complex regulatory interactions between the CS that influenced the inhibition of 
Hsf1/Skn7 transcription factors. Accordingly, we found new roles in growth
control and stress response for Hsf1/Skn7 when PKA activity was low (cdc25<U+0394>
cells). Experimental results were used to propose an interaction scheme for the
PKA-RN and to build an extension of a classic synchronous discrete modeling
framework. Our computational model reproduced the experimental data and predicted
complex interactions between the CS and the existence of a repressor of Hsf1/Skn7
that is activated by the CS. Additional genetic analysis identified Ssa1 and Ssa2
chaperones as such repressors. Further modeling of the new data foresaw a third
repressor of Hsf1/Skn7, active only in the absence of Tpk2. By averaging the
network state over all its attractors, a good quantitative agreement between
computational and experimental results was obtained, as the averages reflected
more accurately the population measurements.
CONCLUSIONS: The assumption of PKA being one molecular entity has hindered the
study of a wide range of behaviors. Additionally, the dynamics of HSE-dependent
gene expression cannot be simulated accurately by considering the activity of
single PKA-RN components (i.e., cAMP, individual CS, Bcy1, etc.). We show that
the differential roles of the CS are essential to understand the dynamics of the 
PKA-RN and its targets. Our systems level approach, which combined experimental
results with theoretical modeling, unveils the relevance of the interaction
scheme for the CS and offers quantitative predictions for several scenarios (WT
vs. mutants in PKA-RN genes and growth at optimal temperature vs. heat shock).

PMCID: PMC4515323
PMID: 26209979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 20;10(7):e0133553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133553.
eCollection 2015.

RhoA Activation Sensitizes Cells to Proteotoxic Stimuli by Abrogating the
HSF1-Dependent Heat Shock Response.

Meijering RA(1), Wiersma M(1), van Marion DM(1), Zhang D(1), Hoogstra-Berends
F(1), Dijkhuis AJ(2), Schmidt M(3), Wieland T(4), Kampinga HH(2), Henning RH(1), 
Brundel BJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Cell Biology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Institute of Experimental and
Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Mannheim Medical Faculty, University of
Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. (5)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and
Pharmacology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands; Department of Physiology, Institute for
Cardiovascular Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The heat shock response (HSR) is an ancient and highly conserved
program of stress-induced gene expression, aimed at reestablishing protein
homeostasis to preserve cellular fitness. Cells that fail to activate or maintain
this protective response are hypersensitive to proteotoxic stress. The HSR is
mediated by the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), which binds to
conserved heat shock elements (HSE) in the promoter region of heat shock genes,
resulting in the expression of heat shock proteins (HSP). Recently, we observed
that hyperactivation of RhoA conditions cardiomyocytes for the cardiac arrhythmia
atrial fibrillation. Also, the HSR is annihilated in atrial fibrillation, and
induction of HSR mitigates sensitization of cells to this disease. Therefore, we 
hypothesized active RhoA to suppress the HSR resulting in sensitization of cells 
for proteotoxic stimuli.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Stimulation of RhoA activity significantly suppressed the
proteotoxic stress-induced HSR in HL-1 atrial cardiomyocytes as determined with a
luciferase reporter construct driven by the HSF1 regulated human HSP70 (HSPA1A)
promoter and HSP protein expression by Western Blot analysis. Inversely, RhoA
inhibition boosted the proteotoxic stress-induced HSR. While active RhoA did not 
preclude HSF1 nuclear accumulation, phosphorylation, acetylation, or sumoylation,
it did impair binding of HSF1 to the hsp genes promoter element HSE. Impaired
binding results in suppression of HSP expression and sensitized cells to
proteotoxic stress.
CONCLUSION: These results reveal that active RhoA negatively regulates the HSR
via attenuation of the HSF1-HSE binding and thus may play a role in sensitizing
cells to proteotoxic stimuli.

PMCID: PMC4508109
PMID: 26193369  [PubMed - in process]


75. Cancer Lett. 2015 Oct 1;366(2):191-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.07.006. Epub
2015 Jul 13.

Tyrosine kinase inhibitor tyrphostin AG490 triggers both apoptosis and autophagy 
by reducing HSF1 and Mcl-1 in PEL cells.

Granato M(1), Chiozzi B(1), Filardi MR(1), Lotti LV(1), Di Renzo L(1), Faggioni
A(2), Cirone M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, viale Regina
Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza
University of Rome, viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: alberto.faggioni@uniroma1.it. (3)Department of Experimental Medicine,
Sapienza University of Rome, viale Regina Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: mara.cirone@uniroma1.it.

PEL cells relay on the constitutive activation of STAT3 for their survival, thus 
its inhibition by AG490 leads to apoptotic cell death. In this study, we found
that the cytotoxic activity of AG490 correlated with the reduction of HSP70 and
its master regulator HSF1 that, based on knocking-down experiments, was found to 
play a pro-survival role in PEL cells. To counteract the pro-death effect
mediated by HSF1/HSP70 down-regulation, AG490 induced a complete autophagy, whose
inhibition potentiated its cytotoxic effect against PEL cells. AG490 as well as
HSF1 siRNA reduced the expression of Mcl-1, a Bcl-2 family member that negatively
regulates apoptosis and autophagy. These results suggest that STAT3 inhibition,
by down-regulating the expression of HSF1/HSP70, reduces Mcl-1 and leads to both 
apoptosis and autophagy induction in PEL cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26184999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Nov;28(6):643-4. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12395. Epub
2015 Sep 8.

A (heat) shocking development: FBXW7 loss unleashes HSF1 to drive melanoma
invasion and metastasis.

Cho E, Grim JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)jgrim@fredhutch.org.

PMID: 26178611  [PubMed - in process]


77. Cancer Sci. 2015 Sep;106(9):1163-73. doi: 10.1111/cas.12739.

p53 activated by AND gate genetic circuit under radiation and hypoxia for
targeted cancer gene therapy.

Ding M(1), Li R(2), He R(3), Wang X(3), Yi Q(1), Wang W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children Hospital, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China. (2)Institute of Combined Injury, State Key Laboratory of
Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Chongqing Engineering Research Center for
Nanomedicine, College of Preventive Medicine, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, China. (3)Department of Emergency, Children Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tumor 
Hospital of Sichuan, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Radio-activated gene therapy has been developed as a novel therapeutic strategy
against cancer; however, expression of therapeutic gene in peritumoral tissues
will result in unacceptable toxicity to normal cells. To restrict gene expression
in targeted tumor mass, we used hypoxia and radiation tolerance features of tumor
cells to develop a synthetic AND gate genetic circuit through connecting
radiation sensitivity promoter cArG6 , heat shock response elements SNF1, HSF1
and HSE4 with retroviral vector plxsn. Their construction and dynamic activity
process were identified through downstream enhanced green fluorescent protein and
wtp53 expression in non-small cell lung cancer A549 cells and in a nude mice
model. The result showed that AND gate genetic circuit could be activated by
lower required radiation dose (6 Gy) and after activated, AND gate could induce
significant apoptosis effects and growth inhibition of cancer cells in vitro and 
in vivo. The radiation- and hypoxia-activated AND gate genetic circuit, which
could lead to more powerful target tumoricidal activity represented a promising
strategy for both targeted and effective gene therapy of human lung
adenocarcinoma and low dose activation character of the AND gate genetic circuit 
implied that this model could be further exploited to decrease side-effects of
clinical radiation therapy.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4582985
PMID: 26177264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Animal. 2015 Dec;9(12):1979-85. doi: 10.1017/S1751731115001226. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Developmental competence of different quality bovine oocytes retrieved through
ovum pick-up following in vitro maturation and fertilization.

Saini N(1), Singh MK(1), Shah SM(1), Singh KP(1), Kaushik R(1), Manik RS(1),
Singla SK(1), Palta P(1), Chauhan MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre,National Dairy Research Institute,Karnal
132001,Haryana,India.

In the present study, oocytes retrieved from cross bred Karan Fries cows by ovum 
pick-up technique were graded into Group 1 and Group 2, based on the
morphological appearance of the individual cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs). To
analyze whether the developmental potential of the COCs bears a relation to
morphological appearance, relative expression of a panel of genes associated
with; (a) cumulus-oocyte interaction (Cx43, Cx37, GDF9 and BMP15), (b)
fertilization (ZP2 and ZP3), (c) embryonic development (HSF1, ZAR1 and bFGF) and 
(d) apoptosis and survival (BAX, BID and BCL-XL, MCL-1, respectively) was studied
at two stages: germinal vesicle (GV) stage and after in vitro maturation. The
competence was further corroborated by evaluating the embryonic progression of
the presumed zygotes obtained from fertilization of the graded COCs. The gene
expression profile and development rate in pooled A and B grade (Group 1) COCs
and pooled C and D grade (Group 2) COCs were determined and compared according to
the original grades. The results of the study demonstrated that the
morphologically characterized Group 2 COCs showed significantly (P<0.05) lower
expression for most of the genes related to cumulus-oocyte interplay,
fertilization and embryonic development, both at GV stage as well as after
maturation. Group 1 COCs also showed greater expression of anti-apoptotic genes
(BCL-XL and MCL1) both at GV stage and after maturation, while pro-apoptotic
genes (BAX and BID) showed significantly (P<0.05) elevated expression in poor
quality COCs at both the stages. The cleavage rate in Group 1 COCs was
significantly higher than that of Group 2 (74.46±7.06 v. 31.57±5.32%). The
development of the presumed zygotes in Group 2 oocytes proceeded up to 8- to
16-cell stages only, while in Group 1 it progressed up to morulae (35.38±7.11%)
and blastocyst stages (9.70±3.15%), indicating their better developmental
potential.

PMID: 26165355  [PubMed - in process]


79. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Sep 1;25(17):3409-14. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.06.052.
Epub 2015 Jun 20.

Regulating the master regulator: Controlling heat shock factor 1 as a
chemotherapy approach.

McConnell JR(1), Buckton LK(1), McAlpine SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW
2052, Australia. Electronic address: s.mcalpine@unsw.edu.au.

Described is the role that heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) plays in regulating
cellular stress. Focusing on the current state of the HSF1 field in
chemotherapeutics we outline the cytoprotective role of HSF1 in the cell.
Summarizing the mechanism by which HSF1 regulates the unfolded proteins that are 
generated under stress conditions provides the background on why HSF1, the master
regulator, is such an important protein in cancer cell growth. Summarizing siRNA 
knockdown results and current inhibitors provides a comprehensive evaluation on
HSF1 and its current state. One set of molecules stands out, in that they
completely obliterate the levels of HSF1, while simultaneously inhibiting heat
shock protein 90 (Hsp90). These molecules are extremely promising as
chemotherapeutic agents and as tools that may ultimately provide the connection
between Hsp90 inhibition and HSF1 protein levels.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26164188  [PubMed - in process]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 21;464(2):561-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.006. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

BAG3 affects the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of HSF1 upon heat stress.

Jin YH(1), Ahn SG(2), Kim SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dongguk University College of Oriental Medicine,
Gyeongju 780-714, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Chosun
University College of Dentistry, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Dongguk University College of Oriental Medicine,
Gyeongju 780-714, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: ksooa@dongguk.ac.kr.

Bcl2-associated athoanogene (BAG) 3 is a member of the co-chaperone BAG family.
It is induced by stressful stimuli such as heat shock and heavy metals, and it
regulates cellular adaptive responses against stressful conditions. In this
study, we identified a novel role for BAG3 in regulating the nuclear shuttling of
HSF1 during heat stress. The expression level of BAG3 was induced by heat stress 
in HeLa cells. Interestingly, BAG3 rapidly translocalized to the nucleus upon
heat stress. Immunoprecipitation assay showed that BAG3 interacts with HSF1 under
normal and stressed conditions and co-translocalizes to the nucleus upon heat
stress. We also demonstrated that BAG3 interacts with HSF1 via its BAG domain.
Over-expression of BAG3 down-regulates the level of nuclear HSF1 by exporting it 
to the cytoplasm during the recovery period. Depletion of BAG3 using siRNA
results in reduced nuclear HSF1 and decreased Hsp70 promoter activity. BAG3 in
MEF(hsf1(-/-)) cells actively translocalizes to the nucleus upon heat stress
suggesting that BAG3 plays a key role in the processing of the nucleocytoplasmic 
shuttling of HSF1 upon heat stress.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26159920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 Jun 11;11(8):923-34. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.10896. eCollection
2015.

Sensitization of chemo-resistant human chronic myeloid leukemia stem-like cells
to Hsp90 inhibitor by SIRT1 inhibition.

Kim HB(1), Lee SH(1), Um JH(2), Kim MJ(1), Hyun SK(1), Gong EJ(1), Oh WK(3), Kang
CD(1), Kim SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Biochemistry, Pusan National University School of Medicine,
Yangsan 626-870, Korea. (2)2. Korea Mouse Metabolic Phenotyping Center, Lee Gil
Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Incheon 406-840, Korea.
(3)3. College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-818, Korea.

Development of effective therapeutic strategies to eliminate cancer stem-like
cells (CSCs), which play a major role in drug resistance and disease recurrence, 
is critical to improve cancer treatment outcomes. The current investigation was
undertaken to examine the effectiveness of the combination treatment of Hsp90
inhibitor and SIRT1 inhibitor in inhibiting the growth of chemo-resistant
stem-like cells isolated from human chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells.
Inhibition of SIRT1 by use of SIRT1 siRNA or SIRT1 inhibitors (amurensin G and
EX527) effectively potentiated sensitivity of Hsp90 inhibitors (17-AAG and
AUY922) in CD44(high) K562 stem-like cells expressing high levels of CSC-related 
molecules including Oct4, CD34, ß-catenin, c-Myc, mutant p53 (mut p53), BCRP and 
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) as well as CD44. SIRT1 depletion caused significant
down-regulation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)/heat shock proteins (Hsps) as well 
as these CSC-related molecules, which led to the sensitization of CD44(high) K562
cells to Hsp90 inhibitor by SIRT1 inhibitor. Moreover, 17-AAG-mediated activation
of HSF1/Hsps and P-gp-mediated efflux, major causes of Hsp90 inhibitor
resistance, was suppressed by SIRT1 inhibitor in K562-CD44(high) cells. Our data 
suggest that combined treatment with Hsp90 inhibitor and SIRT1 inhibitor could be
an effective therapeutic approach to target CSCs that are resistant to current
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4495410
PMID: 26157347  [PubMed - in process]


82. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 28;290(35):21421-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.654913. Epub
2015 Jul 8.

Mitochondrial Respiratory Dysfunction Induces Claudin-1 Expression via Reactive
Oxygen Species-mediated Heat Shock Factor 1 Activation, Leading to Hepatoma Cell 
Invasiveness.

Lee JH(1), Lee YK(1), Lim JJ(1), Byun HO(1), Park I(1), Kim GH(1), Xu WG(2), Wang
HJ(2), Yoon G(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and the Department of Biomedical Science,
Graduate School, Ajou University, Suwon 443-380, Korea. (2)Surgery, Ajou
University School of Medicine, Suwon, 443-380, Korea and. (3)From the Departments
of Biochemistry and the Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School, Ajou
University, Suwon 443-380, Korea ypeace@ajou.ac.kr.

Although mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in tumor metastasis, it is
unclear how it regulates tumor cell aggressiveness. We have reported previously
that human hepatoma cells harboring mitochondrial defects have high tumor cell
invasion activity via increased claudin-1 (Cln-1) expression. In this study, we
demonstrated that mitochondrial respiratory defects induced Cln-1 transcription
via reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) activation,
which contributed to hepatoma invasiveness. We first confirmed the inverse
relationship between mitochondrial defects and Cln-1 induction in SNU hepatoma
cells and hepatocellular carcinoma tissues. We then examined five different
respiratory complex inhibitors, and complex I inhibition by rotenone most
effectively induced Cln-1 at the transcriptional level. Rotenone increased both
mitochondrial and cytosolic ROS. In addition, rotenone-induced Cln-1 expression
was attenuated by N-acetylcysteine, an antioxidant, and exogenous H2O2 treatment 
was enough to increase Cln-1 transcription, implying the involvement of ROS. Next
we found that ROS-mediated HSF1 activation via hyperphosphorylation was the key
event for Cln-1 transcription. Moreover, the Cln-1 promoter region (from -529 to 
+53) possesses several HSF1 binding elements, and this region showed increased
promoter activity and HSF1 binding affinity in response to rotenone treatment.
Finally, we demonstrated that the invasion activity of SNU449 cells, which harbor
mitochondrial defects, was blocked by siRNA-mediated HSF1 knockdown. Taken
together, these results indicate that mitochondrial respiratory defects enhance
Cln-1-mediated hepatoma cell invasiveness via mitochondrial ROS-mediated HSF1
activation, presenting a potential role for HSF1 as a novel mitochondrial
retrograde signal-responsive transcription factor to control hepatoma cell
invasiveness.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4571870 [Available on 2016-08-28]
PMID: 26157141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5524-30. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4027. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Heat shock protein 70 induction by glutamine increases the a-synuclein
degradation in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.

Yang J(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhao S(3), Zhang Z(3), Tong X(3), Wei F(3), Lu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei
430060, P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurology, The People's Hospital of Inner
Mongolia, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia 010055, P.R. China. (3)Department of Neurology, 
Affiliated Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical University, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia 
010059, P.R. China.

Functional defects in heat shock proteins (HSPs), e.g. Hsp70, have been reported 
to have a key role in Parkinson's disease (PD). Overexpressed Hsp70 re-folds
aggregated a-synuclein to generate the non-toxic and non-aggregated form. Thus,
Hsp70 is a well-defined therapeutic target, and Hsp70 promotion is an efficient
strategy to prevent or even reverse the a-synuclein-induced toxicity in PD. The
present study investigated the promotion of Hsp70 expression in SH-SY5Y
neuroblastoma cells by glutamine (Gln), which has recently been recognized to
induce Hsp70 expression. Furthermore, the role of heat shock factor (HSF)-1 in
the Gln-mediated upregulation of Hsp70 expression was investigated. In addition, 
the regulatory role of Gln in a-synuclein degradation in
a-synuclein-overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells was determined. The results of the
present study demonstrated that Gln treatment significantly upregulated Hsp70
expression at the mRNA as well as the protein level in a dose-dependent and
time-dependent manner. Gln-induced Hsp70 upregulation was found to be
HSF-1-dependent, as HSF-1 knockdown abrogated the Hsp70 upregulation by Gln in
a-synuclein-overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells. In conclusion, present study confirmed 
that Gln upregulates Hsp70 expression in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells in an
HSF-1-dependent manner. The upregulation of Hsp70 by Gln increases the
a-synuclein degradation. Therefore, Gln may be a potential therapeutic agent to
prevent a-synuclein aggregation in PD.

PMID: 26135068  [PubMed - in process]


84. Oncogene. 2015 Jun 29. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.241. [Epub ahead of print]

Heat-shock factor 2 is a suppressor of prostate cancer invasion.

Björk JK(1), Åkerfelt M(1), Joutsen J(2), Puustinen MC(2), Cheng F(2), Sistonen
L(2), Nees M(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland [2] Medical Biotechnology, VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland, Turku, Finland. (2)1] Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and 
Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland [2] Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland. (3)Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and 
Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.

Heat-shock factors (HSFs) are key transcriptional regulators in cell survival.
Although HSF1 has been identified as a driver of carcinogenesis, HSF2 has not
been explored in malignancies. Here, we report that HSF2 suppresses tumor
invasion of prostate cancer (PrCa). In three-dimensional organotypic cultures and
the in vivo xenograft chorioallantoic membrane model HSF2 knockdown perturbs
organoid differentiation and promotes invasiveness. Gene expression profiling
together with functional studies demonstrated that the molecular mechanism
underlying the effect on tumor progression originates from HSF2 steering the
switch between acinar morphogenesis and invasion. This is achieved by the
regulation of genes connected to, for example, GTPase activity, cell adhesion,
extracellular matrix and actin cytoskeleton dynamics. Importantly, low HSF2
expression correlates with high Gleason score, metastasis and poor survival of
PrCa patients, highlighting the clinical relevance of our findings. Finally, the 
study was expanded beyond PrCa, revealing that the expression of HSF2 is
decreased in a wide range of cancer types. This study provides the first evidence
for HSF2 acting as a suppressor of invasion in human malignancies.Oncogene
advance online publication, 29 June 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.241.

PMID: 26119944  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


85. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):4923-31. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3674-x. Epub 2015
Jun 25.

Multifaceted roles of HSF1 in cancer.

Jiang S(1), Tu K, Fu Q, Schmitt DC, Zhou L, Lu N, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, West China School of
Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, 
People's Republic of China.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of the heat
shock response. Accumulating evidence shows that HSF1 is overexpressed in a
variety of human cancers, is associated with cancer aggressiveness, and could
serve as an independent diagnostic or prognostic biomarker. In this review, we
will provide an overview of the multifaceted roles of HSF1 in cancer, with a
special focus on the four underlying molecular mechanisms involved. First, HSF1
regulates the expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) including HSP90, HSP70,
and HSP27. Second, HSF1 regulates cellular metabolism, including glycolysis and
lipid metabolism. Third, HSF1 serves as a regulator of different signaling
pathways, such as HuR-HIF-1, Slug, protein kinase C (PKC), nuclear factor-kappaB 
(NF-<U+03BA>B), PI3K-AKT-mTOR, and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways.
Finally, HSF1 regulates microRNAs (miRNAs) and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs).
Overall, HSF1 plays many important roles in cancer via regulating cell
proliferation, anti-apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
migration, invasion, and metastasis and may be a potential therapeutic target for
human cancers.

PMID: 26108999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. World J Urol. 2016 Feb;34(2):197-205. doi: 10.1007/s00345-015-1616-2. Epub 2015
Jun 23.

Knockdown of BAG3 sensitizes bladder cancer cells to treatment with the BH3
mimetic ABT-737.

Mani J(1), Antonietti P(2), Rakel S(2), Blaheta R(3), Bartsch G(3), Haferkamp
A(3), Kögel D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Goethe University Hospital, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. jens.mani@kgu.de. (2)Experimental Neurosurgery,
Neuroscience Center, Goethe University Hospital, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)Department of Urology, Goethe University Hospital,
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

PURPOSE: BAG3 is overexpressed in several malignancies and mediates a
non-canonical, selective form of (macro)autophagy. By stabilizing pro-survival
Bcl-2 proteins in complex with HSP70, BAG3 can also exert an
apoptosis-antagonizing function. ABT-737 is a high affinity Bcl-2 inhibitor that 
fails to target Mcl-1. This failure may confer resistance in various cancers.
METHODS: Urothelial cancer cells were treated with the BH3 mimetics ABT-737 and
(-)-gossypol, a pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor which inhibits also Mcl-1. To clarify the
importance of the core autophagy regulator ATG5 and BAG3 in ABT-737 treatment,
cell lines carrying a stable lentiviral knockdown of ATG5 and BAG3 were created. 
The synergistic effect of ABT-737 and pharmaceutical inhibition of BAG3 with the 
HSF1 inhibitor KRIBB11 or sorafenib was also evaluated. Total cell death and
apoptosis were quantified by FACS analysis of propidium iodide, annexin. Target
protein analysis was conducted by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Knockdown of BAG3 significantly downregulated Mcl-1 protein levels and
sensitized urothelial cancer cells to apoptotic cell death induced by ABT-737,
while inhibition of bulk autophagy through depletion of ATG5 had no discernible
effect on cell death. Similar to knockdown of BAG3, pharmacological targeting of 
the BAG3/Mcl-1 pathway with KRIBB11 was capable to sensitize both cell lines to
treatment with ABT-737.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that BAG3, but not bulk autophagy has a major role
in the response of bladder cancer cells to BH3 mimetics. They also suggest that
BAG3 is a suitable target for combined therapies aimed at synergistically
inducing apoptosis in bladder cancer.

PMID: 26100943  [PubMed - in process]


87. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 Aug;100(2):465-72. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2015.03.021.
Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Upregulation of Nuclear Heat Shock Factor 1 Contributes to Tumor Angiogenesis and
Poor Survival in Patients With Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Cui J(1), Tian H(2), Chen G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Shandong
Province, PR China; Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function
Research, Jinan, Shandong Province, PR China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, 
Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Shandong Province, PR China. Electronic
address: cmjyseul@163.com.

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 Aug;100(2):472-3.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to detect the expression of heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1) and microvessel density (MVD) in patients with non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC) and to examine the relevance between HSF1 and angiogenesis,
clinicopathologic factors, and prognosis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was used to examine the level of expression
of HSF1 and CD34. MVD was used to detect the number of microvessels by counting
CD34(+) endothelial cells. Their relationship with clinicopathologic factors and 
prognosis in patients with NSCLC was determined using IBM SPSS Statistics,
version 19 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL).
RESULTS: The level of expression of HSF1 was increased significantly in NSCLC.
HSF1 overexpression was observed in 45 patients and was significantly associated 
with MVD (p = 0.005). The overexpression of HSF1 was not associated with patient 
sex, age, tumor size, histologic type, or differentiation, but it was
significantly associated with node metastasis (p = 0.005) and clinical stage
(p = 0.006). HSF1 overexpression and high MVD were significantly associated with 
poor 5-year disease-free survival (p = 0.001 and p = 0.006, respectively).
Patients with HSF1 overexpression and high MVD had a significantly poor overall
survival (p = 0.006 and p = 0.019, respectively) and disease-specific survival
(p = 0.005 and p = 0.016, respectively). Multivariate analysis showed that HSF1
overexpression was an independent prognosticator for poor overall,
disease-specific, and disease-free survival (p = 0.040, p = 0.046, and p = 0.004,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of HSF1 is common and significantly correlated with
tumor angiogenesis in NSCLC. Patients with high HSF1 expression had poorer
overall, disease-free, and disease-specific survival. These current findings
suggest that HSF1 may serve as a novel prognostic marker and potential
therapeutic target molecule for antiangiogenic therapy in patients with NSCLC.

Copyright © 2015 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26095102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2015;15(10):1333-40.

A Novel Triazole Nucleoside Suppresses Prostate Cancer Cell Growth by Inhibiting 
Heat Shock Factor 1 and Androgen Receptor.

Xia Y, Wang M, Beraldi E, Cong M, Zoubeidi A, Gleave M, Peng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Drug Research Centre, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
ling.peng@univ-amu.fr.

A novel triazole nucleoside analogue was discovered to exhibit potent anticancer 
activity in prostate cancer cells via down-regulating heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) 
and related heat shock proteins, along with the consequential inhibition of
androgen receptor (AR) expression and transactivation, arresting the cell cycle
in AR-governed phase. This triazole nucleoside therefore constitutes a novel
structural paradigm and potential drug candidate for prostate cancer through
inhibition of HSF1 and AR.

PMID: 26081200  [PubMed - in process]


89. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:123-31. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.06.001. Epub 2015 Jun 
9.

Development-dependent regulation of molecular chaperones after hypoxia-ischemia.

Sun X(1), Crawford R(2), Liu C(2), Luo T(2), Hu B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shock Trauma and Anesthesiology Research Center, University of MD School of
Medicine, USA; Department of Neurology, The First Teaching Hospital, Jilin
University, China. (2)Shock Trauma and Anesthesiology Research Center, University
of MD School of Medicine, USA. (3)Shock Trauma and Anesthesiology Research
Center, University of MD School of Medicine, USA. Electronic address:
bhu@anes.umm.edu.

Cellular stress response after hypoxia-Ischemia (HI) may be substantially
different between immature and mature brains. To study this phenomenon, postnatal
day 7 (P7) and P26 rats were subjected to HI followed by different periods of
recovery. Nuclear accumulation of heat-shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1) and
expression of molecular chaperone proteins and mRNAs were analyzed by in situ
hybridization, Western blotting and confocal microscopy. Nuclear accumulation of 
HSF1 protein and induction of hsp70 mRNA occurred dramatically in P26 neurons,
but minimally in P7 neurons and moderately in microglial cells after HI.
Consistently, the level of HSF1 was significantly higher in P26 brain samples,
compared with that in P7 brain. Translation of hsp70 mRNA into proteins in P26
mature neurons was seen at 4h and peaked at 24h, when some neurons had already
died after HI. Induction of ER glucose-regulated protein-78 (grp78) and
mitochondrial hsp60 mRNAs and proteins was moderate and occurred also only in P26
mature brain after HI. These results suggest that the cellular stress response
after HI is development-dependent, being pronounced in mature but virtually
negligible in neonatal neurons. Therefore, the effectiveness of therapeutic
strategies targeting the stress pathway against HI may be significantly different
between immature and mature brains. The delayed induction of molecular chaperones
in mature brain may be somewhat late for protecting HI neurons from acute HI
injury.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4641006 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26070787  [PubMed - in process]


90. Int J Cardiol. 2015 Sep 15;195:285-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2015.05.155. Epub
2015 May 30.

Novel potential therapeutic strategies of senile cardiac amyloidosis: Heat shock 
factor 1 blocks senile cardiac amyloidosis via HSPA1A in mouse model.

Qian J(1), Huo J(2), Qian J(3), Gao T(1), Gou Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hebei Medical University, Key Laboratory of Kidney
Diseases of Hebei Province, Shijiazhuang, China. (2)Department of Osteopathy,
Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China. (3)Department of
Pathology, Hebei Medical University, Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases of Hebei
Province, Shijiazhuang, China. Electronic address: qianjz0125@163.com.

PMID: 26056959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 8;10(6):e0129329. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129329.
eCollection 2015.

Characterizing HSF1 Binding and Post-Translational Modifications of hsp70
Promoter in Cultured Cortical Neurons: Implications in the Heat-Shock Response.

Gómez AV(1), Córdova G(1), Munita R(1), Parada GE(1), Barrios ÁP(1), Cancino
GI(1), Álvarez AR(1), Andrés ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Libertador Bernardo O'Higgins 340, 
Santiago, Chile.

Causes of lower induction of Hsp70 in neurons during heat shock are still a
matter of debate. To further inquire into the mechanisms regulating Hsp70
expression in neurons, we studied the activity of Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1) and 
histone posttranslational modifications (PTMs) at the hsp70 promoter in rat
cortical neurons. Heat shock induced a transient and efficient translocation of
HSF1 to neuronal nuclei. However, no binding of HSF1 at the hsp70 promoter was
detected while it bound to the hsp25 promoter in cortical neurons during heat
shock. Histone PTMs analysis showed that the hsp70 promoter harbors lower levels 
of histone H3 and H4 acetylation in cortical neurons compared to PC12 cells under
basal conditions. Transcriptomic profiling data analysis showed a predominant
usage of cryptic transcriptional start sites at hsp70 gene in the rat cerebral
cortex, compared with the whole brain. These data support a weaker activation of 
hsp70 canonical promoter. Heat shock increased H3Ac at the hsp70 promoter in PC12
cells, which correlated with increased Hsp70 expression while no modifications
occurred at the hsp70 promoter in cortical neurons. Increased histone H3
acetylation by Trichostatin A led to hsp70 mRNA and protein induction in cortical
neurons. In conclusion, we found that two independent mechanisms maintain a lower
induction of Hsp70 in cortical neurons. First, HSF1 fails to bind specifically to
the hsp70 promoter in cortical neurons during heat shock and, second, the hsp70
promoter is less accessible in neurons compared to non-neuronal cells due to
histone deacetylases repression.

PMCID: PMC4459960
PMID: 26053851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 1;10(6):e0128552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128552.
eCollection 2015.

Coniferyl aldehyde attenuates radiation enteropathy by inhibiting cell death and 
promoting endothelial cell function.

Jeong YJ(1), Jung MG(2), Son Y(2), Jang JH(2), Lee YJ(2), Kim SH(3), Ko YG(4),
Lee YS(5), Lee HJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul, Korea; Department of Life Sciences, Korea University, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea. (3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Korea. (4)Department of Life Sciences, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea. (5)College of Pharmacy & Division of Life &
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.

Radiation enteropathy is a common complication in cancer patients. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether radiation-induced intestinal injury could
be alleviated by coniferyl aldehyde (CA), an HSF1-inducing agent that increases
cellular HSP70 expression. We systemically administered CA to mice with radiation
enteropathy following abdominal irradiation (IR) to demonstrate the protective
effects of CA against radiation-induced gastrointestinal injury. CA clearly
alleviated acute radiation-induced intestinal damage, as reflected by the
histopathological data and it also attenuated sub-acute enteritis. CA prevented
intestinal crypt cell death and protected the microvasculature in the lamina
propria during the acute and sub-acute phases of damage. CA induced HSF1 and
HSP70 expression in both intestinal epithelial cells and endothelial cells in
vitro. Additionally, CA protected against not only the apoptotic cell death of
both endothelial and epithelial cells but also the loss of endothelial cell
function following IR, indicating that CA has beneficial effects on the
intestine. Our results provide novel insight into the effects of CA and suggest
its role as a therapeutic candidate for radiation-induced enteropathy due to its 
ability to promote rapid re-proliferation of the intestinal epithelium by the
synergic effects of the inhibition of cell death and the promotion of endothelial
cell function.

PMCID: PMC4452689
PMID: 26029925  [PubMed - in process]


93. Anticancer Res. 2015 Jun;35(6):3217-21.

Inflammation-Related Tumor Progression in Murine Fibrosarcoma Exhibited
Over-expression of Sex-determining Region Y-box 2 (Sox2) Compared to Parental
Regressor Cells.

Kuramitsu Y(1), Tanaka I(2), Wang Y(2), Okada F(3), Tokuda K(2), Kitagawa T(2),
Akada J(2), Nakamura K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan climates@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.
(2)Departments of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan. (3)Division of Pathological
Biochemistry, Tottori University School of Medicine, Yonago, Japan.
(4)Departments of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan Centre of Clinical
Laboratories in Tokuyama Medical Association Hospital, Shunan, Yamaguchi, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Tumor progression is one of the most serious issues to overcome
cancer disease. As a model of inflammation-induced tumor progression, we used the
regressive murine fibrosarcoma cell clone QR-32 and the progressive malignant
clone QRsP-11, that was derived from QR-32. Heat shock protein beta-1 (Hspb1) is 
a molecular chaperone. Hspb1 plays roles in not only cell protection but also
chemo-resistance, tumorigenicity and protection from apoptosis. In a recent
study, we showed that Hspb1 was up-regulated in QRsP-11 compared to QR-32.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared the expression levels of Hspb1, Hsf1 and Sox2 
in QR-32 and QRsP-11 cells by means of western blotting.
RESULTS: Hsf1, a transcription factor for Hspb1 was not increased in QRsP-11. Sex
determining region Y-box 2 (Sox2) is a transcription factor, reported to interact
with Hspb1. Sox2 was up-regulated in QRsP-11 compared to QR-32.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that Sox2-Hspb1 signaling is a possible pathway
responsible to tumor progression of QRsP-11.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26026081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Autophagy. 2015;11(7):975-94. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1049800.

RIPK1 regulates survival of human melanoma cells upon endoplasmic reticulum
stress through autophagy.

Luan Q(1), Jin L, Jiang CC, Tay KH, Lai F, Liu XY, Liu YL, Guo ST, Li CY, Yan XG,
Tseng HY, Zhang XD.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy; University of Newcastle ; NSW , 
Australia.

Although RIPK1 (receptor [TNFRSF]-interacting protein kinase 1) is emerging as a 
critical determinant of cell fate in response to cellular stress resulting from
activation of death receptors and DNA damage, its potential role in cell response
to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress remains undefined. Here we report that RIPK1
functions as an important prosurvival mechanism in melanoma cells undergoing
pharmacological ER stress induced by tunicamycin (TM) or thapsigargin (TG)
through activation of autophagy. While treatment with TM or TG upregulated RIPK1 
and triggered autophagy in melanoma cells, knockdown of RIPK1 inhibited autophagy
and rendered the cells sensitive to killing by TM or TG, recapitulating the
effect of inhibition of autophagy. Consistently, overexpression of RIPK1 enhanced
induction of autophagy and conferred resistance of melanoma cells to TM- or
TG-induced cell death. Activation of MAPK8/JNK1 or MAPK9/JNK2, which
phosphorylated BCL2L11/BIM leading to its dissociation from BECN1/Beclin 1, was
involved in TM- or TG-induced, RIPK1-mediated activation of autophagy; whereas,
activation of the transcription factor HSF1 (heat shock factor protein 1)
downstream of the ERN1/IRE1-XBP1 axis of the unfolded protein response was
responsible for the increase in RIPK1 in melanoma cells undergoing
pharmacological ER stress. Collectively, these results identify upregulation of
RIPK1 as an important resistance mechanism of melanoma cells to TM- or TG-induced
ER stress by protecting against cell death through activation of autophagy, and
suggest that targeting the autophagy-activating mechanism of RIPK1 may be a
useful strategy to enhance sensitivity of melanoma cells to therapeutic agents
that induce ER stress.

PMCID: PMC4590596
PMID: 26018731  [PubMed - in process]


95. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Aug;13(8):1163-73. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0135. Epub 
2015 May 26.

When Cancer Fights Back: Multiple Myeloma, Proteasome Inhibition, and the
Heat-Shock Response.

Shah SP(1), Lonial S(1), Boise LH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship, Cancer Institute of
Emory University and the Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
(2)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship, Cancer Institute of
Emory University and the Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.
Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia. lboise@emory.edu.

Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell malignancy with an estimated 26,850 new cases
and 11,240 deaths in 2015 in the United States. Two main classes of agents are
the mainstays of therapy-proteasome inhibitors (PI) and immunomodulatory drugs
(IMiD). Other new targets are emerging rapidly, including monoclonal antibodies
and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. These therapeutic options have greatly
improved overall survival, but currently only 15% to 20% of patients experience
long-term progression-free survival or are cured. Therefore, improvement in
treatment options is needed. One potential means of improving clinical options is
to target resistance mechanisms for current agents. For example, eliminating the 
cytoprotective heat-shock response that protects myeloma cells from proteasome
inhibition may enhance PI-based therapies. The transcription factor heat-shock
factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of the heat-shock response. HSF1 is vital
in the proteotoxic stress response, and its activation is controlled by
posttranslational modifications (PTM). This review details the mechanisms of HSF1
regulation and discusses leveraging that regulation to enhance PI activity.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26013169  [PubMed - in process]


96. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Nov;39(11):1217-24. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10493. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

Glucose regulates heat shock factor 1 transcription activity via mTOR pathway in 
HCC cell lines.

Ma W(1), Zhang Y(2), Mu H(3), Qing X(2), Li S(2), Cui X(2), Lou Q(2), Ma Y(2), Pu
H(4), Hu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Huai-He Hospital, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan,
China. (2)State Key Lab of Molecular Immunology and Engineering Antibody
Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Henan University School of
Medicine, Kaifeng, Henan, China. (3)Institute of Eye Disease, Kaifeng Central
Hospital, Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan, China. (4)Department of Nephrology,
The First-Affiliated Hospital of Henan University, Kaifeng, Henan, China.

HSF1-mediated heat shock response is activated in most tumors and plays important
roles in regulating tumor homeostasis. However, the signals underlying HSF1
activation is still not completely understood. In this paper, we find that
glucose, the dominant tumor energy supplement, participates in regulating HSF1's 
activation in HCC cell lines. The immunoblotting results indicate that the
phosphorylation of HSF1/S326, a hallmark of HSF1 activation, varies between the
HCC cell lines (e.g., SMMC7721, HapG2, plc/prf5, and Chang-liver). Glucose, but
not 2D-glucose, can induce the phosphorylation of HSF1 at S326 and upregulate the
expression of HSF1's downstream alpha B-crystallin and Hsp70 as well as the
none-heat shock proteins CSK2 and RBM23 in two tested hepatocellular carcinoma
cell lines (prl/prf5 and SMMC7721). Rapamycin, an inhibitor of mTOR, can suppress
the glucose-induced phosphorylation of HSF1/S326 and the expression of alpha
B-crystallin. Knockdown of HSF1 with shRNA enhances the
glucose-depletion-mediated inhibition of plc/prf5 cell proliferation. Our data
reveal that HSF1 can be activated by glucose-mTOR pathway, providing an
alternative pathway for targeting HSF1 in tumor therapy.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26010766  [PubMed - in process]


97. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 31;463(3):303-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.056. Epub 2015 May 21.

Heat shock-induced interactions among nuclear HSFs detected by fluorescence
cross-correlation spectroscopy.

Pack CG(1), Ahn SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
changipack@amc.seoul.kr. (2)Dept. of Pathology, College of Dentistry, Chosun
University, Seosuk-dong, Dong-gu, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea.

The cellular response to stress is primarily controlled in cells via
transcriptional activation by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 is well-known to
form homotrimers for activation upon heat shock and subsequently bind to target
DNAs, such as heat-shock elements, by forming stress granules. A previous study
demonstrated that nuclear HSF1 and HSF2 molecules in live cells interacted with
target DNAs on the stress granules. However, the process underlying the binding
interactions of HSF family in cells upon heat shock remains unclear. This study
demonstrate for the first time that the interaction kinetics among nuclear HSF1, 
HSF2, and HSF4 upon heat shock can be detected directly in live cells using dual 
color fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (FCCS). FCCS analyses indicated
that the binding between HSFs was dramatically changed by heat shock.
Interestingly, the recovery kinetics of interaction between HSF1 molecules after 
heat shock could be represented by changes in the relative interaction amplitude 
and mobility.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26003728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Int J Hyperthermia. 2015 Sep;31(6):635-42. doi: 10.3109/02656736.2015.1041430.
Epub 2015 May 22.

Photothermal stress triggered by near-infrared-irradiated carbon nanotubes
up-regulates osteogenesis and mineral deposition in tooth-extracted sockets.

Kajiya H(1,)(2), Katsumata Y(1), Sasaki M(2), Tsutsumi T(2), Kawaguchi M(1,)(3), 
Fukushima T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Fukuoka Dental College , Fukuoka . (2)b
Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology , Fukuoka Dental
College , Fukuoka , and. (3)c Department of Dental Engineering , Fukuoka Dental
College , Japan.

PURPOSE: The bone regenerative healing process is often prolonged, with a high
risk of infection particularly in elderly and diseased patients. A reduction in
healing process time usually requires mechanical stress devices, chemical cues,
or laser/thermal therapies. Although these approaches have been used extensively 
for the reduction of bone healing time, the exact mechanisms involved in thermal 
stress-induced bone regeneration remain unclear.
METHODS: Photothermal stress (PTS) stimulation was carried out using a novel
photothermal device, composed of an alginate gel (AG) including carbon nanotubes 
(CNT-AGs) and their irradiator with near-infrared (NIR) light. We investigated
the effects of optimal hyperthermia on osteogenesis, its signalling pathway in
vitro and mineral deposition in tooth-extracted sockets in vivo.
RESULTS: The PTS (10<U+2009>min at 42<U+2009>°C, every day), triggered by NIR-induced CNT,
increased the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in mouse osteoblast MC3T3-E1
cells in a time-dependent manner compared with the non-thermal stress control.
PTS significantly induced the expression of osteogenic-related molecules such as 
ALP, RUNX2 and Osterix in a time-dependent manner with phosphorylated
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK). PTS increased the expression of heat
shock factor (HSF) 2, but not HSF1, resulting in activation of heat shock protein
27. PTS significantly up-regulated mineral deposition in tooth-extracted sockets 
in normal and ovariectomised osteoporotic model mice in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our novel CNT-based PTS up-regulated osteogenesis via activation of 
heat shock-related molecules, resulting in promotion of mineral deposition in
enhanced tooth-extracted sockets.

PMID: 26000973  [PubMed - in process]


99. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2015 Jun;29(2):341-55. doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2015.02.007.

Human granulocytic anaplasmosis.

Bakken JS(1), Dumler JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, University of Minnesota School of Medicine,
Duluth, MN, USA; St. Luke's Infectious Disease Associates, 1001 East Superior
Street, Suite L201, Duluth, MN 55802, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University
of Maryland School of Medicine, 685 West Baltimore Street, HSF1 322D, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA; Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address:
sdumler@som.umaryland.edu.

Human granulocytic anaplasmosis, a deer tick-transmitted rickettsial infection
caused by Anaplasma phagocytophilum, is a common cause of undifferentiated fever 
in the northeast and upper Midwest United States. Patients are often initially
diagnosed with a mild viral infection, and illness readily resolves in most
cases. However, as many as 3% develop life-threatening complications and nearly
1% die from the infection. Although coinfections with Borrelia burgdorferi and
Babesia microti occur, there is little evidence to suggest synergism of disease
or a role for A phagocytophilum in chronic illness. No vaccine is available.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4441757 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25999228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2015 May 21;10(5):e0127854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127854.
eCollection 2015.

Hypothermia and rewarming induce gene expression and multiplication of cells in
healthy rat prostate tissue.

Kaija H(1), Pakanen L(1), Kortelainen ML(2), Porvari K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu,
Oulu, Finland; Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (2)Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0131261.
    PLoS One. 2015;10(8):e0137228.

Prostate cancer has been extensively studied, but cellular stress responses in
healthy prostate tissue are rarely investigated. Hypothermia is known to cause
alterations in mRNA and protein expressions and stability. The aim of this study 
was to use normal rat prostate as a model in order to find out consequences of
cold exposure and rewarming on the expressions of genes which are either members 
or functionally/structurally related to erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene B 
(ErbB) signaling pathway. Relative mRNA expressions of amphiregulin (AMR), cyclin
D1 (CyD1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (p21), transmembrane form of the 
prostatic acid phosphatase (PAcP), thrombomodulin (TM) and heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in rat ventral prostate were quantified in mild (2 
or 4.5 h at room temperature) and severe (2 or 4.5 h at +10°C) hypothermia and in
rewarming after cold exposure (2 h at +10°C followed by 2 h at room temperature
or 3 h at +28°C). AMR protein level, apoptotic Bcl-2 associated X protein to
B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (Bax/Bcl-2) mRNA ratio and proliferative index Ki-67 were
determined. 4.5-h mild hypothermia, 2-h severe hypothermia and rewarming
increased expression of all these genes. Elevated proliferation index Ki-67 could
be seen in 2-h severe hypothermia, and the proliferation index had its highest
value in longer rewarming with totally recovered normal body temperature.
Pro-apoptotic tendency could be seen in 2-h mild hypothermia while anti-apoptosis
was predominant in 4.5-h mild hypothermia and in shorter rewarming with only
partly recovered body temperature. Hypothermia and following rewarming promote
the proliferation of cells in healthy rat prostate tissue possibly via ErbB
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4440734
PMID: 25996932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell Reprogram. 2015 Jun;17(3):199-210. Epub 2015 May 18.

Effective Oocyte Vitrification and Survival Techniques for Bovine Somatic Cell
Nuclear Transfer.

Park MJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Lee SE(2,)(3,)(4), Kim EY(1,)(2,)(3), Lee JB(5), Jeong
CJ(5), Park SP(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Mirae Cell Bio Inc., Seoul 143-854, Korea. (2)2 Jeju National University
Stem Cell Research Center , Seoul 143-854, Korea. (3)3 Faculty of Biotechnology, 
College of Applied Life Sciences, Jeju National University , Jeju 690-756, Korea.
(4)5 These authors contributed equally to this work. (5)4 Shin Woman's Hospital ,
Uijeongbu 480-848, Korea.

Bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) using vitrified-thawed (VT) oocytes
has been studied; however, the cloning efficiency of these oocytes is not
comparable with that of nonvitrified (non-V) fresh oocytes. This study sought to 
optimize the survival and cryopreservation of VT oocytes for SCNT. Co-culture
with feeder cells that had been preincubated for 15 h significantly improved the 
survival of VT oocytes and their in vitro developmental potential following SCNT 
in comparison to co-culture with feeder cells that had been preincubated for 2,
5, or 24 h (p<0.05). Spindle assessment via the Oosight Microscopy Imaging System
and microtubule staining revealed that vitrified metaphase II oocytes (VT group) 
were not suitable for SCNT. However, enucleating and/or activating oocytes prior 
to freezing enhanced their developmental potential and suitability for SCNT. The 
cloning efficiency of the enucleated-activated-vitrified-thawed (EAVT) group
(21.6%) was better than that of the other vitrification groups
[enucleated-vitrified-thawed (EVT) group, 13.7%; VT group, 15.0%; p<0.05] and was
comparable with that of the non-V group (25.9%). The reactive oxygen species
level was significantly lower in the EAVT group than in the other vitrification
groups (p<0.05). mRNA levels of maternal genes (ZAR1, BMP15, and NLRP5) and a
stress gene (HSF1) were lower in the vitrification groups than in the non-V group
(p<0.05), whereas the level of phospho-p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase
did not differ among the groups. Among the vitrification groups, blastocysts in
the EAVT group had the best developmental potential, as judged by their high mRNA
expression of developmental potential-related genes (POU5f1, Interferon-tau, and 
SLC2A5) and their low expression of proapoptotic (CASP3) and stress (Hsp70)
genes. This study demonstrates that SCNT using bovine frozen-thawed oocytes can
be successfully achieved using optimized vitrification and co-culture techniques.

PMCID: PMC4487599 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25984830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015 Sep;129(6):477-87. doi: 10.1042/CS20150127. Epub 2015 May
18.

Homocysteine facilitates LOX-1 activation and endothelial death through the PKCß 
and SIRT1/HSF1 mechanism: relevance to human hyperhomocysteinaemia.

Hung CH(1), Chan SH(2), Chu PM(3), Tsai KL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Physical Therapy, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
kunlingtsai@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

HHcy (hyperhomocysteinaemia) is one of the major risk factors for cardiovascular 
diseases. A high concentration of Hcy (homocysteine) induces endothelial
dysfunction by activating endothelial oxidative stress. LOX-1 (lectin-like
oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor 1) plays a vital role in regulating the
progression of atherosclerotic lesions. LOX-1 activation causes endothelial
apoptosis and inflammation. The mechanism is still unclear as to whether Hcy
affects human endothelial LOX-1 expression. LOX-1 expression level was confirmed 
by Western blotting assay in Hcy-treated endothelial cells. L-Methionine was used
for HHcy induction in animals. Our results suggested that Hcy increased PKCß
(protein kinase Cß) activation to enhance the LOX-1 expression level. The
up-regulation of PKCß phosphorylation subsequently causes ROS (reactive oxygen
species) formation and SIRT1 (sirtuin 1) degradation through a
proteasome-dependent mechanism, thereby mitigating the activity of SIRT1 by
deacetylating HSF1 (heat-shock transcription factor 1). We also found that NOX2
is a key NAPDH oxidase isoform responsible for the Hcy-caused ROS formation. The 
overexpression of SIRT1 and HSF1 reduced the Hcy-induced LOX-1 activation.
Silencing PKCß function also reduced LOX-1 activation and endothelial apoptosis
caused by Hcy. Our hypothesis was supported by analysing the data from
methionine-induced HHcy-affected animals. Our data indicate a new direction for
LOX-1 regulation by the modulation of the PKCß/NAPDH oxidase/SIRT1/HSF1
mechanism. Our findings might provide a novel route for developing new
therapeutic treatments for HHcy.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 25982096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Therm Biol. 2015 Jul;51:55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jtherbio.2015.03.006. Epub 2015
Mar 17.

Expression profiling of major heat shock protein genes during different seasons
in cattle (Bos indicus) and buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) under tropical climatic
condition.

Kumar A(1), Ashraf S(2), Goud TS(2), Grewal A(3), Singh SV(2), Yadav BR(4),
Upadhyay RC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Cattle Physiology Division, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute,
Karnal 132001, Haryana, India. Electronic address: anilbiotech84@gmail.com.
(2)Dairy Cattle Physiology Division, ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute,
Karnal 132001, Haryana, India. (3)Department of Biotechnology Engineering,
University Institute of Engineering and Technology (UIET), Kurukshetra
University, Kurukshetra, Haryana, India. (4)Dairy Cattle Breeding Division,
ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 132001, Haryana, India.

Heat shock proteins consist of highly conserved stress proteins, expressed in
response to stress and play crucial roles in environmental stress tolerance and
adaptation. The present study was conducted to identify major types of genes
under the HSP70 family and other HSPs and to evaluate their expression pattern in
Sahiwal and Tharparkar breeds of zebu cattle (Bos indicus) and Murrah buffalo
(Bubalus bubalis) with respect to different seasons. Quantitative real time
polymerase chain reaction was performed to analyze the transcript variants of
three HSP70 family genes (HSPA1A, HSPA1B, and HSPA8) and HSP10, HSP60, HSP90 and 
HSF1 in each breed. The major finding of this study was the higher abundance of
all the studied HSP genes during summer and winter compared to spring season, but
the magnitude of increase was higher during summer as compared to winter. HSPA1A 
and HSPA1B genes showed maximal induction (P<0.001) during summer and winter
while HSP60 and HSP10 were found to be the second most abundantly expressed HSPs.
The relative mRNA abundance of HSF1 significantly increased (P<0.001) in Murrah
buffalo compared to Tharparkar and Sahiwal cattle during summer and winter.
Expression pattern of heat shock protein genes indicated that amongst the breeds,
the expression was higher in Murrah buffalo compared to Sahiwal and Tharparkar
cattle, thereby indicating the more adaptive capacity of later during periods of 
stress. Hence, this study suggests that heat shock protein genes may be
conveniently used as biomarkers for assessing stress response in cattle and
buffalo and the expression is species and breed-specific. Furthermore, the
variation in expression is associated with heat tolerance and adaptation to
different climatic conditions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25965018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jul;35(14):2530-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00816-14. Epub 2015 May 
11.

Uncoupling Stress-Inducible Phosphorylation of Heat Shock Factor 1 from Its
Activation.

Budzynski MA(1), Puustinen MC(1), Joutsen J(1), Sistonen L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland Turku Center
for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland Turku Center
for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland
lea.sistonen@abo.fi.

In mammals the stress-inducible expression of genes encoding heat shock proteins 
is under the control of the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Activation 
of HSF1 is a multistep process, involving trimerization, acquisition of
DNA-binding and transcriptional activities, which coincide with several
posttranslational modifications. Stress-inducible phosphorylation of HSF1, or
hyperphosphorylation, which occurs mainly within the regulatory domain (RD), has 
been proposed as a requirement for HSF-driven transcription and is widely used
for assessing HSF1 activation. Nonetheless, the contribution of
hyperphosphorylation to the activity of HSF1 remains unknown. In this study, we
generated a phosphorylation-deficient HSF1 mutant (HSF1<U+0394>~PRD), where the 15 known
phosphorylation sites within the RD were disrupted. Our results show that the
phosphorylation status of the RD does not affect the subcellular localization and
DNA-binding activity of HSF1. Surprisingly, under stress conditions, HSF1<U+0394>~PRD is
a potent transactivator of both endogenous targets and a reporter gene, and
HSF1<U+0394>~PRD has a reduced activation threshold. Our results provide the first
direct evidence for uncoupling stress-inducible phosphorylation of HSF1 from its 
activation, and we propose that the phosphorylation signature alone is not an
appropriate marker for HSF1 activity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4475925
PMID: 25963659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;843:77-128. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2480-6_4.

Molecular biology of the stress response in the early embryo and its stem cells.

Puscheck EE(1), Awonuga AO, Yang Y, Jiang Z, Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ob/Gyn, REI Division, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Stress is normal during early embryogenesis and transient, elevated stress is
commonplace. Stress in the milieu of the peri-implantation embryo is a summation 
of maternal hormones, and other elements of the maternal milieu, that signal
preparedness for development and implantation. Examples discussed here are
leptin, adrenaline, cortisol, and progesterone. These hormones signal maternal
nutritional status and provide energy, but also signal stress that diverts
maternal and embryonic energy from an optimal embryonic developmental trajectory.
These hormones communicate endocrine maternal effects and local embryonic effects
although signaling mechanisms are not well understood. Other in vivo stresses
affect the embryo such as local infection and inflammation, hypoxia,
environmental toxins such as benzopyrene, dioxin, or metals, heat shock, and
hyperosmotic stress due to dehydration or diabetes. In vitro, stresses include
shear during handling, improper culture media and oxygen levels,
cryopreservation, and manipulations of the embryo to introduce sperm or
mitochondria. We define stress as any stimulus that slows stem cell accumulation 
or diminishes the ability of cells to produce normal and sufficient parenchymal
products upon differentiation. Thus stress deflects downwards the normal
trajectories of development, growth and differentiation. Typically stress is
inversely proportional to embryonic developmental and proliferative rates, but
can be proportional to induction of differentiation of stem cells in the
peri-implantation embryo. When modeling stress it is most interesting to produce 
a 'runting model' where stress exposures slow accumulation but do not create
excessive apoptosis or morbidity. Windows of stress sensitivity may occur when
major new embryonic developmental programs require large amounts of energy and
are exacerbated if nutritional flow decreases and removes energy from the normal 
developmental programs and stress responses. These windows correspond to zygotic 
genome activation, the large mRNA program initiated at compaction, ion pumping
required for cavitation, the differentiation of the first lineages, integration
with the uterine environment at implantation, rapid proliferation of stem cells, 
and production of certain lineages which require the highest energy and are most 
sensitive to mitochondrial inhibition. Stress response mechanisms insure that
stem cells for the early embryo and placenta survive at lower stress exposures,
and that the organism survives through compensatory and prioritized stem cell
differentiation, at higher stress exposures. These servomechanisms include a
small set of stress enzymes from the 500 protein kinases in the kinome; the part 
of the genome coding for protein kinases that hierarchically regulate the
activity of other proteins and enzymes. Important protein kinases that mediate
the stress response of embryos and their stem cells are SAPK, p38MAPK, AMPK,
PI3K, Akt, MEK1/2, MEKK4, PKA, IRE1 and PERK. These stress enzymes have cytosolic
function in cell survival at low stress exposures and nuclear function in
modifying transcription factor activity at higher stress exposures. Some of the
transcription factors (TFs) that are most important in the stress response are
JunC, JunB, MAPKAPs, ATF4, XBP1, Oct1, Oct4, HIFs, Nrf2/KEAP, NFKB, MT1, Nfat5,
HSF1/2 and potency-maintaining factors Id2, Cdx2, Eomes, Sox2, Nanog, Rex1, and
Oct4. Clearly the stress enzymes have a large number of cytosolic and nuclear
substrates and the TFs regulate large numbers of genes. The interaction of stress
enzymes and TFs in the early embryo and its stem cells are a continuing central
focus of research. In vitro regulation of TFs by stress enzymes leads to
reprogramming of the stem cell when stress diminishes stem cell accumulation.
Since more differentiated product is produced by fewer cells, the process
compensates for fewer cells. Coupled with stress-induced compensatory
differentiation of stem cells is a tendency to prioritize differentiation by
increasing the first essential lineage and decreasing later lineages. These
mechanisms include stress enzymes that regulate TFs and provide stress-specific, 
shared homeostatic cellular and organismal responses of prioritized
differentiation.

PMID: 25956296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2015 Apr 22;6:53. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2015.00053.
eCollection 2015.

Mutant p53 - Heat Shock Response Oncogenic Cooperation: A New Mechanism of Cancer
Cell Survival.

Alexandrova EM(1), Marchenko ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University , Stony Brook, NY , USA.

The main tumor suppressor function of p53 as a "guardian of the genome" is to
respond to cellular stress by transcriptional activation of apoptosis, growth
arrest, or senescence in damaged cells. Not surprisingly, mutations in the p53
gene are the most frequent genetic alteration in human cancers. Importantly,
mutant p53 (mutp53) proteins not only lose their wild-type tumor suppressor
activity but also can actively promote tumor development. Two main mechanisms
accounting for mutp53 proto-oncogenic activity are inhibition of the wild-type
p53 in a dominant-negative fashion and gain of additional oncogenic activities
known as gain-of-function (GOF). Here, we discuss a novel mechanism of mutp53
GOF, which relies on its oncogenic cooperation with the heat shock machinery.
This coordinated adaptive mechanism renders cancer cells more resistant to
proteotoxic stress and provides both, a strong survival advantage to cancer cells
and a promising means for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4406088
PMID: 25954247  [PubMed]


107. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Oct;290(5):1979-90. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1055-1. Epub
2015 May 6.

Cross talk between cytokine and hyperthermia-induced pathways: identification of 
different subsets of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes regulated by TNFa and heat shock.

Janus P(1,)(2), Stokowy T(1,)(3,)(4), Jaksik R(3), Szoltysek K(1), Handschuh
L(5,)(6), Podkowinski J(5), Widlak W(1), Kimmel M(3,)(7), Widlak P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, Gliwice, Poland. (2)Institute of
Automatic Control, Silesian University of Technology, Akademicka 16, Gliwice,
Poland. (3)Faculty of Automatic Control, Electronics and Computer Sciences,
Silesian University of Technology, Akademicka 16, Gliwice, Poland. (4)Department 
of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Postboks 7804, Bergen, Norway.
(5)Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego
12/14, Poznan, Poland. (6)Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Szamarzewskiego 84,
Poznan, Poland. (7)Department of Statistics, Rice University, 6100 Main Street,
Houston, TX, USA. (8)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute 
of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, Gliwice, Poland.
widlak@io.gliwice.pl.

Heat shock inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, yet the knowledge about its influence on the
regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes is limited. Using genomic approaches, i.e.,
expression microarrays and ChIP-Seq, we aimed to establish a global picture for
heat shock-mediated impact on the expression of genes regulated by TNFa cytokine.
We found that 193 genes changed expression in human U-2 osteosarcoma cells
stimulated with cytokine (including 77 genes with the <U+03BA>B motif in the proximal
promoters). A large overlap between sets of genes modulated by cytokine or by
heat shock was revealed (86 genes were similarly affected by both stimuli).
Binding sites for heat shock-induced HSF1 were detected in regulatory regions of 
1/3 of these genes. Furthermore, pre-treatment with heat shock affected the
expression of 2/3 of cytokine-modulated genes. In the largest subset of
co-affected genes, heat shock suppressed the cytokine-mediated activation
(antagonistic effect, 83 genes), which genes were associated with the canonical
functions of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. However, subsets of co-activated and co-repressed
genes were also revealed. Importantly, pre-treatment with heat shock resulted in 
the suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B binding in the promoters of the cytokine-upregulated
genes, either antagonized or co-activated by both stimuli. In conclusion, we
confirmed that heat shock inhibited activation of genes involved in the classical
cytokine-mediated functions of NF-<U+03BA>B. On the other hand, genes involved in
transcription regulation were over-represented in the subset of genes upregulated
by both stimuli. This suggests the replacement of NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated regulation by
heat shock-mediated regulation in the latter subset of genes, which may
contribute to the robust response of cells to both stress conditions.

PMCID: PMC4768219
PMID: 25944781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 26;290(26):16177-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.653899. Epub
2015 May 1.

Yeast Tolerance to Various Stresses Relies on the Trehalose-6P Synthase (Tps1)
Protein, Not on Trehalose.

Petitjean M(1), Teste MA(1), François JM(2), Parrou JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Université de Toulouse; INSA, UPS, INP, LISBP, 135 Avenue de
Rangueil, F-31077 Toulouse, France and INRA, UMR792 Ingénierie des Systèmes
Biologiques et des Procédés and CNRS, UMR5504, F-31400 Toulouse, France. (2)From 
the Université de Toulouse; INSA, UPS, INP, LISBP, 135 Avenue de Rangueil,
F-31077 Toulouse, France and INRA, UMR792 Ingénierie des Systèmes Biologiques et 
des Procédés and CNRS, UMR5504, F-31400 Toulouse, France
fran_jm@insa-toulouse.fr. (3)From the Université de Toulouse; INSA, UPS, INP,
LISBP, 135 Avenue de Rangueil, F-31077 Toulouse, France and INRA, UMR792
Ingénierie des Systèmes Biologiques et des Procédés and CNRS, UMR5504, F-31400
Toulouse, France jean-luc.parrou@insa-toulouse.fr.

Trehalose is a stable disaccharide commonly found in nature, from bacteria to
fungi and plants. For the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, claims that
trehalose is a stress protectant were based indirectly either on correlation
between accumulation of trehalose and high resistance to various stresses or on
stress hypersensitivity of mutants deleted for TPS1, which encodes the first
enzyme in trehalose biosynthetic pathway. Our goal was to investigate more
directly which one, between trehalose and/or the Tps1 protein, may serve yeast
cells to withstand exposure to stress. By employing an original strategy that
combined the use of mutant strains expressing catalytically inactive variants of 
Tps1, with MAL(+) yeast strains able to accumulate trehalose from an exogenous
supply, we bring for the first time unbiased proof that trehalose does not
protect yeast cells from dying and that the stress-protecting role of trehalose
in this eukaryotic model was largely overestimated. Conversely, we identified the
Tps1 protein as a key player for yeast survival in response to temperature,
oxidative, and desiccation stress. We also showed by robust RT-quantitative PCR
and genetic interaction analysis that the role of Tps1 in thermotolerance is not 
dependent upon Hsf1-dependent transcription activity. Finally, our results
revealed that the Tps1 protein is essential to maintain ATP levels during heat
shock. Altogether, these findings supported the idea that Tps1 is endowed with a 
regulatory function in energy homeostasis, which is essential to withstand
adverse conditions and maintain cellular integrity.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4481218 [Available on 2016-06-26]
PMID: 25934390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Autophagy. 2015 Apr 23:0. [Epub ahead of print]

PSMD10/Gankyrin Induces Autophagy to Promote Tumor Progression through
Cytoplasmic Interaction with ATG7 and Nuclear Transactivation of ATG7 Expression.

Luo T(1), Fu J, Xu A, Su B, Ren Y, Li N, Zhu J, Zhao X, Dai R, Cao J, Wang B, Qin
W, Jiang J, Li J, Wu M, Feng G, Chen Y, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)a International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction , Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute/Hospital , 225 Changhai Road, Shanghai 200438 ,
P.R.China.

Although autophagy is most critical for survival of cancer cells, especially in
fast-growing tumors, the mechanism remains to be fully characterized. Herein we
report that PSMD10/Gankyrin promotes autophagy in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
in response to starvation or stress through 2 complementary routes. PSMD10 was
physically associated with ATG7 in the cytoplasm, and this association was
enhanced by initial nutrient deprivation. Subsequently, PSMD10 translocated into 
the nucleus and bound cooperatively with nuclear HSF1 (heat shock transcription
factor 1) onto the ATG7 promoter, upregulated ATG7 expression in the advanced
stage of starvation. Intriguingly, the type of PSMD10-mediated autophagy was
independent of the proteasome system, although PSMD10 has been believed as an
indispensable chaperone for assembly of the 26S proteasome. A significant
correlation between PSMD10 expression and ATG7 levels was detected in human HCC
biopsies, and the combination of these 2 parameters is a powerful predictor of
poor prognosis. The median survival of sorafenib-treated HCC patients with high
expression of PSMD10 was much shorter than those with low expression of PSMD10.
Furthermore, PSMD10 augmented autophagic flux to resist sorafenib or conventional
chemotherapy, and inhibition of autophagy suppressed PSMD10-mediated
resistance.CONCLUSION: These results present a novel mechanism involving
modulation of ATG7 by PSMD10 in sustaining autophagy, promoting HCC cell survival
against starvation or chemotherapy. Targeting of PSMD10 might therefore be an
attractive strategy in HCC treatment by suppressing autophagy and inducing HCC
cell sensitivity to drugs.

PMID: 25905985  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


110. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Jul;88(1):38-47. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.097584. Epub 2015 Apr
21.

A sexual dimorphism influences bicyclol-induced hepatic heat shock factor 1
activation and hepatoprotection.

Chen X(1), Zhang J(1), Han C(1), Dai H(1), Kong X(1), Xu L(1), Xia Q(1), Zhang
M(2), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplantation and Hepatic Surgery, Renji Hospital (X.C.,
Jianjian Z., H.D., X.K., Q.X., M.Z., Jianjun Z.), and The Central Laboratory of
Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China 
(L.X.); and Department of Urology, Xuzhou Central Hospital, Xuzhou Medical
University School of Clinical Medicine, Xuzhou, China (C.H.). (2)Department of
Transplantation and Hepatic Surgery, Renji Hospital (X.C., Jianjian Z., H.D.,
X.K., Q.X., M.Z., Jianjun Z.), and The Central Laboratory of Renji Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (L.X.); and
Department of Urology, Xuzhou Central Hospital, Xuzhou Medical University School 
of Clinical Medicine, Xuzhou, China (C.H.) zhangming1973@yeah.net
zhangjianjun@medmail.com.cn.

Bicyclol
[4,4'-dimethoxy-5,6,5',6'-bis(methylenedioxy)-2-hydroxy-methyl-2'-methoxycarbonyl
biphenyl] is a synthetic hepatoprotectant widely used in clinical practice, but
resistance to this treatment is often observed. We found that the
hepatoprotective effect of bicyclol was greatly compromised in female and
castrated male mice. This study was to dissect the molecular basis behind the sex
difference, which might underlie the clinical uncertainty. We compared
bicyclol-induced hepatoprotection between male and female mice using acute liver 
damage models. Inducible knockout by the Cre/loxp system was used to decipher the
role of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Functional experiments, western
blot, and histopathological analysis were used to determine the key causative
factors which might antagonize bicyclol in female livers. HSF1 activation and
heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) expression, which were responsible for
bicyclol-induced hepatoprotection, were compromised in female and castrated male 
livers. Compromised HSF1 activation was a result of HSF1 phosphorylation at
serine 303, which was catalyzed by glycogen synthase kinase 3ß (GSK3ß).
Testosterone was necessary for bicyclol to inhibit hepatic GSK3ß activity.
Administration of testosterone or GSK3ß inhibitors restored bicyclol-induced
protection in females. Bicyclol induces sex-specific hepatoprotection based on a 
sex-specific HSF1/Hsp70 response, in which testosterone and GSK3ß play key roles.
Because a lot of patients suffering from liver diseases have very low
testosterone levels, our results give a possible explanation for the clinical
variation in bicyclol-induced hepatoprotection, as well as practicable solutions 
to improve the effect of bicyclol.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMID: 25901028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Apr 23;8:40. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0135-3.

Heat shock factor 1 is a potent therapeutic target for enhancing the efficacy of 
treatments for multiple myeloma with adverse prognosis.

Bustany S(1), Cahu J(2), Descamps G(3), Pellat-Deceunynck C(4), Sola B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, EA4652, Caen, France. sophie.bustany@ch-flers.fr.
(2)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, EA4652, Caen, France. julie.cahu@gmail.com. (3)CRCNA,
INSERM U892, CNRS UMR6299, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France.
geraldine.descamps@univ-nantes.fr. (4)CRCNA, INSERM U892, CNRS UMR6299,
Université de Nantes, Nantes, France. catherine.pellat-deceunynck@inserm.fr.
(5)Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, EA4652, Caen, France. brigitte.sola@unicaen.fr.

Deregulated expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) encoding genes is frequent
in multiple myeloma. HSPs, which are molecular chaperones involved in protein
homeostasis pathways, have emerged recently as promising therapeutic targets.
Using human myeloma cell lines and primary myeloma cells belonging to various
molecular groups, we tested the efficacy of HSP90, HSP70, and heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) inhibitors alone or associated with current antimyeloma drugs. We report
here that KNK-437 (an inhibitor of HSF1) and bortezomib have additive effects on 
apoptosis induction in cells belonging to groups with bad prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4435646
PMID: 25898974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 17;6:6964. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7964.

Erratum: mitochondrial SSBP1 protects cells from proteotoxic stresses by
potentiating stress-induced HSF1 transcriptional activity.

Tan K, Fujimoto M, Takii R, Takaki E, Hayashida N, Nakai A.

Erratum for
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:6580.

PMCID: PMC4411294
PMID: 25883027  [PubMed]


113. Pancreas. 2015 May;44(4):583-9. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000317.

Primary and liver metastasis-derived cell lines from KrasG12D; Trp53R172H; Pdx-1 
Cre animals undergo apoptosis in response to triptolide.

Sangwan V(1), Banerjee S, Jensen KM, Chen Z, Chugh R, Dudeja V, Vickers SM,
Saluja AK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.

OBJECTIVES: Pancreatic cancer has a 5-year survival rate of less than 5%, partly 
because of limited chemotherapeutic options, thereby highlighting the need for
novel therapies. Triptolide, a diterpene triepoxide that was derived from a
Chinese herb, has shown great promise in preclinical testing against pancreatic
cancer using immunocompromised animals.
RESULTS: In this study, we tested the ability of triptolide to induce cell death 
in cell lines derived from a primary tumor and adjacent liver metastases of
immunocompetent animals (Kras, Trp53, Pdx-1 Cre [KPC]). Both cell lines were more
aggressive in their ability to form tumors when compared with other pancreatic
cancer cell lines and showed constitutive activation of the nuclear factor
<U+03BA>-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells pathway. Triptolide induced apoptotic
cell death in both cell lines, as evidenced by decreased cell viability as well
as increased caspase 3/7 activity, annexin V positivity, and increased terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling positivity in tumors
from KPC animals treated with Minnelide. In addition, triptolide decreased levels
of HSP70, its transcription factor HSF1, as well as the antiapoptotic proteins
Bcl-xL, Bcl-2, and Mcl-1, which are known to be up-regulated in pancreatic
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The ability of triptolide to cause cell death in cell lines derived 
from immunocompetent animals further validates its potential as a novel agent
against pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4412369 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25875797  [PubMed - in process]


114. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015 May;64(5):599-608. doi:
10.1007/s00262-015-1665-9. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

NZ28-induced inhibition of HSF1, SP1 and NF-<U+03BA>B triggers the loss of the natural
killer cell-activating ligands MICA/B on human tumor cells.

Schilling D(1), Kühnel A, Tetzlaff F, Konrad S, Multhoff G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische
Universität München, TUM, Ismaningerstr. 22, 81675, Munich, Germany.

The activity of natural killer (NK) cells is regulated by activating and
inhibiting receptors, whereby the C-type lectin natural killer group 2D (NKG2D)
receptor serves as the major activating receptor on NK cells which recognizes
major histocompatibility class I chain-related proteins A and B (MICA/B). The
MICA/B expression has been described to be regulated by the transcription factor 
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). Inhibition of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is known 
to induce the heat shock response via activation of HSF1 which is associated with
tumor development, metastasis and therapy resistance and also with an increased
susceptibility to NK cell-mediated lysis. Therefore, we compared the effects of
Hsp90 inhibitor NVP-AUY922, HSF1 inhibitor NZ28 and HSF1 knockdown on the
sensitivity of lung (H1339) and breast (MDA-MB-231, T47D) cancer cells to NK
cell-mediated cytotoxicity and the expression of the NKG2D ligands MICA/B.
Although NVP-AUY922 activates HSF1, neither the MICA/B surface density on tumor
cells nor their susceptibility to NK cell-mediated lysis was affected. A single
knockdown of HSF1 by shRNA decreased the surface expression of MICB but not that 
of MICA, and thereby, the NK cell-mediated lysis was only partially blocked. In
contrast, NZ28 completely blocked the MICA/B membrane expression on tumor cells
and thereby strongly inhibited the NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity. This effect
might be explained by a simultaneous inhibition of the transcription factors
HSF1, Sp1 and NF-<U+03BA>B by NZ28. These findings suggest that new anticancer
therapeutics should be investigated with respect to their effects on the innate
immune system.

PMCID: PMC4412431
PMID: 25854583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Jun;36(6):696-706. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv045. Epub 2015 Apr
3.

Fisetin, a dietary flavonoid, induces apoptosis of cancer cells by inhibiting
HSF1 activity through blocking its binding to the hsp70 promoter.

Kim JA(1), Lee S(1), Kim DE(1), Kim M(2), Kwon BM(1), Han DC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology and Department of BioMolecular Science, University of Science and
Technology in Korea and. (2)Department of BioMolecular Science, University of
Science and Technology in Korea and Bio-Nano Research Center, Korea Research
Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, 111 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon
305-806, Korea. (3)Genomics Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute
of Bioscience and Biotechnology and Department of BioMolecular Science,
University of Science and Technology in Korea and dchan@kribb.re.kr
kwonbm@kribb.re.kr.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a transcription factor for heat shock proteins
(HSPs) expression that enhances the survival of cancer cells exposed to various
stresses. HSF1 knockout suppresses carcinogen-induced cancer induction in mice.
Therefore, HSF1 is a promising therapeutic and chemopreventive target. We
performed cell-based screening with a natural compound collection and identified 
fisetin, a dietary flavonoid, as a HSF1 inhibitor. Fisetin abolished heat
shock-induced luciferase activity with an IC50 of 14 µM in HCT-116 cancer cells. 
The treatment of HCT-116 with fisetin inhibited proliferation with a GI50 of 23
µM. When the cells were exposed to heat shock in the presence of fisetin, the
induction of HSF1 target proteins, such as HSP70, HSP27 and BAG3
(Bcl-2-associated athanogene domain 3), were inhibited. HSP70/BAG3 complexes
protect cancer cells from apoptosis by stabilizing anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
proteins. The downregulation of HSP70/BAG3 by fisetin significantly reduced the
amounts of Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 proteins, subsequently inducing apoptotic cell
death. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that fisetin inhibited HSF1
activity by blocking the binding of HSF1 to the hsp70 promoter. Intraperitoneal
treatment of nude mice with fisetin at 30mg/kg resulted in a 35.7% (P < 0.001)
inhibition of tumor growth.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25840992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. FEBS Lett. 2015 Apr 28;589(10):1150-5. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.03.019. Epub
2015 Mar 26.

HSF1 transcriptional activity is modulated by IER5 and PP2A/B55.

Ishikawa Y(1), Kawabata S(1), Sakurai H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. (2)Division of
Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Science, 5-11-80 
Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. Electronic address:
hsakurai@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master transcriptional regulator of chaperone
genes. HSF1 regulates the expression of the immediate-early response gene IER5,
which encodes a protein that has roles in the stress response and cell
proliferation. Here, we have shown that IER5 interacts with protein phosphatase
2A (PP2A) and its B55 regulatory subunits. Expression of IER5 and B55 in cells
leads to HSF1 dephosphorylation and activation of HSF1 target genes. The B55
subunits directly bind to HSF1. These results suggest that IER5 functions as a
positive feedback regulator of HSF1 and that this process involves PP2A/B55 and
HSF1 dephosphorylation.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25816751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Brain Res. 2015 Jun 3;1609:21-30. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.03.032. Epub 2015 
Mar 24.

Celastrol supports survival of retinal ganglion cells injured by optic nerve
crush.

Kyung H(1), Kwong JM(2), Bekerman V(2), Gu L(2), Yadegari D(2), Caprioli J(3),
Piri N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA; National Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Jules Stein Eye
Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Jules
Stein Eye Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 
Brain Research Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA. (4)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, USA; Brain Research Institute, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: piri@jsei.ucla.edu.

The present study evaluates the effect of celastrol on the survival of retinal
ganglion cells (RGCs) injured by optic nerve crush (ONC). Celastrol, a quinine
methide triterpene extracted from the perennial vine Tripterygium wilfordii
(Celastraceae), has been identified as a potential neuroprotective candidate in a
comprehensive drug screen against various neurodegenerative diseases. Two weeks
after ONC, the average density of remaining RGCs in retinas of animals treated
with daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of celastrol (1mg/kg) was
approximately 1332 cells/mm(2), or 40.8% of the Celastrol/Control group. In
retinas of the Vehicle/ONC group about 381 RGCs/mm(2) were counted, which is 9.6%
of the total number of RGCs in the DMSO/Control group. This corresponds to
approximately a 250% increase in RGC survival mediated by celastrol treatment
compared to Vehicle/ONC group. Furthermore, the average RGC number in retinas of 
ONC animals treated with a single intravitreal injection of 1mg/kg or 5mg/kg of
celastrol was increased by approximately 80% (760 RGCs/mm(2)) and 78% (753
RGCs/mm(2)), respectively, compared to Vehicle/ONC controls (422 cells/mm(2)).
Injection of 0.2mg/kg of celastrol had no significant effect on cell survival,
with the average number of RGCs being 514 cells/mm(2) in celastrol-treated
animals versus 422 cells/mm(2) in controls. The expression levels of Hsp70, Hsf1,
Hsf2, HO-1 and TNF-alpha in the retina were analyzed to evaluate the roles of
these proteins in the celastrol-mediated protection of injured RGCs. No
statistically significant change in HO-1, Hsf1 and Hsp70 levels was seen in
animals with ONC. An approximately 2 fold increase in Hsf2 level was observed in 
celastrol-treated animals with or without injury. Hsf2 level was also increased
1.8 fold in DMSO-treated animals with ONC injury compared to DMSO-treated animals
with no injury suggesting that Hsf2 induction has an injury-induced component.
Expression of TNF-alpha in retinas of celastrol-treated uninjured and ONC animals
was reduced by approximately 2 and 1.5 fold compared to vehicle treated animals, 
respectively. The observed results suggest that mechanisms underlying celastrol<U+05F3>s
RGC protective effect are associated with inhibition of TNF-alpha-mediated cell
death.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4417422 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 25813825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Anticancer Drugs. 2015 Jul;26(6):657-66. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000231.

ERK-dependent phosphorylation of HSF1 mediates chemotherapeutic resistance to
benzimidazole carbamates in colorectal cancer cells.

Wales CT(1), Taylor FR, Higa AT, McAllister HA, Jacobs AT.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy, 
University of Hawaii at Hilo, Hilo bCancer Biology Program, University of Hawaii 
Cancer Center, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.

Drugs containing the benzimidazole carbamate scaffold include anthelmintic and
antifungal agents, and they are now also recognized as having potential
applications in the treatment of colorectal and other cancers. These agents act
by binding to ß-tubulin, and in doing so they disrupt microtubules, arrest cell
division, and promote apoptotic cell death in malignant cells. We have evaluated 
several commercially available benzimidazole carbamates for cytotoxic activity in
colorectal cancer cells. In addition to cytotoxicity, we also observe activation 
of the transcription factor, heat shock factor-1 (HSF1). HSF1 is well known to
mediate a cytoprotective response that promotes tumor cell survival and drug
resistance. Here, we show that biochemical inhibition with the HSF1 inhibitor
KRIBB11 or siRNA-based silencing of HSF1 results in a significant enhancement of 
drug potency, causing an approximately two-fold decrease in IC50 values of
parbendazole and nocodazole. We also define a mechanism for drug-induced HSF1
activation, which results from a phosphorylation event at Ser326 that is
dependent on the activation of the extracellular regulated protein kinase-1/2
(ERK-1/2) mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Inhibition of the upstream
kinase MEK-1/2 with U0126 attenuates the phosphorylation of both ERK-1/2 and
HSF1, and significantly enhances drug cytotoxicity. From these data we propose a 
unique model whereby the ERK-1/2-dependent activation of HSF1 promotes
chemotherapeutic resistance to benzimidazole carbamates. Therefore, targeting the
ERK-1/2 signaling cascade is a potential strategy for HSF1 inhibition and a means
of enhancing the cytotoxicity of these agents.

PMID: 25811962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1292:53-65. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2522-3_4.

Analysis of the heat shock factor complex in mammalian HSP70 promoter.

Fujimoto M(1), Takii R, Hayashida N, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, 755-8505, Japan.

The heat shock response is characterized by the induction of heat shock proteins 
(HSPs) and is one of prominent mechanisms that regulate proteostasis capacity in 
the cell. In mammals, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) regulates the expression of HSPs
transcriptionally in both unstressed and stressed cells. Recent reports show that
the HSF1-RPA complex constitutively gains access to nucleosomal DNA in part by
recruiting a histone chaperone and a chromatin-remodeling component. Here, we
describe the strategies to substitute endogenous HSF1 with ectopically expressed 
HSF1 or its mutant and to detect the occupancy of HSF1 transcription complex
including RPA in vivo on two heat shock response elements located close together 
in the human or mouse HSP70 promoters by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay with
high sensitivity and specificity.

PMID: 25804747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 May 8;460(3):622-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.03.079. Epub 2015 Mar 21.

HSF1 and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 participate in the process of exercise preconditioning
attenuating pressure overload-induced pathological cardiac hypertrophy.

Xu T(1), Zhang B(2), Yang F(3), Cai C(3), Wang G(3), Han Q(4), Zou L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, No. 401 Hospital of PLA, Qingdao, China;
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical 
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Centre of Cardiovascular Surgery, Guangzhou
General Hospital of Guangzhou Military Region, Guangzhou, China; Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (4)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: handoctor@gmail.com. (5)Department of
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: zouliangjiansh@gmail.com.

Pathological cardiac hypertrophy, often accompanied by hypertension, aortic
stenosis and valvular defects, is typically associated with myocyte remodeling
and cardiac dysfunction. Exercise preconditioning (EP) has been proven to enhance
the tolerance of the myocardium to cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury. However, 
the effects of EP in pathological cardiac hypertrophy are rarely reported.
10-wk-old male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 80) were randomly divided into four
groups: sham, TAC, EP + sham and EP + TAC. Two EP groups were subjected to 4
weeks of treadmill training, and the EP + TAC and TAC groups were followed by TAC
operations. The sham and EP + sham groups underwent the same operation without
aortic constriction. Eight weeks after the surgery, we evaluated the effects of
EP by echocardiography, morphology, and histology and observed the expressions of
the associated proteins. Compared with the respective control groups,
hypertrophy-related indicators were significantly increased in the TAC and EP +
TAC groups (p < 0.05). However, between the TAC and EP + TAC groups, all of these
changes were effectively inhibited by EP treatment (p < 0.05). Furthermore, EP
treatment upregulated the expression of HSF1 and HSP70, increased the HSF1 levels
in the nuclear fraction, inhibited the expression of the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit,
decreased the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit levels in the nuclear fraction, and reduced the
IL2 levels in the myocardia of rats. EP could effectively reduce the cardiac
hypertrophic responses induced by TAC and may play a protective role by
upregulating the expressions of HSF1 and HSP70, activating HSF1 and then
inhibiting the expression of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and nuclear translocation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25804640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 19;10(3):e0117519. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117519.
eCollection 2015.

Modelling and analysis of the feeding regimen induced entrainment of hepatocyte
circadian oscillators using petri nets.

Tareen SH(1), Ahmad J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Sciences, Research Center for Modeling and
Simulation (RCMS), National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST),
Islamabad, Pakistan.

Circadian rhythms are certain periodic behaviours exhibited by living organism at
different levels, including cellular and system-wide scales. Recent studies have 
found that the circadian rhythms of several peripheral organs in mammals, such as
the liver, are able to entrain their clocks to received signals independent of
other system level clocks, in particular when responding to signals generated
during feeding. These studies have found SIRT1, PARP1, and HSF1 proteins to be
the major influencers of the core CLOCKBMAL1:PER-CRY circadian clock. These
entities, along with abstracted feeding induced signals were modelled
collectively in this study using Petri Nets. The properties of the model show
that the circadian system itself is strongly robust, and is able to continually
evolve. The modelled feeding regimens suggest that the usual 3 meals/day and 2
meals/day feeding regimens are beneficial with any more or less meals/day
negatively affecting the system.

PMCID: PMC4366204
PMID: 25789928  [PubMed - in process]


122. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 12;6:6580. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7580.

Mitochondrial SSBP1 protects cells from proteotoxic stresses by potentiating
stress-induced HSF1 transcriptional activity.

Tan K(1), Fujimoto M(1), Takii R(1), Takaki E(1), Hayashida N(1), Nakai A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:6964.

Heat-shock response is an adaptive response to proteotoxic stresses including
heat shock, and is regulated by heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) in mammals.
Proteotoxic stresses challenge all subcellular compartments including the
mitochondria. Therefore, there must be close connections between mitochondrial
signals and the activity of HSF1. Here, we show that heat shock triggers nuclear 
translocation of mitochondrial SSBP1, which is involved in replication of
mitochondrial DNA, in a manner dependent on the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore ANT-VDAC1 complex and direct interaction with HSF1. HSF1 recruits
SSBP1 to the promoters of genes encoding cytoplasmic/nuclear and mitochondrial
chaperones. HSF1-SSBP1 complex then enhances their induction by facilitating the 
recruitment of a chromatin-remodelling factor BRG1, and supports cell survival
and the maintenance of mitochondrial membrane potential against proteotoxic
stresses. These results suggest that the nuclear translocation of mitochondrial
SSBP1 is required for the regulation of cytoplasmic/nuclear and mitochondrial
proteostasis against proteotoxic stresses.

PMCID: PMC4558571
PMID: 25762445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Mar 15;91(4):807-16. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.11.031.

Coniferyl aldehyde reduces radiation damage through increased protein stability
of heat shock transcriptional factor 1 by phosphorylation.

Kim SY(1), Lee HJ(2), Nam JW(1), Seo EK(1), Lee YS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Women's University, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and
Medical Sciences, Seoul, Korea. (3)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Ewha Women's University, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: yslee0425@ewha.ac.kr.

PURPOSE: We previously screened natural compounds and found that coniferyl
aldehyde (CA) was identified as an inducer of HSF1. In this study, we further
examined the protective effects of CA against ionizing radiation (IR) in normal
cell system.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Western blotting and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction tests were performed to evaluate expression of HSF1, HSP27, and
HSP70 in response to CA. Cell death and cleavage of PARP and caspase-3 were
analyzed to determine the protective effects of CA in the presence of IR or
taxol. The protective effects of CA were also evaluated using animal models.
RESULTS: CA increased stability of the HSF1 protein by phosphorylation at Ser326,
which was accompanied by increased expression of HSP27 and HSP70. HSF1
phosphorylation at Ser326 by CA was mediated by EKR1/2 activation. Cotreatment of
CA with IR or taxol in normal cells induced protective effects with
phosphorylation- dependent patterns at Ser326 of HSF1. The decrease in bone
marrow (BM) cellularity and increase of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
dUTP nick end labeling-positive BM cells by IR were also significantly inhibited 
by CA in mice (30.6% and 56.0%, respectively). A549 lung orthotopic lung tumor
model indicated that CA did not affect the IR-mediated reduction of lung tumor
nodules, whereas CA protected normal lung tissues from the therapeutic
irradiation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that CA may be useful for inducing HSF1 to
protect against normal cell damage after IR or chemotherapeutic agents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25752395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 5;34(45):5617-25. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.32. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

HSPB1 as a novel regulator of ferroptotic cancer cell death.

Sun X(1,)(2), Ou Z(1,)(2), Xie M(3), Kang R(4), Fan Y(1,)(2), Niu X(1,)(2), Wang 
H(5), Cao L(3), Tang D(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, The Third
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes,
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. 
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (5)Department of
Emergency Medicine, North Shore University Hospital, The Feinstein Institute for 
Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA.

Ferroptosis is an iron-dependent form of non-apoptotic cell death, but its
molecular mechanism remains largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that heat shock
protein beta-1 (HSPB1) is a negative regulator of ferroptotic cancer cell death. 
Erastin, a specific ferroptosis-inducing compound, stimulates heat shock factor 1
(HSF1)-dependent HSPB1 expression in cancer cells. Knockdown of HSF1 and HSPB1
enhances erastin-induced ferroptosis, whereas heat shock pretreatment and
overexpression of HSPB1 inhibits erastin-induced ferroptosis. Protein kinase
C-mediated HSPB1 phosphorylation confers protection against ferroptosis by
reducing iron-mediated production of lipid reactive oxygen species. Moreover,
inhibition of the HSF1-HSPB1 pathway and HSPB1 phosphorylation increases the
anticancer activity of erastin in human xenograft mouse tumor models. Our
findings reveal an essential role for HSPB1 in iron metabolism with important
effects on ferroptosis-mediated cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4640181 [Available on 2016-05-05]
PMID: 25728673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 15;75(6):907-12. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2905. Epub
2015 Feb 27.

Heat shock factor 1 in protein homeostasis and oncogenic signal integration.

Home T(1), Jensen RA(1), Rao R(2).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, Kansas. (2)The University
of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, Kansas. rraomanepalli@kumc.edu.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a stress-inducible transcription factor and has
been described as a multi-faceted modulator of tumorigenesis. Heat shock,
accumulation of misfolded proteins, or malignant transformation promotes the
activation and nuclear translocation of HSF1, where it binds to the promoters of 
heat shock proteins and an array of nonheat shock-regulated proteins to
upregulate their transcription. These stress-responsive and tumor-promoting genes
in turn alter the ability of tumor cells to respond to a variety of stresses and 
enable them to thrive in less than favorable growth conditions. Although a direct
role for HSF1 in promoting mRNA transcription of tumor-promoting genes has been
suggested, it appears that this property is context- and cell-type dependent.
Furthermore, recent studies have demonstrated a direct involvement of mTOR
signaling in regulating HSF1-mediated transcription, thus establishing a direct
link between protein translation and HSF1 activity. Interestingly, there is a
growing understanding of the signaling pathways that are modulated by HSF1 in a
variety of tumor types and the co-option of these survival pathways by HSF1 to
promote tumorigenesis. This review will focus on the role of HSF1 in protein
homeostasis and HSF1-mediated oncogenic signaling pathways that together promote 
tumorigenesis.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25724679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Lett. 2015 May 1;360(2):294-301. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.02.033. Epub
2015 Feb 23.

Sensitizing tumor cells to radiation by targeting the heat shock response.

Schilling D(1), Kühnel A(2), Konrad S(2), Tetzlaff F(2), Bayer C(3), Yaglom J(4),
Multhoff G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany; Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Institute of Biological and Medical Imaging, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) partner site Munich, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany; Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Institute of Biological and Medical Imaging, Munich, Germany. Electronic 
address: gabriele.multhoff@lrz.tum.de.

Elevated levels of heat shock proteins (HSPs) contribute to tumor cell survival
and mediate protection against radiation-induced cell death. Hsp90 inhibitors are
promising radiosensitizers but also activate heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and
thereby induce the synthesis of cytoprotective Hsp70. In this study the heat
shock response inhibitor NZ28 either alone or in combination with the Hsp90
inhibitor NVP-AUY922 was investigated for radiosensitizing effects, alterations
in cell cycle distribution and effects on migratory/invasive capacity of
radioresistant tumor cells. NZ28 reduced the constitutive and NVP-AUY922-induced 
Hsp70 expression by inhibition of the HSF1 activity and inhibited migration and
invasion in human lung and breast tumor cells. Treatment of tumor cells with NZ28
significantly increased their radiation response. One possible mechanism might be
a decrease of the radioresistant S-phase. When combined with the Hsp90 inhibitor 
NVP-AUY922 the concentration of NZ28 could be significantly reduced
(1/10th-1/20th) to achieve the same radiosensitization. Our results demonstrate
that a dual targeting of Hsp70 and Hsp90 with NZ28 and NVP-AUY922 potentiates the
radiation response of tumor cells that are otherwise resistant to ionizing
radiation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25721082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;17(3):322-32.

FBXW7 modulates cellular stress response and metastatic potential through <U+200B>HSF1
post-translational modification.

Kourtis N, Moubarak RS, Aranda-Orgilles B, Lui K, Aydin IT, Trimarchi T,
Darvishian F, Salvaggio C, Zhong J, Bhatt K, Chen EI, Celebi JT, Lazaris C,
Tsirigos A, Osman I, Hernando E, Aifantis I.

<U+200B>Heat-shock factor 1 (<U+200B>HSF1) orchestrates the heat-shock response in eukaryotes. 
Although this pathway has evolved to help cells adapt in the presence of
challenging conditions, it is co-opted in cancer to support malignancy. However, 
the mechanisms that regulate <U+200B>HSF1 and thus cellular stress response are poorly
understood. Here we show that the ubiquitin ligase <U+200B>FBXW7a interacts with <U+200B>HSF1
through a conserved motif phosphorylated by <U+200B>GSK3ß and <U+200B>ERK1. <U+200B>FBXW7a
ubiquitylates <U+200B>HSF1 and loss of <U+200B>FBXW7a results in impaired degradation of
nuclear <U+200B>HSF1 and defective heat-shock response attenuation. <U+200B>FBXW7a is either
mutated or transcriptionally downregulated in melanoma and <U+200B>HSF1 nuclear
stabilization correlates with increased metastatic potential and disease
progression. <U+200B>FBXW7a deficiency and subsequent <U+200B>HSF1 accumulation activates an
invasion-supportive transcriptional program and enhances the metastatic potential
of human melanoma cells. These findings identify a post-translational mechanism
of regulation of the <U+200B>HSF1 transcriptional program both in the presence of
exogenous stress and in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4401662
PMID: 25720964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Autophagy. 2015;11(2):200-13. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1009776.

Heat shock response and autophagy--cooperation and control.

Dokladny K(1), Myers OB, Moseley PL.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Internal Medicine; Health Sciences Center; Health, Exercise & 
Sports Science of University of New Mexico ; Albuquerque , NM USA.

Protein quality control (proteostasis) depends on constant protein degradation
and resynthesis, and is essential for proper homeostasis in systems from single
cells to whole organisms. Cells possess several mechanisms and processes to
maintain proteostasis. At one end of the spectrum, the heat shock proteins
modulate protein folding and repair. At the other end, the proteasome and
autophagy as well as other lysosome-dependent systems, function in the
degradation of dysfunctional proteins. In this review, we examine how these
systems interact to maintain proteostasis. Both the direct cellular data on heat 
shock control over autophagy and the time course of exercise-associated changes
in humans support the model that heat shock response and autophagy are tightly
linked. Studying the links between exercise stress and molecular control of
proteostasis provides evidence that the heat shock response and autophagy
coordinate and undergo sequential activation and downregulation, and that this is
essential for proper proteostasis in eukaryotic systems.

PMCID: PMC4502786
PMID: 25714619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Mol Biol. 2015 Apr 10;427(7):1644-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.02.010. Epub 2015
Feb 15.

Lysine deacetylases regulate the heat shock response including the age-associated
impairment of HSF1.

Zelin E(1), Freeman BC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, 601 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (2)Department 
of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
601 South Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. Electronic address:
bfree@illinois.edu.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is critical for defending cells from both acute and
chronic stresses. In aging cells, the DNA binding activity of HSF1 deteriorates
correlating with the onset of pathological events including neurodegeneration and
heart disease. We find that DNA binding by HSF1 is controlled by lysine
deacetylases with HDAC7, HDAC9, and SIRT1 distinctly increasing the magnitude and
length of a heat shock response (HSR). In contrast, HDAC1 inhibits HSF1 in a
deacetylase-independent manner. In aging cells, the levels of HDAC1 are elevated 
and the HSR is impaired, yet reduction of HDAC1 in aged cells restores the HSR.
Our results provide a mechanistic basis for the age-associated regulation of the 
HSR. Besides HSF1, the deacetylases differentially modulate the activities of
unrelated DNA binding proteins. Taken together, our data further support the
model that lysine deacetylases are selective regulators of DNA binding proteins.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4357550 [Available on 2016-04-10]
PMID: 25688804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cell. 2015 Feb 12;160(4):729-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.028.

MEK guards proteome stability and inhibits tumor-suppressive amyloidogenesis via 
HSF1.

Tang Z(1), Dai S(2), He Y(2), Doty RA(2), Shultz LD(2), Sampson SB(2), Dai C(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA; Graduate
Programs, Department of Molecular and Biomedical Sciences, The University of
Maine, 5735 Hitchner Hall, Orono, ME 04469, USA. (2)The Jackson Laboratory, 600
Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. (3)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main
Street, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA. Electronic address: chengkai.dai@jax.org.

Signaling through RAS/MAP kinase pathway is central to biology. ERK has long been
perceived as the only substrate for MEK. Here, we report that HSF1, the master
regulator of the proteotoxic stress response, is a new MEK substrate. Beyond
mediating cell-environment interactions, the MEK-HSF1 regulation impacts
malignancy. In tumor cells, MEK blockade inactivates HSF1 and thereby provokes
proteomic chaos, presented as protein destabilization, aggregation, and,
strikingly, amyloidogenesis. Unlike their non-transformed counterparts, tumor
cells are particularly susceptible to proteomic perturbation and amyloid
induction. Amyloidogenesis is tumor suppressive, reducing in vivo melanoma growth
and contributing to the potent anti-neoplastic effects of proteotoxic stressors. 
Our findings unveil a key biological function of the oncogenic RAS-MEK signaling 
in guarding proteostasis and suppressing amyloidogenesis. Thus, proteomic
instability is an intrinsic feature of malignant state, and disrupting the
fragile tumor proteostasis to promote amyloidogenesis may be a feasible
therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4564124
PMID: 25679764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Apoptosis. 2015 May;20(5):679-88. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1103-7.

Targeting of tumor-associated gangliosides with antibodies affects signaling
pathways and leads to cell death including apoptosis.

Horwacik I(1), Rokita H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Faculty of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, 7 Gronostajowa St.,
30-387, Kraków, Poland, irena.horwacik@uj.edu.pl.

Gangliosides are a diverse group of sialic acid containing glycosphigolipids that
are abundantly present in an outer plasma membrane of some cells. Biological
roles of gangliosides and other lipids in cell fate regulation are being
extensively studied. Gangliosides are well known to be involved in interactions
between cells and in signal transduction to regulate growth, adhesion and
motility. Moreover, many gangliosides are tumor-associated antigens
over-expressed on several tumor types. As a result, monoclonal antibodies binding
gangliosides can be used to diagnose, monitor and to treat cancer patients. In
the review, we gather and discuss data of various research groups on direct
cytotoxic effects elicited by several ganglioside-specific antibodies, which bind
to GM2, N-acetyl-GM2, N-glycolyl-GM2, GM3, GD3, GD2, O-acetyl-GD2, without
involvement of immunological mechanisms. Thus, in cultures of numerous human and 
mouse cancer cell lines, the antibodies were reported to cause morphological
changes, aggregation and detachment of cells, inhibition of proliferation and
cell death involving necrosis, apoptosis and oncosis-like mechanisms.
Additionally, data on proteome alterations were reviewed that encompass, among
others, changes in kinome (P38, JNK, c-MET, ERK1/2, PI3K, AKT, FAK, aurora A, B, 
C), protein levels of transcription factors (P53, MYCN, HSF1) and pro-apoptotic
proteins (caspase 3, BAX). Next, we collected data on application of the
antibodies to enhance cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs and small molecule
inhibitors. Finally, further research perspectives on the topic are discussed.

PMID: 25673107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Apr;29(3):600-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2015.01.009. Epub 2015
Jan 31.

Solanesol protects human hepatic L02 cells from ethanol-induced oxidative injury 
via upregulation of HO-1 and Hsp70.

Yao X(1), Bai Q(2), Yan D(3), Li G(4), Lü C(2), Xu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Food Engineering, Bengbu College, Bengbu, PR China. 
Electronic address: leeyxy@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biology and Food
Engineering, Bengbu College, Bengbu, PR China. (3)School of Biology and
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan, PR China.
(4)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shanxi Agricultural
University, Taigu, PR China.

In present study, we showed that the mRNA and protein levels of HO-1 and Hsp70 in
solanesol-treated L02 cells were significantly increased. The induction of the
HO-1 by solanesol is majorly achieved via enhancing the nuclear translocation and
transactivity of Nrf2 through enhancement of Hsp90-Keap1 interaction, while
solanesol-elevated Hsp70 is related with promoting the nuclear translocation of
HSF1 through the involvement of chaperones interaction. Furthermore, the
induction of HO-1 and Hsp70 by solanesol could protect against ethanol-induced
liver injury, including significantly suppressing the elevation of the activities
of LDH and AST, attenuating ethanol-induced increase of the MDA, ROS level and
decrease of the GSH level. Moreover, solanesol also suppressed ethanol-induced
apoptosis of L02 cells by inhibition of nuclear morphological damage, procaspase 
3 and cleavage of caspase 3 and PARP, suggesting solanesol may be beneficial
against ALD. Solanesol also promoted tBHQ-mediated protective effects. However,
treatment cells with SnPP or PES markedly abrogated the protective effects of
solanesol on ethanol-induced cell injury. These results strongly suggested that
solanesol could protect ethanol-induced L02 cell damage, which might be
attributed to the activation of HO-1 and Hsp70.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25645596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015 Jan 29. [Epub ahead of print]

HSF1 Relieves Amyloid-ß-Induced Cardiomyocytes Apoptosis.

Zhang B(1), He P, Lu Y, Bian X, Yang X, Fu X, Wu Y, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, 36
Sanhao Street, Shenyang, 110004, Liaoning, China, zhangbeiru@hotmail.com.

Accumulation of amyloid-ß in organs results in a series of diseases. Heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of genes encoding molecular
chaperones and attenuates apoptosis induced by multiple factors. However, the
role of HSF1 on amyloid-ß-induced apoptosis is still unknown. The present study
was aimed to explore the function of HSF1 in amyloid-ß-induced cardiomyocytes
apoptosis. TUNEL assay and flow cytometry analysis were used to detect cell
apoptosis. Phalloidin staining was used to detect cytoskeleton injury. Changes in
expression levels of proteins involved in apoptosis and endoplasmic reticulum
stress were measured by Western blot. In our study, amyloid-ß was found to
promote apoptosis, impair cytoskeleton, and induce endoplasmic reticulum stress
in isolated cardiomyocytes. However, these damaging effects of amyloid-ß can be
relieved by over-expression of HSF1, and the protective role of HSF1 might be
associated with the regulation of HSPs expressions. Results of our study suggest 
that over-expression of HSF1 might become a promising gene therapeutic for the
treatment of heart diseases associated with amyloid-ß accumulation.

PMID: 25631374  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


134. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2015 May;65(5):485-93. doi: 10.1097/FJC.0000000000000218.

Tissue-specific Gene Expression in Rat Hearts and Aortas in a Model of Vascular
Nitrate Tolerance.

Csont T(1), Murlasits Z, Ménesi D, Kelemen JZ, Bencsik P, Pipicz M, Fekete V,
Zvara Á, Puskás LG, Ferdinandy P.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biochemistry, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary;
Pharmahungary Group, Szeged, Hungary; Institute of Genetics, Biological
Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary; and §Department 
of Pharmacology and Pharmacotherapy, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Nitroglycerin exerts a direct myocardial anti-ischemic effect even in the state
of vascular nitrate tolerance. To examine the potentially diverse molecular
responses in vascular and cardiac tissues, we investigated the gene expression
profile of the heart and the aorta by DNA microarray in male Wistar rats that
were previously made tolerant to the vascular effects of nitroglycerin. The blood
pressure-lowering effect of nitroglycerin (1-100 µg/kg) was markedly attenuated
in rats pretreated for 3 days with 3 × 100 mg/kg nitroglycerin. Nitric oxide
content was significantly elevated in the heart but not in the aorta of
nitrate-tolerant animals, which indicated tissue-specific differences in
nitroglycerin bioconversion. Of 7742 genes analyzed by DNA microarray, we found
that although the expression of 25 genes changed significantly in the heart
(increased: Tas2r119, Map6, Cd59, Kcnh2, Kcnh3, Senp6, Mcpt1, Tshb, Haus1, Vipr1,
Lrn3, Lifr; decreased: Ihh, Fgfr1, Cryge, Krt9, Agrn, C4bpb, Fcer1a, Csf3,
Hsd17b11, Hsd11b2, Ctnnbl1, Prpg1, Hsf1), only 14 genes were altered in the aorta
(increased: Tas2r119, Ihh, Rrad, Npm1, Snai1; decreased: Tubb2b, Usp15, Sema6c,
Wfdc2, Rps21, Ramp2, Galr1, Atxn1, Lhx1) in vascular nitrate tolerance.
Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis of genes
related to oxidative/nitrative/nitrosative stress also showed differential
expression pattern in the heart and aorta. This is the first pharmacogenomic
analysis showing that nitroglycerin treatment leading to vascular nitrate
tolerance differentially impacts gene expression in vascular and cardiac tissues,
which indicates different tissue-specific downstream signaling pathways.

PMID: 25626975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Gut. 2016 Apr;65(4):595-606. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-307030. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Methyl-deficient diet promotes colitis and SIRT1-mediated endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Melhem H(1), Hansmannel F(1), Bressenot A(1), Battaglia-Hsu SF(1), Billioud V(1),
Alberto JM(1), Gueant JL(1), Peyrin-Biroulet L(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U954, Faculté de Médecine, Nutrition Génétique et exposition aux
risques environnementaux, Université de Lorraine 54 511, Vanduvre-Lès-Nancy
cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Methyl donor deficiency (MDD) aggravates experimental colitis in rats
and increases endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress through decreased sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) in neuronal cells and myocardium. ER stress plays a key role in IBD
pathogenesis.
AIM: We investigated whether the influence of MDD on colitis resulted from an ER 
stress response triggered by decreased SIRT1 expression.
DESIGN: The unfolded protein response (UPR), chaperones proteins, heat shock
factor protein 1 (HSF1) and SIRT1 were examined in rats with MDD and dextran
sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in a Caco-2 cell model with stable
expression of transcobalamin-oleosin (TO) chimera, which impairs cellular
availability of vitamin B12, and in IBD. The effects of SIRT1 activation were
studied both in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: MDD aggravated DSS-induced colitis clinically, endoscopically and
histologically. MDD activated ER stress pathways, with increased
phosphorylate-PKR-like ER kinase, P-eiF-2a, P-IRE-1a, activating transcription
factor (ATF)6, XBP1-S protein and ATF4 mRNA expression levels in rats. This was
accompanied by reduced SIRT1 expression level and greater acetylation of HSF1, in
relation with a dramatic decrease of chaperones (binding immunoglobulin protein
(BIP), heat shock protein (HSP)27 and HSP90). Adding either vitamin B12,
S-adenosylmethionine or an SIRT1 activator (SRT1720) reduced the UPR in vitro. In
rats, SIRT1 activation by SRT1720 prevented colitis by reducing HSF1 acetylation 
and increasing expression of BIP, HSP27 and HSP90. Immunohistochemistry showed
impaired expression of SIRT1 in the colonic epithelium of patients with IBD.
CONCLUSIONS: SIRT1 is a master regulator of ER stress and severity of
experimental colitis in case of MDD. It could deserve further interest as a
therapeutic target of IBD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25608526  [PubMed - in process]


136. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(4):495-501. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1006043.

Causes and consequences of protein folding stress in aneuploid cells.

Donnelly N(1), Storchová Z.

Author information: 
(1)a Group Maintenance of Genome Stability; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry 
; Martinsried , Germany.

Imbalanced chromosomal content, or aneuploidy, strongly affects the physiology of
eukaryotic cells. The consequences of these effects are frequently detrimental,
in particular in Metazoans. In humans, aneuploidy has been causatively linked to 
pathological conditions such as spontaneous abortions, trisomy syndromes and
cancer. However, only in recent years have we witnessed an unraveling of the
complex phenotypes that are caused by aneuploidy. Importantly, it has become
apparent that aneuploidy evokes global and uniform changes that cannot be
explained by the altered expression of the specific genes located on aneuploid
chromosomes. Recent discoveries show that aneuploidy negatively affects protein
folding; in particular, the functions of the molecular chaperone Heat Shock
Protein 90 (HSP90) and the upstream regulator of heat shock-induced
transcription, Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), are impaired. Here we discuss the
possible causes and consequences of this impairment and propose that the protein 
folding stress instigated by aneuploidy may be a common feature of conditions as 
variable as cancer and trisomy syndromes.

PMCID: PMC4347676
PMID: 25602365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1853(3):746-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.01.004.
Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Hsf4 counteracts Hsf1 transcription activities and increases lens epithelial cell
survival in vitro.

Cui X(1), Xie PP(1), Jia PP(1), Lou Q(1), Dun G(1), Li S(1), Liu G(1), Zhang
J(1), Dong Z(2), Ma Y(1), Hu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Key laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Department of Cell 
Biology and Genetics, Henan University School of Medicine, Jin-Ming Road,
Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China. (2)Henan Key laboratory of Molecular and Cellular
Immunology, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Henan University School of
Medicine, Jin-Ming Road, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China; Department of Cell Biology
and Anatomy, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (3)Henan Key
laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Department of Cell Biology and
Genetics, Henan University School of Medicine, Jin-Ming Road, Kaifeng, Henan
475004, China. Electronic address: hyz@henu.edu.cn.

The interplay between Hsf4 and Hsf1 plays an important role in the regulation of 
lens homeostasis. However, the mechanism of the intermolecular association
involved is still unclear. In this paper, we find that reconstitution of Hsf4b
into Hsf4-/- lens epithelial (mLEC/Hsf4-/-) cells can simultaneously downregulate
Hsp70 expression and upregulate the expression of small heat shock proteins Hsp25
and aB-crystallin at both RNA and protein levels. ChIP assay results indicate
Hsf4b, which binds to the promoters of Hsp90a, Hsp70.3, Hsp25 and aB-crystallin
but not Hsp70.1, can inhibit Hsf1 binding to Hsp70.3 promoter and the heat shock 
mediated Hsp70 promoter activity by reducing Hsf1 protein expression. Hsf4b
N-terminal hydrophobic region can interact with Hsf1 N-terminal hydrophobic
region. Their interaction impairs Hsf1's intramolecular interaction between the
N- and C-terminal hydrophobic regions, leading to Hsf1's cytosolic retention and 
protein degradation. Both lysosome inhibitors (chloroquine, pepstatin A plus
E64d) and proteasome inhibitor MG132 can inhibit Hsf4-mediated Hsf1 protein
degradation, but MG132 can induce Hsf1 activation as well. Upregulation of Hsf4b 
can significantly inhibit cisplatin and staurosporine induced lens epithelial
cell apoptosis through direct upregulation of Hsp25 and aB-crystallin expression.
Taken together, our results imply that upregulation of Hsf4b modulates the
expression pattern of heat shock proteins in lens tissue by either directly
binding to their promoters or promoting Hsf1 protein degradation. Moreover,
upregulation of Hsf4b protects lens cell survival by upregulating anti-apoptotic 
pathways. These studies reveal a novel regulatory mechanism between Hsf1 and
Hsf4b in modulating lens epithelial cell homeostasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25601714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 13;457(3):473-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.021. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Sir2 links the unfolded protein response and the heat shock response in a stress 
response network.

Weindling E(1), Bar-Nun S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George S. Wise Faculty of
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Israel. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, 
Israel. Electronic address: shoshbn@tauex.tau.ac.il.

The Heat Shock Response (HSR) in the cytosol and the Unfolded Protein Response
(UPR) in the endoplasmic reticulum are major pathways of the cellular
proteostasis network. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, HSR is regulated by
transcription factor Hsf1, and UPR Ire1 branch activates transcription factor
Hac1. Here we demonstrate systemic regulation of proteostasis through a direct
link between UPR and HSR. Hsf1 is activated by UPR and its HSR depends on intact 
UPR. This link is mediated by Sir2, which is not only essential for Hsf1 HSR but 
also required for Hsf1 activation by UPR. Excess Sir2 augments Hsf1 activation by
UPR and can compensate for its impairment in UPR-defective strains. Sir2 is
upregulated by UPR but, in turn, it also attenuates this pathway, ensuring that
UPR functions only transiently.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25600811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Apr;43(2):375-86. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.01.004.
Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Identification, tissue distribution and characterization of two heat shock
factors (HSFs) in goldfish (Carassius auratus).

Kim SS(1), Chang Z(1), Park JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute of Functional Materials, Pusan
National University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Chemistry
and Chemistry Institute of Functional Materials, Pusan National University, Busan
609-735, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jaspark@pusan.ac.kr.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are synthesized rapidly in response to a variety of
physiological or environmental stressors, whereas the transcriptional activation 
of HSPs is regulated by a family of heat shock factors (HSFs). In vertebrates,
multiple HSFs (HSF1-4) have been reported to have different roles in response to 
a range of stresses. This paper reports the cDNA cloning of two goldfish
(Carassius auratus) HSF gene families, HSF1 and three isoforms of HSF2. Both HSF1
and HSF2s showed high homology to the known HSFs from other organisms,
particularly the zebrafish. Different patterns of HSF1 and HSF2 mRNA expression
were detected in several goldfish tissues, highlighting their distinct roles. In 
cadmium (Cd)-treated tissues, the responses of HSP70 showed less difference.
However, the increase in HSF1 and HSF2 in these tissues differs considerable. In 
particular, HSF2 was induced strongly in the heart and liver. On the other hand, 
in heart tissue, HSF1 showed the smallest increment. These results suggest the
potential role of HSF2 in assisting HSF1 in these tissues. In another in vitro
experiment of hepatocyte cultures, Cd exposure caused similar patterns of
goldfish HSF1 and HSF2 mRNA expression and induction of the HSP70 protein. On the
other hand, an examination of the characterization of recombinant proteins showed
that HSF1 undergoes a conformation change induced by heat shock above 30 °C and
approaches each other in the trimer, whereas HSF2 could not sense thermal stress 
directly. Furthermore, immune-blot analysis of HSFs showed that both monomers and
trimmers of HSF1 were observed in cadmium-induced tissues, whereas HSF2 were all 
in monomeric. These results show that HSF1 and HSF2 play different roles in the
transcription of heat shock proteins.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25592877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jun;116(6):977-84. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25051.

protonation behavior of histidine during HSF1 activation by physiological
acidification.

Lu M(1), Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biofuels, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266061, China; Department of
Chemistry, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735, Korea.

The expression of eukaryotic molecular chaperones (heat shock proteins, HSPs) is 
triggered in response to a wide range of environmental stresses, including: heat 
shock, hydrogen peroxide, heavy metal, low-pH, or virus infection. Biochemical
and genetic studies have clearly shown the fundamental roles of heat shock factor
1 (HSF1) in stress-inducible HSP gene expression, resistance to stress-induced
cell death, carcinogenesis, and other biological phenomena. Previous studies show
that acidic pH changes within the physiological range directly activate the HSF1 
function in vitro. However, the detailed mechanism is unclear. Though
computational pKa-predications of the amino acid side-chain, acidic-pH induced
protonation of a histidine residue was found to be most-likely involved in this
process. The histidine 83 (His83) residue, which could be protonated by mild
decrease in pH, causes mild acidic-induced HSF1 activation (including in-vitro
trimerization, DNA binding, in-vivo nuclear accumulation, and HSPs expression).
His83, which is located in the loop region of the HSF1 DNA binding domain, was
suggested to enhance the intermolecular force with Arginine 79, which helps HSF1 
form a DNA-binding competent. Therefore, low-pH-induced activation of HSF1 by the
protonation of histidine can help us better to understand the HSF1 mechanism and 
develop more therapeutic applications (particularly in cancer therapy). J. Cell. 
Biochem. 116: 977-984, 2015. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25560907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):163-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.040. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

Neuronal serotonin release triggers the heat shock response in C. elegans in the 
absence of temperature increase.

Tatum MC(1), Ooi FK(1), Chikka MR(1), Chauve L(2), Martinez-Velazquez LA(3),
Steinbusch HW(4), Morimoto RI(2), Prahlad V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Aging Mind and Brain Initiative, University of Iowa,
338 Biology Building East, 210 Iowa Avenue, Iowa City, IA 52242-1324, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Rice Institute for Biomedical Sciences,
Northwestern University, 2205 Tech Drive, Hogan 2-100, Evanston, IL 60208-3500,
USA. (3)Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration, and Repair,
Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street,
P.O. Box 208002, New Haven, CT 06520-8002, USA. (4)Department Translational
Neuroscience, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences, Maastricht
University Medical Center, Universiteitssingel 40, Room 2.578, P.O. Box 616,
6200 MD Maastricht, the Netherlands. (5)Department of Biology, Aging Mind and
Brain Initiative, University of Iowa, 338 Biology Building East, 210 Iowa Avenue,
Iowa City, IA 52242-1324, USA. Electronic address: veena-prahlad@uiowa.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):R71-3.

BACKGROUND: Cellular mechanisms aimed at repairing protein damage and maintaining
homeostasis, widely understood to be triggered by the damage itself, have
recently been shown to be under cell nonautonomous control in the metazoan C.
elegans. The heat shock response (HSR) is one such conserved mechanism, activated
by cells upon exposure to proteotoxic conditions such as heat. Previously, we had
shown that this conserved cytoprotective response is regulated by the
thermosensory neuronal circuitry of C. elegans. Here, we investigate the
mechanisms and physiological relevance of neuronal control.
RESULTS: By combining optogenetic methods with live visualization of the dynamics
of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF1), we show that excitation of the AFD
thermosensory neurons is sufficient to activate HSF1 in another cell, even in the
absence of temperature increase. Excitation of the AFD thermosensory neurons
enhances serotonin release. Serotonin release elicited by direct optogenetic
stimulation of serotonergic neurons activates HSF1 and upregulates molecular
chaperones through the metabotropic serotonin receptor SER-1. Consequently,
excitation of serotonergic neurons alone can suppress protein misfolding in C.
elegans peripheral tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies imply that thermosensory activity coupled to
serotonergic signaling is sufficient to activate the protective HSR prior to
frank proteotoxic damage. The ability of neurosensory release of serotonin to
control cellular stress responses and activate HSF1 has powerful implications for
the treatment of protein conformation diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. EMBO J. 2015 Feb 3;34(3):267-9. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490757. Epub 2015 Jan 2.

Cellular stress response cross talk maintains protein and energy homeostasis.

Swan CL(1), Sistonen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland Turku Centre
for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku,
Finland.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2015 Feb 3;34(3):275-93.

PMCID: PMC4339114
PMID: 25555794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cell Oncol. 2015;2(4). pii: e1002718. Epub 2015 Jan 23.

Metabolic stressors disrupt proteome homeostasis to suppress malignancy.

Dai C(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Within tumor cells the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)-mediated stress response is
constitutively mobilized to counter persistent proteotoxic stress, hence
sustaining their fragile proteome homeostasis and supporting robust malignant
phenotypes. Intriguingly, our new studies reveal that metabolic stressors, such
as metformin, inactivate HSF1 and provoke proteomic chaos, thereby impeding
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4786015
PMID: 26973866  [PubMed]


144. Int J Legal Med. 2015 Mar;129(2):289-96. doi: 10.1007/s00414-014-1138-2. Epub
2014 Dec 28.

Victims of lethal hypothermia have decreased levels of thrombomodulin in
myocardium and urine.

Pakanen L(1), Kaija H, Kortelainen ML, Särkioja T, Porvari K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diagnostics, Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Oulu,
P.O. Box 5000, FI-90014, Oulu, Finland.

Severe cold stress has been shown to cause changes in the expression and
secretion of thrombomodulin (TM), an endothelial protein regulating haemostasis
and inflammation. To further evaluate TM as a cold stress indicator, relative TM 
mRNA and TM protein levels in the myocardium and the concentrations of TM in
serum and urine were analysed in different causes of death (hypothermia main
cause, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>80; hypothermia contributory cause, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>26; cardiovascular disease
(CVD) main cause, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>94; trauma main cause, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>45; other main cause, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>25).
Urinary catecholamine concentrations and myocardial heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
transcript levels were also studied. The TM mRNA and the TM protein levels in
myocardium and urine were significantly lower in hypothermia deaths than those in
the controls. Post-mortem interval did not correlate with urinary TM
concentration. The sensitivity and specificity of urinary TM assay to detect
hypothermia deaths were 70.8 and 70.3 %, respectively. Catecholamine
concentrations in urine correlated significantly with TM concentration in urine
and TM mRNA levels in all groups excluding CVD deaths. There were no differences 
in the HSF1 transcript levels and no correlation to TM levels. These findings
provide further evidence that cold stress and hypothermia affect TM expression
and secretion and that they are possibly linked to catecholamine action. Thus,
measuring post-mortem TM levels may provide additional support to diagnosing
hypothermia in medico-legal examination. The results may also provide additional 
knowledge for the treatment of hypothermic patients and the use of hypothermia
for medical purposes.

PMID: 25543320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2421-33.

MicroRNA-135b, a HSF1 target, promotes tumor invasion and metastasis by
regulating RECK and EVI5 in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li Y(1), Xu D(1), Bao C(1), Zhang Y(1), Chen D(1), Zhao F(1), Ding J(2), Liang
L(2), Wang Q(2), Liu L(2), Li J(1), Yao M(1), Huang S(2), He X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (2)Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center and Institutes of
Biomedical Sciences, Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) often localize to chromosomal fragile sites and are associated
with cancer. In this study, we screened for the aberrant and functional miRNAs in
the regions of copy number alterations (CNAs) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), 
and found that miR-135b was frequently amplified and upregulated in HCC tissues. 
The expression level of miR-135b was inversely correlated with the occurrence of 
tumor capsules. In addition, miR-135b promoted HCC cell migration and invasion in
vitro and metastasis in vivo. The reversion-inducing-cysteine-rich protein with
kazal motifs (RECK) and ecotropic viral integration site 5 (EVI5) were identified
as the direct and functional targets of miR-135b in HCC. Furthermore, we observed
that heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) directly activated miR-135b
expression, consequently enhancing HCC cell motility and invasiveness. The newly 
identified HSF1/miR-135b/RECK&EVI5 axis provides novel insight into the
mechanisms of HCC metastasis, which may facilitate the development of new
therapeutics against HCC.

PMCID: PMC4385861
PMID: 25537516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Mar;80:67-76. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.12.005.
Epub 2014 Dec 13.

Iron, copper, and manganese complexes with in vitro superoxide dismutase and/or
catalase activities that keep Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells alive under severe
oxidative stress.

Ribeiro TP(1), Fernandes C(2), Melo KV(2), Ferreira SS(2), Lessa JA(2), Franco
RW(3), Schenk G(4), Pereira MD(5), Horn A Jr(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Citotoxicidade e Genotoxicidade, Departamento de Bioquímica,
Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
21941-909, RJ, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de Ciências Químicas, Universidade Estadual
do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro - Campos dos Goytacazes, 28013-602, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Ciência Físicas, Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense
Darcy Ribeiro - Campos dos Goytacazes, 28013-602, RJ, Brazil. (4)School of
Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
4072, Australia. (5)Laboratório de Citotoxicidade e Genotoxicidade, Departamento 
de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, 21941-909, RJ, Brazil. Electronic address: marcosdp@iq.ufrj.br.
(6)Laboratório de Ciências Químicas, Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense
Darcy Ribeiro - Campos dos Goytacazes, 28013-602, RJ, Brazil. Electronic address:
adolfo@uenf.br.

Due to their aerobic lifestyle, eukaryotic organisms have evolved different
strategies to overcome oxidative stress. The recruitment of some specific
metalloenzymes such as superoxide dismutases (SODs) and catalases (CATs) is of
great importance for eliminating harmful reactive oxygen species (hydrogen
peroxide and superoxide anion). Using the ligand HPClNOL
{1-[bis(pyridin-2-ylmethyl)amino]-3-chloropropan-2-ol}, we have synthesized three
coordination compounds containing iron(III), copper(II), and manganese(II) ions, 
which are also present in the active site of the above-noted metalloenzymes.
These compounds were evaluated as SOD and CAT mimetics. The manganese and iron
compounds showed both SOD and CAT activities, while copper showed only SOD
activity. The copper and manganese in vitro SOD activities are very similar
(IC50~0.4 µmol dm(-3)) and about 70-fold higher than those of iron. The manganese
compound showed CAT activity higher than that of the iron species. Analyzing
their capacity to protect Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells against oxidative stress
(H2O2 and the O2(-) radical), we observed that all compounds act as
antioxidants, increasing the resistance of yeast cells mainly due to a reduction 
of lipid oxidation. Especially for the iron compound, the data indicate complete 
protection when wild-type cells were exposed to H2O2 or O2(-) species.
Interestingly, these compounds also compensate for both superoxide dismutase and 
catalase deficiencies; their antioxidant activity is metal ion dependent, in the 
order iron(III)>copper(II)>manganese(II). The protection mechanism employed by
the complexes proved to be independent of the activation of transcription factors
(such as Yap1, Hsf1, Msn2/Msn4) and protein synthesis. There is no direct
relation between the in vitro and the in vivo antioxidant activities.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25511255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Jan;36(1):6-14. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2014.10.011. Epub 
2014 Nov 22.

Transcription factors Hsf1 and Nrf2 engage in crosstalk for cytoprotection.

Dayalan Naidu S(1), Kostov RV(1), Dinkova-Kostova AT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research
Institute, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK. (2)Jacqui Wood Cancer
Centre, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research Institute, University of
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK; Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology and
Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
USA. Electronic address: a.dinkovakostova@dundee.ac.uk.

Transcription factors heat shock factor (Hsf)1 and nuclear factor-erythroid 2
p45-related factor (Nrf)2 are critical for adaptation and survival. Each is
maintained at low basal levels, but is robustly activated by various stimuli,
including cysteine-reactive small molecules (inducers). Although each is
regulated by distinct mechanisms, it is emerging that these transcription factors
engage in crosstalk by sharing overlapping transcriptional targets, such as heat 
shock protein (HSP)70, p62, and activating transcription factor (ATF)3, and in
certain cases, compensating for each other. Critically, activation of Hsf1 or
Nrf2 affects the cellular redox balance by promoting the reduced state.
Conversely, deletion of Hsf1 or Nrf2 is associated with oxidative stress and
impaired mitochondrial function. Transient activation of Hsf1 and Nrf2 is
cytoprotective, but their persistent upregulation may be detrimental, causing
cardiomyopathy or accelerating carcinogenesis, and should be considered when
designing strategies for disease prevention and treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25465722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;57:76-83. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.10.006.
Epub 2014 Oct 19.

Crosstalk between HSF1 and HSF2 during the heat shock response in mouse testes.

Korfanty J(1), Stokowy T(2), Widlak P(3), Gogler-Piglowska A(4), Handschuh L(5), 
Podkowinski J(6), Vydra N(7), Naumowicz A(8), Toma-Jonik A(9), Widlak W(10).

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic
address: joanna1540@op.pl. (2)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101
Gliwice, Poland; Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Postboks
7800, 5020 Bergen, Norway. Electronic address: tomasz.stokowy@k2.uib.no. (3)Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address:
widlak@io.gliwice.pl. (4)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101
Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: agogler@io.gliwice.pl. (5)Microarray and
Deep Sequencing Laboratory, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of
Sciences, Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704 Poznan, Poland; Department of Hematology and
Bone Marrow Transplantation, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
Szamarzewskiego 84, 60-569 Poznan, Poland. Electronic address:
luizahan@ibch.poznan.pl. (6)Microarray and Deep Sequencing Laboratory, Institute 
of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704
Poznan, Poland. Electronic address: jpodkow@man.poznan.pl. (7)Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address:
nvydra@yahoo.co.uk. (8)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101
Gliwice, Poland; Institute of Automatic Control, The Silesian University of
Technology, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: annanaumowicz@o2.pl.
(9)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic
address: agatoma5@wp.pl. (10)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101
Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: wwidlak@io.gliwice.pl.

Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1) is the primary transcription factor responsible for
the response to cellular stress, while HSF2 becomes activated during development 
and differentiation, including spermatogenesis. Although both factors are
indispensable for proper spermatogenesis, activation of HSF1 by heat shock
initiates apoptosis of spermatogenic cells leading to infertility of males. To
characterize mechanisms assisting such heat induced apoptosis we studied how HSF1
and HSF2 cooperate during the heat shock response. For this purpose we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation and the proximity ligation approaches. We looked
for co-occupation of binding sites by HSF1 and HSF2 in untreated (32 °C) or heat 
shocked (at 38 °C or 43 °C) spermatocytes, which are cells the most sensitive to 
hyperthermia. At the physiological temperature or after mild hyperthermia at 38
°C, the sharing of binding sites for both HSFs was observed mainly in promoters
of Hsp genes and other stress-related genes. Strong hyperthermia at 43 °C
resulted in an increased binding of HSF1 and releasing of HSF2, hence
co-occupation of promoter regions was not detected any more. The close proximity 
of HSF1 and HSF2 (and/or existence of HSF1/HSF2 complexes) was frequent at the
physiological temperature. Temperature elevation resulted in a decreased number
of such complexes and they were barely detected after strong hyperthermia at 43
°C. We have concluded that at the physiological temperature HSF1 and HSF2
cooperate in spermatogenic cells. However, temperature elevation causes
remodeling of chromatin binding and interactions between HSFs are disrupted. This
potentially affects the regulation of stress response and contributes to the heat
sensitivity of these cells.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell Rep. 2014 Nov 6;9(3):955-66. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.09.056. Epub 2014
Oct 30.

A direct regulatory interaction between chaperonin TRiC and stress-responsive
transcription factor HSF1.

Neef DW(1), Jaeger AM(1), Gomez-Pastor R(1), Willmund F(2), Frydman J(2), Thiele 
DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA. (2)Department of Biology, Stanford University,
Palo Alto, CA 94305, USA. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke 
University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA; Department of Biochemistry,
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic address:
dennis.thiele@duke.edu.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is an evolutionarily conserved
transcription factor that protects cells from protein-misfolding-induced stress
and apoptosis. The mechanisms by which cytosolic protein misfolding leads to HSF1
activation have not been elucidated. Here, we demonstrate that HSF1 is directly
regulated by TRiC/CCT, a central ATP-dependent chaperonin complex that folds
cytosolic proteins. A small-molecule activator of HSF1, HSF1A, protects cells
from stress-induced apoptosis, binds TRiC subunits in vivo and in vitro, and
inhibits TRiC activity without perturbation of ATP hydrolysis. Genetic
inactivation or depletion of the TRiC complex results in human HSF1 activation,
and HSF1A inhibits the direct interaction between purified TRiC and HSF1 in
vitro. These results demonstrate a direct regulatory interaction between the
cytosolic chaperone machine and a critical transcription factor that protects
cells from proteotoxicity, providing a mechanistic basis for signaling
perturbations in protein folding to a stress-protective transcription factor.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4488849
PMID: 25437552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cell Signal. 2015 Feb;27(2):394-401. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.11.029. Epub
2014 Nov 27.

Active heat shock transcription factor 1 supports migration of the melanoma cells
via vinculin down-regulation.

Toma-Jonik A(1), Widlak W(2), Korfanty J(3), Cichon T(4), Smolarczyk R(5),
Gogler-Piglowska A(6), Widlak P(7), Vydra N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic
address: agatoma5@wp.pl. (2)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101
Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: wwidlak@io.gliwice.pl. (3)Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address:
joanna1540@op.pl. (4)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute 
of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. 
Electronic address: tcichon@io.gliwice.pl. (5)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial
Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 
15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: rsmolarczyk@io.gliwice.pl.
(6)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic
address: agogler@io.gliwice.pl. (7)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center 
and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101
Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address: widlak@io.gliwice.pl. (8)Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address:
nvydra@yahoo.co.uk.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), the major regulator of stress response,
is frequently activated in cancer and has an apparent role in malignant
transformation. Here we analyzed the influence of the over-expression of a
constitutively active transcriptionally-competent HSF1 mutant form on phenotypes 
of mouse and human melanoma cells. We observed that the expression of active HSF1
supported anchorage-independent growth in vitro, and metastatic spread in the
animal model in vivo, although the proliferation rate of cancer cells was not
affected. Furthermore, active HSF1 enhanced cell motility, reduced the adherence 
of cells to a fibronectin-coated surface, and affected the actin cytoskeleton. We
found that although the expression of active HSF1 did not affect levels of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers, it caused transcriptional
down-regulation of vinculin, protein involved in cell motility, and adherence.
Functional HSF1-binding sites were found in mouse and human Vcl/VCL genes,
indicating a direct role of HSF1 in the regulation of this gene. An apparent
association between HSF1-induced down-regulation of vinculin, increased motility,
and a reduced adherence of cells suggests a possible mechanism of HSF1-mediated
enhancement of the metastatic potential of cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25435429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Mar;20(2):371-9. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0558-8.
Epub 2014 Nov 28.

HSF1 functions as a transcription regulator for Dp71 expression.

Tan J(1), Tan S, Zheng H, Liu M, Chen G, Zhang H, Wang K, Tan S, Zhou J, Xiao XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Shock, Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, 110# Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan, 410008,
People's Republic of China.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is one of the most important transcriptional molecules
in the heat shock process; however, HSF1 can also regulate the expression of
other proteins. Dystrophin Dp71 is one of the most widely expressed isoforms of
the dystrophin gene family. In our experiments, we showed for the first time that
HSF1 can function as a transcriptional factor for endogenous Dp71 expression in
vivo and in vitro. We demonstrated that the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein
expression of Dp71 were significantly reduced in HSF1-knockout mice compared with
wild-type mice in brain, lung, liver, spleen, and kidney. Overexpression of HSF1 
significantly enhanced the mRNA and protein expression of Dp71 in HeLa cells.
Inhibiting the expression of HSF1 in HeLa cells significantly reduced the
expression of Dp71. By use of the EMSA technique, the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, and the luciferase reporter system, we demonstrated
that HSF1 can directly bind the HSE in the Dp71 promoter region. We concluded
from our data that HSF1 functions as a transcriptional regulator of Dp71
expression.

PMCID: PMC4326382
PMID: 25430510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. EMBO J. 2015 Feb 3;34(3):275-93. doi: 10.15252/embj.201489062. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Suppression of the HSF1-mediated proteotoxic stress response by the metabolic
stress sensor AMPK.

Dai S(1), Tang Z(2), Cao J(1), Zhou W(1), Li H(1), Sampson S(1), Dai C(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA. (2)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar
Harbor, ME, USA Graduate Programs, Department of Molecular & Biomedical Sciences,
The University of Maine, Orono, ME, USA. (3)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor,
ME, USA Chengkai.Dai@jax.org.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Feb 3;34(3):267-9.

Numerous extrinsic and intrinsic insults trigger the HSF1-mediated proteotoxic
stress response (PSR), an ancient transcriptional program that is essential to
proteostasis and survival under such conditions. In contrast to its
well-recognized mobilization by proteotoxic stress, little is known about how
this powerful adaptive mechanism reacts to other stresses. Surprisingly, we
discovered that metabolic stress suppresses the PSR. This suppression is largely 
mediated through the central metabolic sensor AMPK, which physically interacts
with and phosphorylates HSF1 at Ser121. Through AMPK activation, metabolic stress
represses HSF1, rendering cells vulnerable to proteotoxic stress. Conversely,
proteotoxic stress inactivates AMPK and thereby interferes with the metabolic
stress response. Importantly, metformin, a metabolic stressor and popular
anti-diabetic drug, inactivates HSF1 and provokes proteotoxic stress within tumor
cells, thereby impeding tumor growth. Thus, these findings uncover a novel
interplay between the metabolic stress sensor AMPK and the proteotoxic stress
sensor HSF1 that profoundly impacts stress resistance, proteostasis, and
malignant growth.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4339117
PMID: 25425574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Front Mol Neurosci. 2014 Nov 4;7:83. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2014.00083. eCollection
2014.

Divergent tissue and sex effects of rapamycin on the proteasome-chaperone network
of old mice.

Rodriguez KA(1), Dodds SG(2), Strong R(3), Galvan V(1), Sharp ZD(2), Buffenstein 
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Aging and Longevity Studies, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio San Antonio, TX, USA ; Department of
Physiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio San Antonio,
TX, USA. (2)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Aging and Longevity Studies,
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio San Antonio, TX, USA ;
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)Sam and Ann Barshop Institute for Aging and 
Longevity Studies, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio San
Antonio, TX, USA ; Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio San Antonio, TX, USA.

Rapamycin, an allosteric inhibitor of the mTOR kinase, increases longevity in
mice in a sex-specific manner. In contrast to the widely accepted theory that a
loss of proteasome activity is detrimental to both life- and healthspan,
biochemical studies in vitro reveal that rapamycin inhibits 20S proteasome
peptidase activity. We tested if this unexpected finding is also evident after
chronic rapamycin treatment in vivo by measuring peptidase activities for both
the 26S and 20S proteasome in liver, fat, and brain tissues of old, male and
female mice fed encapsulated chow containing 2.24 mg/kg (14 ppm) rapamycin for 6 
months. Further we assessed if rapamycin altered expression of the chaperone
proteins known to interact with the proteasome-mediated degradation system
(PMDS), heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and the levels of key mTOR pathway proteins. 
Rapamycin had little effect on liver proteasome activity in either gender, but
increased proteasome activity in female brain lysates and lowered its activity in
female fat tissue. Rapamycin-induced changes in molecular chaperone levels were
also more substantial in tissues from female animals. Furthermore, mTOR pathway
proteins showed more significant changes in female tissues compared to those from
males. These data show collectively that there are divergent tissue and sex
effects of rapamycin on the proteasome-chaperone network and that these may be
linked to the disparate effects of rapamycin on males and females. Further our
findings suggest that rapamycin induces indirect regulation of the
PMDS/heat-shock response through its modulation of the mTOR pathway rather than
via direct interactions between rapamycin and the proteasome.

PMCID: PMC4220119
PMID: 25414638  [PubMed]


154. PLoS Biol. 2014 Nov 18;12(11):e1001998. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001998.
eCollection 2014.

Modulation of the maladaptive stress response to manage diseases of protein
folding.

Roth DM(1), Hutt DM(1), Tong J(1), Bouchecareilh M(1), Wang N(2), Seeley T(1),
Dekkers JF(3), Beekman JM(3), Garza D(4), Drew L(4), Masliah E(5), Morimoto
RI(2), Balch WE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences,
Rice Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, United States of America. (3)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology,
Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical Centre, Utrecht, The
Netherlands; Laboratory of Translational Immunology, Wilhelmina Children's
Hospital, University Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Proteostasis
Therapeutics Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America. (6)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps 
Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America; The Skaggs
Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California, United States of America; Department of Chemical Physiology, The
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America; The
Institute for Childhood and Neglected Diseases, The Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2014 Nov;12(11):e1001999.

Diseases of protein folding arise because of the inability of an altered peptide 
sequence to properly engage protein homeostasis components that direct protein
folding and function. To identify global principles of misfolding disease
pathology we examined the impact of the local folding environment in
alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD), Niemann-Pick type C1 disease (NPC1),
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and cystic fibrosis (CF). Using distinct models,
including patient-derived cell lines and primary epithelium, mouse brain tissue, 
and Caenorhabditis elegans, we found that chronic expression of misfolded
proteins not only triggers the sustained activation of the heat shock response
(HSR) pathway, but that this sustained activation is maladaptive. In diseased
cells, maladaptation alters protein structure-function relationships, impacts
protein folding in the cytosol, and further exacerbates the disease state. We
show that down-regulation of this maladaptive stress response (MSR), through
silencing of HSF1, the master regulator of the HSR, restores cellular protein
folding and improves the disease phenotype. We propose that restoration of a more
physiological proteostatic environment will strongly impact the management and
progression of loss-of-function and gain-of-toxic-function phenotypes common in
human disease.

PMCID: PMC4236052
PMID: 25406061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Biol Cell. 2015 Jan 15;26(2):270-82. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-06-1145. Epub 2014 
Nov 12.

tRNA thiolation links translation to stress responses in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.

Damon JR(1), Pincus D(1), Ploegh HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142. (2)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142 ploegh@wi.mit.edu.

Although tRNA modifications have been well catalogued, the precise functions of
many modifications and their roles in mediating gene expression are still being
elucidated. Whereas tRNA modifications were long assumed to be constitutive, it
is now apparent that the modification status of tRNAs changes in response to
different environmental conditions. The URM1 pathway is required for thiolation
of the cytoplasmic tRNAs tGlu(UUC), tGln(UUG), and tLys(UUU) in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. We demonstrate that URM1 pathway mutants have impaired translation,
which results in increased basal activation of the Hsf1-mediated heat shock
response; we also find that tRNA thiolation levels in wild-type cells decrease
when cells are grown at elevated temperature. We show that defects in tRNA
thiolation can be conditionally advantageous, conferring resistance to
endoplasmic reticulum stress. URM1 pathway proteins are unstable and hence are
more sensitive to changes in the translational capacity of cells, which is
decreased in cells experiencing stresses. We propose a model in which a
stress-induced decrease in translation results in decreased levels of URM1
pathway components, which results in decreased tRNA thiolation levels, which
further serves to decrease translation. This mechanism ensures that tRNA
thiolation and translation are tightly coupled and coregulated according to need.

© 2015 Damon et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4294674
PMID: 25392298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 2;290(1):242-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.586636. Epub 2014
Nov 12.

Sequence-dependent internalization of aggregating peptides.

Couceiro JR(1), Gallardo R(1), De Smet F(1), De Baets G(1), Baatsen P(2), Annaert
W(3), Roose K(4), Saelens X(4), Schymkowitz J(1), Rousseau F(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Switch Laboratory, VIB, Leuven, Belgium, the Switch Laboratory,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)the Electron Microscopy Facility (EMoNe), KU Leuven Centre for Human Genetics,
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium, the VIB BIO Imaging Core, VIB, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(3)the Laboratory for Membrane Trafficking, KU Leuven and VIB-Centre for the
Biology of Disease, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. (4)the VIB Inflammation Research
Center, 9052 Ghent, Belgium, and the Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, 
Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium. (5)From the Switch Laboratory, VIB,
Leuven, Belgium, the Switch Laboratory, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, KU Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium,
frederic.rousseau@switch.vib-kuleuven.be.

Recently, a number of aggregation disease polypeptides have been shown to spread 
from cell to cell, thereby displaying prionoid behavior. Studying aggregate
internalization, however, is often hampered by the complex kinetics of the
aggregation process, resulting in the concomitant uptake of aggregates of
different sizes by competing mechanisms, which makes it difficult to isolate
pathway-specific responses to aggregates. We designed synthetic aggregating
peptides bearing different aggregation propensities with the aim of producing
modes of uptake that are sufficiently distinct to differentially analyze the
cellular response to internalization. We found that small acidic aggregates (=500
nm in diameter) were taken up by nonspecific endocytosis as part of the fluid
phase and traveled through the endosomal compartment to lysosomes. By contrast,
bigger basic aggregates (>1 µm) were taken up through a mechanism dependent on
cytoskeletal reorganization and membrane remodeling with the morphological
hallmarks of phagocytosis. Importantly, the properties of these aggregates
determined not only the mechanism of internalization but also the involvement of 
the proteostatic machinery (the assembly of interconnected networks that control 
the biogenesis, folding, trafficking, and degradation of proteins) in the
process; whereas the internalization of small acidic aggregates is
HSF1-independent, the uptake of larger basic aggregates was HSF1-dependent,
requiring Hsp70. Our results show that the biophysical properties of aggregates
determine both their mechanism of internalization and proteostatic response. It
remains to be seen whether these differences in cellular response contribute to
the particular role of specific aggregated proteins in disease.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4281728
PMID: 25391649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Cell Sci. 2014 Dec 15;127(Pt 24):5273-87. doi: 10.1242/jcs.157024. Epub 2014
Nov 6.

DAPK-HSF1 interaction as a positive-feedback mechanism stimulating TNF-induced
apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells.

Benderska N(1), Ivanovska J(1), Rau TT(1), Schulze-Luehrmann J(1), Mohan S(2),
Chakilam S(1), Gandesiri M(1), Ziesché E(3), Fischer T(4), Söder S(1), Agaimy
A(1), Distel L(5), Sticht H(6), Mahadevan V(2), Schneider-Stock R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Tumor Pathology, Institute of Pathology,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen 91054, Germany. 
(2)Faculty of School of Chemical & Biotechnology of the SASTRA University,
Thanjavur 613401, India. (3)3rd Medical Department, Medical University, 55122
Mainz, Germany. (4)Center of Internal Medicine, Clinic of Hematology/Oncology,
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany. (5)Department
of Radiation Oncology, University Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg
(FAU), Erlangen 91054, Germany. (7)Department of Experimental Tumor Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU),
Erlangen 91054, Germany regine.schneider-stock@uk-erlangen.de.

Death-associated protein kinase (DAPK) is a serine-threonine kinase with tumor
suppressor function. Previously, we demonstrated that tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
induced DAPK-mediated apoptosis in colorectal cancer. However, the
protein-protein interaction network associated with TNF-DAPK signaling still
remains unclear. We identified HSF1 as a new DAPK phosphorylation target in
response to low concentrations of TNF and verified a physical interaction between
DAPK and HSF1 both in vitro and in vivo. We show that HSF1 binds to the DAPK
promoter. Transient overexpression of HSF1 protein led to an increase in DAPK
mRNA level and consequently to an increase in the amount of apoptosis. By
contrast, treatment with a DAPK-specific inhibitor as well as DAPK knockdown
abolished the phosphorylation of HSF1 at Ser230 (pHSF1(Ser230)). Furthermore,
translational studies demonstrated a positive correlation between DAPK and
pHSF1(Ser230) protein expression in human colorectal carcinoma tissues. Taken
together, our data define a novel link between DAPK and HSF1 and highlight a
positive-feedback loop in DAPK regulation under mild inflammatory stress
conditions in colorectal tumors. For the first time, we show that under TNF the
pro-survival HSF1 protein can be redirected to a pro-apoptotic program.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25380824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Mol Med (Berl). 2015 Feb;93(2):199-210. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1218-2. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Modulation of cellular stress response via the erythropoietin/CD131
heteroreceptor complex in mouse mesenchymal-derived cells.

Bohr S(1), Patel SJ, Vasko R, Shen K, Iracheta-Vellve A, Lee J, Bale SS,
Chakraborty N, Brines M, Cerami A, Berthiaume F, Yarmush ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Engineering in Medicine/Surgical Services, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and Shriners Hospitals for Children, 51 Blossom
Street, 4th Floor, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.

Tissue-protective properties of erythropoietin (EPO) have let to the discovery of
an alternative EPO signaling via an EPO-R/CD131 receptor complex which can now be
specifically targeted through pharmaceutically designed short sequence peptides
such as ARA290. However, little is still known about specific functions of
alternative EPO signaling in defined cell populations. In this study, we
investigated effects of signaling through EPO-R/CD131 complex on cellular stress 
responses and pro-inflammatory activation in different mesenchymal-derived
phenotypes. We show that anti-apoptotic, anti-inflammatory effects of ARA290 and 
EPO coincide with the externalization of CD131 receptor component as an immediate
response to cellular stress. In addition, alternative EPO signaling strongly
modulated transcriptional, translational, or metabolic responses after stressor
removal. Specifically, we saw that ARA290 was able to overcome a TNFa-mediated
inhibition of transcription factor activation related to cell stress responses,
most notably of serum response factor (SRF), heat shock transcription factor
protein 1 (HSF1), and activator protein 1 (AP1). We conclude that alternative EPO
signaling acts as a modulator of pro-inflammatory signaling pathways and likely
plays a role in restoring tissue homeostasis. Key message: Erythropoietin (EPO)
triggers an alternative pathway via heteroreceptor EPO/CD131. ARA290 peptide
specifically binds EPO/CD131 but not the canonical EPO/EPO receptor. Oxidative
stress and inflammation promote cell surface expression of CD131. ARA290 prevents
tumor necrosis factor-mediated inhibition of stress-related genes. Alternative
EPO signaling modulates inflammation and promotes tissue homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4482224
PMID: 25373867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 5;9(11):e111817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111817.
eCollection 2014.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis reveals chromosomal copy
number aberrations associated with clinical outcome in canine diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Aricò A(1), Ferraresso S(1), Bresolin S(2), Marconato L(3), Comazzi S(4), Te
Kronnie G(2), Aresu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedicine and Food Science, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy. (2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of
Padova, Padova, Italy. (3)Centro Oncologico Veterinario, Sasso Marconi, Italy.
(4)Department of Animal Pathology, Hygiene and Public Health, University of
Milano, Milan, Italy.

Canine Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma (cDLBCL) is an aggressive cancer with
variable clinical response. Despite recent attempts by gene expression profiling 
to identify the dog as a potential animal model for human DLBCL, this tumor
remains biologically heterogeneous with no prognostic biomarkers to predict
prognosis. The aim of this work was to identify copy number aberrations (CNAs) by
high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in 12 dogs with
newly diagnosed DLBCL. In a subset of these dogs, the genetic profiles at the end
of therapy and at relapse were also assessed. In primary DLBCLs, 90 different
genomic imbalances were counted, consisting of 46 gains and 44 losses. Two gains 
in chr13 were significantly correlated with clinical stage. In addition, specific
regions of gains and losses were significantly associated to duration of
remission. In primary DLBCLs, individual variability was found, however 14
recurrent CNAs (>30%) were identified. Losses involving IGK, IGL and IGH were
always found, and gains along the length of chr13 and chr31 were often observed
(>41%). In these segments, MYC, LDHB, HSF1, KIT and PDGFRa are annotated. At the 
end of therapy, dogs in remission showed four new CNAs, whereas three new CNAs
were observed in dogs at relapse compared with the previous profiles. One ex novo
CNA, involving TCR, was present in dogs in remission after therapy, possibly
induced by the autologous vaccine. Overall, aCGH identified small CNAs associated
with outcome, which, along with future expression studies, may reveal target
genes relevant to cDLBCL.

PMCID: PMC4221131
PMID: 25372838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 30;9(10):e111505. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111505.
eCollection 2014.

Deteriorated stress response in stationary-phase yeast: Sir2 and Yap1 are
essential for Hsf1 activation by heat shock and oxidative stress, respectively.

Nussbaum I(1), Weindling E(1), Jubran R(1), Cohen A(1), Bar-Nun S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George S. Wise Faculty of
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Stationary-phase cultures have been used as an important model of aging, a
complex process involving multiple pathways and signaling networks. However, the 
molecular processes underlying stress response of non-dividing cells are poorly
understood, although deteriorated stress response is one of the hallmarks of
aging. The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a valuable model organism to
study the genetics of aging, because yeast ages within days and are amenable to
genetic manipulations. As a unicellular organism, yeast has evolved robust
systems to respond to environmental challenges. This response is orchestrated
largely by the conserved transcription factor Hsf1, which in S. cerevisiae
regulates expression of multiple genes in response to diverse stresses. Here we
demonstrate that Hsf1 response to heat shock and oxidative stress deteriorates
during yeast transition from exponential growth to stationary-phase, whereas Hsf1
activation by glucose starvation is maintained. Overexpressing Hsf1 does not
significantly improve heat shock response, indicating that Hsf1 dwindling is not 
the major cause for Hsf1 attenuated response in stationary-phase yeast. Rather,
factors that participate in Hsf1 activation appear to be compromised. We uncover 
two factors, Yap1 and Sir2, which discretely function in Hsf1 activation by
oxidative stress and heat shock. In <U+0394>yap1 mutant, Hsf1 does not respond to
oxidative stress, while in <U+0394>sir2 mutant, Hsf1 does not respond to heat shock.
Moreover, excess Sir2 mimics the heat shock response. This role of the
NAD+-dependent Sir2 is supported by our finding that supplementing NAD+
precursors improves Hsf1 heat shock response in stationary-phase yeast,
especially when combined with expression of excess Sir2. Finally, the combination
of excess Hsf1, excess Sir2 and NAD+ precursors rejuvenates the heat shock
response.

PMCID: PMC4214751
PMID: 25356557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. FEBS J. 2015 Jan;282(2):332-40. doi: 10.1111/febs.13134. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Heat-induced expression of the immediate-early gene IER5 and its involvement in
the proliferation of heat-shocked cells.

Ishikawa Y(1), Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medical Science, Japan.

The serum-inducible and growth factor-inducible gene IER5 encodes a protein that 
acts as a regulator of cell proliferation. Expression of IER5 is also induced by 
treatment of cells with ionizing radiation and anticancer agents. In this study, 
we demonstrate the expression and function of IER5 in heat-shocked cells. Heat
treatment causes robust expression of IER5 in a heat shock factor
(HSF)1-dependent manner. HSF1 is the master transcriptional regulator of
chaperone genes, and the IER5 promoter contains the binding sequence for HSF1 and
is bound by heat-activated HSF1. Proteotoxic stressors, such as celastrol and
MG132, are known to activate HSF1, and are potent inducers of HSF1 binding and
IER5 expression. Overexpression of IER5 leads to upregulation of chaperone gene
expression and to an increase in refolding of heat-denatured proteins. Cells
expressing IER5 efficiently recover viability after heat challenge. These
observations suggest that HSF1-mediated IER5 expression is involved in the
expression of chaperone genes and in recovery from thermal stress.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 25355627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2014 Oct;18(5):403-9. doi:
10.4196/kjpp.2014.18.5.403. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

Bis is Induced by Oxidative Stress via Activation of HSF1.

Yoo HJ(1), Im CN(2), Youn DY(1), Yun HH(3), Lee JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, 
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. ; Cancer Research
Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, 
Korea. ; Cancer Evolution Research Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. (3)Department of Biochemistry, College
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea. ; Cancer
Research Institute, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 
137-701, Korea.

The Bis protein is known to be involved in a variety of cellular processes
including apoptosis, migration, autophagy as well as protein quality control. Bis
expression is induced in response to a number of types of stress, such as heat
shock or a proteasome inhibitor via the activation of heat shock factor (HSF)1.
We report herein that Bis expression is increased at the transcriptional level in
HK-2 kidney tubular cells and A172 glioma cells by exposure to oxidative stress
such as H2O2 treatment and oxygen-glucose deprivation, respectively. The
pretreatment of HK-2 cells with N-acetyl cysteine, suppressed Bis induction.
Furthermore, HSF1 silencing attenuated Bis expression that was induced by H2O2,
accompaniedby increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. Using a
series of deletion constructs of the bis gene promoter, two putative heat shock
elements located in the proximal region of the bis gene promoter were found to be
essential for the constitutive expression is as well as the inducible expression 
of Bis. Taken together, our results indicate that oxidative stress induces Bis
expression at the transcriptional levels via activation of HSF1, which might
confer an expansion of antioxidant capacity against pro-oxidant milieu. However, 
the possible role of the other cis-element in the induction of Bis remains to be 
determined.

PMCID: PMC4211124
PMID: 25352760  [PubMed]


163. J Anim Sci. 2014 Nov;92(11):4897-908. doi: 10.2527/jas.2014-8047.

Dietary antioxidants at supranutritional doses modulate skeletal muscle heat
shock protein and inflammatory gene expression in sheep exposed to heat stress.

Chauhan SS(1), Celi P(2), Fahri FT(3), Leury BJ(4), Dunshea FR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Husbandry, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla 171005,
India Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010, Australia. (2)Faculty of Veterinary and
Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010,
Australia Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2570, 
Australia. (3)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010, Australia Australian Meat Processors Corporation,
110 Walker Street, North Sydney, NSW 2060, Australia. (4)Faculty of Veterinary
and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010,
Australia. (5)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010, Australia fdunshea@unimelb.edu.au.

Erratum in
    J Anim Sci. 2015 Mar;93(3):1418.

The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of chronic heat
(thermal) stress and dietary antioxidant supplementation on the expression of
heat shock proteins and inflammatory genes in the skeletal muscle of sheep.
Twenty-four Merino × Poll Dorset crossbred ewes were allocated to either a
control (10 IU vitamin E and 0.24 mg Se/kg DM) or high-antioxidant (VitE+Se; 100 
IU vitamin E and 1.20 mg Se/kg DM) diet and were exposed to 2 thermal
(temperature) treatments (thermoneutral [TN]: 18°C-21°C and 26%-30% relative
humidity; heat stress [HS]: 28°C-40°C and 40%-50% relative humidity) for 1 wk.
Physiological parameters were recorded daily, and muscle biopsies were conducted 
at the end of thermal treatments. Total RNA was extracted from muscle samples and
reverse transcribed to cDNA for real-time PCR analysis. Respiration rates and
rectal temperature were increased in response to HS (84.2 vs. 161 breaths per
minute and 39.52°C vs. 40.06°C for TN and HS conditions, respectively; P <
0.001). There were interactions between dietary and thermal treatments,
indicating that dietary antioxidant supplementation reduced respiration rate (P =
0.097) and rectal temperature (P = 0.086) of sheep during HS but not TN
conditions. Skeletal muscle heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) mRNA
abundance was increased by HS (1.3-fold; P < 0.050) but was not changed (P =
0.77) by dietary antioxidant supplementation. The expression of skeletal muscle
heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) mRNA was increased (P < 0.001) 3.5-fold by HS and
tended (P = 0.08) to be increased by dietary antioxidant supplementation.
Although there were no main effects of diet (P = 0.42) or HS (P = 0.47) on
skeletal muscle HSP90 mRNA expression, there was an interaction (P = 0.040) such 
that HSP90 mRNA expression was increased (P = 0.010) in antioxidant-supplemented 
sheep under HS compared to TN conditions. Skeletal muscle nuclear factor kappa B 
(NF-<U+03BA>B) and tissue necrosis factor a (TNF-a) mRNA abundances were increased by
exposure to heat (5.2-fold, P = 0.005 for NF-<U+03BA>B; 5.7-fold, P = 0.013 for TNF-a)
,but there was no main effect (P > 0.05) of dietary antioxidant supplementation. 
There was, however, an interaction between thermal and dietary treatments such
that dietary antioxidant supplementation ameliorated the effect of HS on NF-<U+03BA>B
and TNF-a mRNA expression. Taken together, these results indicate that high
dietary antioxidants modulate skeletal muscle expression of heat shock proteins, 
proinflammatory cytokine, and NF-<U+03BA>B transcription, which may protect against HS
in sheep.

PMID: 25349340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(1):11-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00754-14. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

ATF1 modulates the heat shock response by regulating the stress-inducible heat
shock factor 1 transcription complex.

Takii R(1), Fujimoto M(1), Tan K(1), Takaki E(1), Hayashida N(1), Nakato R(2),
Shirahige K(2), Nakai A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Japan. (2)Research Center for Epigenetic
Disease, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Japan
anakai@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

The heat shock response is an evolutionally conserved adaptive response to high
temperatures that controls proteostasis capacity and is regulated mainly by an
ancient heat shock factor (HSF). However, the regulation of target genes by the
stress-inducible HSF1 transcription complex has not yet been examined in detail
in mammalian cells. In the present study, we demonstrated that HSF1 interacted
with members of the ATF1/CREB family involved in metabolic homeostasis and
recruited them on the HSP70 promoter in response to heat shock. The HSF1
transcription complex, including the chromatin-remodeling factor BRG1 and lysine 
acetyltransferases p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP), was formed in a manner
that was dependent on the phosphorylation of ATF1. ATF1-BRG1 promoted the
establishment of an active chromatin state and HSP70 expression during heat
shock, whereas ATF1-p300/CBP accelerated the shutdown of HSF1 DNA-binding
activity during recovery from acute stress, possibly through the acetylation of
HSF1. Furthermore, ATF1 markedly affected the resistance to heat shock. These
results revealed the unanticipated complexity of the primitive heat shock
response mechanism, which is connected to metabolic adaptation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4295370
PMID: 25312646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Dec;10(6):3139-44. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2619. Epub 2014 Oct 9.

Function of Hsf1 in SV40 T-antigen-transformed HEK293T cells.

Jiang Q(1), Zhang Z(2), Hu Y(2), Ma Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Basic Medical College of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular 
Immunology, Institute of Immunology, Medical School of Henan University, Kaifeng,
Henan 475004, P.R. China.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a main regulator of the heat shock response in
eukaryotes, increases cell survival in numerous pathophysiological conditions.
The aim of the present study was to o bserve the function of defective HSF1
expression in HEK293T cells. shRNA of human HSF1 was constructed into the
retroviral vector pLTHR generating pLTHR-shRNA-HSF1. The shRNA was transiently
transfected into HEK293T cells to silence the expression of the HSF1 gene. Cell
colony formation, MTT and cell cycle assays were used to analyze the SV40
T-antigen (Ag)-transformed cell proliferation rate. Immunoblotting was used to
study the protein expression of HSF1, SV40 T-Ag, p53, p21, heat shock protein 90 
(Hsp90), Hsp70 and Hsp25. The results revealed that a deficiency in HSF1
expression inhibited cellular growth. Defective HSF1 upregulated the protein
expression of p53, retinoblastoma protein (Rb) and SV40 T-Ag, and reduced the
association between SV40 T-Ag and p53/Rb, which resulted in growth inhibition of 
SV40 T-Ag-transformed cells. In conclusion, HSF1 is involved in the regulation of
SV40 T-Ag-induced cell growth and modulates the expression of p53 and Rb
proteins.

PMID: 25310819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Jan;20(1):185-201. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0536-1.
Epub 2014 Oct 11.

Celastrol, an oral heat shock activator, ameliorates multiple animal disease
models of cell death.

Sharma S(1), Mishra R, Walker BL, Deshmukh S, Zampino M, Patel J, Anamalai M,
Simpson D, Singh IS, Kaushal S, Kaushal S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Maryland Medical Center, 110 S.
Paca Street, 7th Floor, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.

Protein homeostatic regulators have been shown to ameliorate single,
loss-of-function protein diseases but not to treat broader animal disease models 
that may involve cell death. Diseases often trigger protein homeostatic
instability that disrupts the delicate balance of normal cellular viability.
Furthermore, protein homeostatic regulators have been delivered invasively and
not with simple oral administration. Here, we report the potent homeostatic
abilities of celastrol to promote cell survival, decrease inflammation, and
maintain cellular homeostasis in three different disease models of apoptosis and 
inflammation involving hepatocytes and cardiomyocytes. We show that celastrol
significantly recovers the left ventricular function and myocardial remodeling
following models of acute myocardial infarction and doxorubicin-induced
cardiomyopathy by diminishing infarct size, apoptosis, and inflammation.
Celastrol prevents acute liver dysfunction and promotes hepatocyte survival after
toxic doses of thioacetamide. Finally, we show that heat shock response (HSR) is 
necessary and sufficient for the recovery abilities of celastrol. Our
observations may have dramatic clinical implications to ameliorate entire disease
processes even after cellular injury initiation by using an orally delivered HSR 
activator.

PMCID: PMC4255245
PMID: 25300203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Dec 15;25(25):4187-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-06-1032. Epub
2014 Oct 8.

HDAC6-ubiquitin interaction controls the duration of HSF1 activation after heat
shock.

Pernet L(1), Faure V(1), Gilquin B(1), Dufour-Guérin S(1), Khochbin S(2), Vourc'h
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Grenoble-Alpes, CRI INSERM, U823, Institut Albert Bonniot, La
Tronche 38042, Grenoble Cedex 9, France. (2)University Grenoble-Alpes, CRI
INSERM, U823, Institut Albert Bonniot, La Tronche 38042, Grenoble Cedex 9, France
claire.vourch@ujf-grenoble.fr saadi.khochbin@ujf-grenoble.fr.

After heat shock, HSF1 controls a major cellular transcriptional response
involving the activation of early (HSP70) and late (HSP25) heat shock gene
expression. Here we show that a full response to heat shock (activation of both
HSP70 and HSP25) depends on the duration of HSF1 activation, which is itself
controlled by HDAC6, a unique deacetylase known to bind monoubiquitin and
polyubiquitin with high affinity. On the basis of a comparative analysis of the
heat shock response in cells knocked out for HDAC6 or expressing HDAC6 mutants,
we show that HDAC6 binding to ubiquitinated proteins controls the duration of
HSF1 activation after heat shock. In cells expressing HDAC6 mutated in the
ubiquitin-binding domain, the AAA ATPase factor p97/VCP mediates rapid
inactivation of HSF1, precluding late activation of the HSP25 gene. In these
cells, knockdown of p97/VCP rescues HSF1 from this rapid inactivation and
restores HSP25 expression. We present here a new regulatory circuit that adjusts 
the duration of the heat shock response to the extent of protein ubiquitination
after heat shock.

© 2014 Pernet, Faure, et al. This article is distributed by The American Society 
for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication
it is available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0 
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4263459
PMID: 25298398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015 Jan;23(1):120-9. doi: 10.1002/oby.20919. Epub 2014 
Oct 8.

Obesity depresses the anti-inflammatory HSP70 pathway, contributing to NAFLD
progression.

Di Naso FC(1), Porto RR, Fillmann HS, Maggioni L, Padoin AV, Ramos RJ, Mottin CC,
Bittencourt A, Marroni NA, de Bittencourt PI Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiology and Experimental Hepatology, Porto Alegre Clinics
Hospital, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether reduced activity of the anti-inflammatory HSP70
pathway correlates with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) progression and 
with markers of oxidative stress because obesity activates inflammatory JNKs,
whereas HSP70 exerts the opposite effect.
METHODS: Adult obese patients (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>95) undergoing bariatric surgery were divided 
into steatosis (ST), steatohepatitis (SH), and fibrosis (SH+F) groups. The levels
of HSP70, its major transcription factor, HSF1, and JNKs were assessed by
immunoblotting hepatic and visceral adipose tissue; data were confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. Plasma biochemistry (lipids, HbA1c , HOMA, hepatic enzymes,
and redox markers) was also evaluated.
RESULTS: In both liver and adipose tissue, decreased HSP70 levels, paralleled by 
similar reductions in HSF1 and reduced plasma antioxidant enzyme activities,
correlated with insulin resistance and with NAFLD progression (expression levels 
were as follows: ST<U+2009>><U+2009>SH<U+2009>><U+2009>SH<U+2009>+<U+2009>F). The immunohistochemistry results suggested
Kupffer cells as a site of HSP70 inhibition. Conversely, JNK1 content and
phosphorylation increased.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased HSF1 levels in the liver and fat of obese patients
correlated with impairment of HSP70 in an NAFLD stage-dependent manner. This
impairment may affect HSP70-dependent anti-inflammation, with consequent
oxidative stress and insulin resistance in advanced stages of NAFLD. Possible
causal effects of fat cell senescence are discussed.

© 2014 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 25292174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 24;453(3):461-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.100. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

Heat shock factor 1 regulates hsa-miR-432 expression in human cervical cancer
cell line.

Das S(1), Bhattacharyya NP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography & Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, India. (2)Crystallography & Molecular 
Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 1/AF Bidhannagar, Kolkata
700064, India; Biomedical Genomics Centre, PG Polyclinic Building, 5, Suburbun
Hospital Road, Kolkata 700020, India. Electronic address: nitai_sinp@yahoo.com.

Heat shock response pathway is a conserved defense mechanism of mammalian cells
to maintain protein homeostasis against proteotoxic environmental conditions.
This is characterized by robust synthesis of molecular chaperones mostly by
stress-induced activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a
family of small non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate expression of
protein-coding genes. Here we report altered expression of a set of miRNAs by
thermal stress in HeLa cells. We also show that HSF1 regulates hsa-miR-432
expression in heat shock-dependent manner through its cognate binding site
present in hsa-miR-432 upstream sequence. Our report uncovers a novel function of
HSF1 and indicates involvement of miRNAs in HSF1-mediated protection of cellular 
proteome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25280995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Prikl Biokhim Mikrobiol. 2014 Mar-Apr;50(2):219-25.

[Cellular test systems for the search for transcription factor activity
modulators].

[Article in Russian]

Salimgareeva MKh, Sadovnikov SV, Farafontova EI, Zainullina LF, Vakhitov VA,
Vakhitova IuV.

Test systems for monitoring activities and the search for substances activating
or inhibiting transcription factors as biotargets have been designed on the basis
of luciferase constructs containing binding sites for transcription factors CREB,
NFAT, NF-kB, p53, STAT1, GAS, VDR, HSF1, and HIF1alpha. An assessment of the
functional activity of reporter constructs has been carried out using their
transient transfection into HEK293 cells followed by treatment with specific
inducers. The functional activity of all reporter constructs was observed based
on the increased luciferase expression. In order to evaluate the efficiency of
the suggested test systems, aspirin was used. Incubation of cells transfected
with the above-mentioned constructs treated with aspirin was accompanied by the
suppression of NF-kB, HIF1alpha, GAS, VDR, and HSF binding activity. The findings
revealed for NF-kB, NFAT, and STAT1 confirm the published data concerning the
mechanisms of aspirin action. The detected effects of this drug on the HIF1alpha,
GAS, VDR, and CREB activity have been demonstrated for the first time.

PMID: 25272742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 2014;33(3):247-63.

Curcumin augments the efficacy of antitumor drugs used in leukemia by modulation 
of heat shock proteins via HDAC6.

Sarkar R(1), Mukherjee A(1), Mukherjee S(2), Biswas R(3), Biswas J(4), Roy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis & Toxicology, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, Calcutta, India. (2)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis 
& Toxicology, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, Kolkata 700 026. (3)NSHM
Knowledge Campus Calcutta (Group of Institutions), (WBUT), Calcutta, India.
(4)Department of Surgical Oncology, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute,
Kolkata, India.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) are induced under
oxidative stress, which promotes oncogenesis. HSPs are regulated by heat shock
factor1 (HSF1). HDAC6, a class IIb deacetylase, plays an essential role in
tumorigenesis and cell stress response. HSPs, HSF1 and HDAC6 are up-regulated in 
cancer. In the present study, we explored the effect of curcumin, a
phytochemical, on HSPs (27, 70, 90), HSF1 and HDAC6 in two different leukemia
cell lines (K-562 and HL-60). The association between HDAC6, HSPs, and intrinsic 
oxidative stress was also investigated. Overexpression of HSPs (27, 70, 90),
HSF1, and HDAC6 in leukemia cells were down-regulated by curcumin, and the
effects on HSPs 27and 70 were less than that on HSP 90. This resulted in cell
cycle arrest at the G2/M stage, leading to apoptosis. Different cell cycle
regulatory proteins (p53, p21, cyclin B1, CDK1, Cdc25C) and some
apoptosis-related proteins (Bcl-2, Bax, Bid, Bad, Apaf1, AIF and Cyt c) were
altered by curcumin. Increased ROS levels in leukemia cells were quenched by
curcumin. A probable association between high ROS level and the overexpression of
the tumor markers was established in this study. Thus, curcumin enhanced the
efficacy of anti-tumor drugs imatinib-mesylate and cytarabine through the
inhibition of the tumor markers.

PMID: 25272063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Elife. 2014 Sep 16;3:e03164. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03164.

The translation elongation factor eEF1A1 couples transcription to translation
during heat shock response.

Vera M(1), Pani B(1), Griffiths LA(2), Muchardt C(3), Abbott CM(2), Singer RH(4),
Nudler E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, United States. (2)Medical Genetics Section,
Molecular Medicine Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Western 
General Hospital, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Département de Biologie du Développement et Cellules Souches, Institut
Pasteur, CNRS URA2578, Paris, France. (4)Department of Anatomy and Structural
Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, United States.

Translation elongation factor eEF1A has a well-defined role in protein synthesis.
In this study, we demonstrate a new role for eEF1A: it participates in the entire
process of the heat shock response (HSR) in mammalian cells from transcription
through translation. Upon stress, isoform 1 of eEF1A rapidly activates
transcription of HSP70 by recruiting the master regulator HSF1 to its promoter.
eEF1A1 then associates with elongating RNA polymerase II and the 3'UTR of HSP70
mRNA, stabilizing it and facilitating its transport from the nucleus to active
ribosomes. eEF1A1-depleted cells exhibit severely impaired HSR and compromised
thermotolerance. In contrast, tissue-specific isoform 2 of eEF1A does not support
HSR. By adjusting transcriptional yield to translational needs, eEF1A1 renders
HSR rapid, robust, and highly selective; thus, representing an attractive
therapeutic target for numerous conditions associated with disrupted protein
homeostasis, ranging from neurodegeneration to cancer.

PMCID: PMC4164936
PMID: 25233275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. EMBO J. 2014 Oct 16;33(20):2374-87. doi: 10.15252/embj.201488648. Epub 2014 Sep
9.

HSF1 deficiency and impaired HSP90-dependent protein folding are hallmarks of
aneuploid human cells.

Donnelly N(1), Passerini V(1), Dürrbaum M(2), Stingele S(1), Storchová Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Group Maintenance of Genome Stability, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany. (2)Group Maintenance of Genome Stability, Max Planck
Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany Center for Integrated Protein
Science Munich, Ludwig-Maximilian-University Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Group
Maintenance of Genome Stability, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich,
Ludwig-Maximilian-University Munich, Munich, Germany storchov@biochem.mpg.de.

Aneuploidy is a hallmark of cancer and is associated with malignancy and poor
prognosis. Recent studies have revealed that aneuploidy inhibits proliferation,
causes distinct alterations in the transcriptome and proteome and disturbs
cellular proteostasis. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the changes
in gene expression and the impairment of proteostasis are not understood. Here,
we report that human aneuploid cells are impaired in HSP90-mediated protein
folding. We show that aneuploidy impairs induction of the heat shock response
suggesting that the activity of the transcription factor heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) is compromised. Indeed, increased levels of HSF1 counteract the effects of
aneuploidy on HSP90 expression and protein folding, identifying HSF1
overexpression as the first aneuploidy-tolerating mutation in human cells. Thus, 
impaired HSF1 activity emerges as a critical factor underlying the phenotypes
linked to aneuploidy. Finally, we demonstrate that deficient protein folding
capacity directly shapes gene expression in aneuploid cells. Our study provides
mechanistic insight into the causes of the disturbed proteostasis in aneuploids
and deepens our understanding of the role of HSF1 in cytoprotection and
carcinogenesis.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4253526
PMID: 25205676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 31;289(44):30459-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.591578. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Genomic heat shock element sequences drive cooperative human heat shock factor 1 
DNA binding and selectivity.

Jaeger AM(1), Makley LN(2), Gestwicki JE(2), Thiele DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology and. (2)the Institute 
for Neurodegenerative Disease, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143. (3)From the Departments of Pharmacology and Cancer
Biology and Biochemistry, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina 27710 and dennis.thiele@duke.edu.

The heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) activates expression of a variety of
genes involved in cell survival, including protein chaperones, the protein
degradation machinery, anti-apoptotic proteins, and transcription factors.
Although HSF1 activation has been linked to amelioration of neurodegenerative
disease, cancer cells exhibit a dependence on HSF1 for survival. Indeed, HSF1
drives a program of gene expression in cancer cells that is distinct from that
activated in response to proteotoxic stress, and HSF1 DNA binding activity is
elevated in cycling cells as compared with arrested cells. Active HSF1
homotrimerizes and binds to a DNA sequence consisting of inverted repeats of the 
pentameric sequence nGAAn, known as heat shock elements (HSEs). Recent
comprehensive ChIP-seq experiments demonstrated that the architecture of HSEs is 
very diverse in the human genome, with deviations from the consensus sequence in 
the spacing, orientation, and extent of HSE repeats that could influence HSF1 DNA
binding efficacy and the kinetics and magnitude of target gene expression. To
understand the mechanisms that dictate binding specificity, HSF1 was purified as 
either a monomer or trimer and used to evaluate DNA-binding site preferences in
vitro using fluorescence polarization and thermal denaturation profiling. These
results were compared with quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in
vivo. We demonstrate a role for specific orientations of extended HSE sequences
in driving preferential HSF1 DNA binding to target loci in vivo. These studies
provide a biochemical basis for understanding differential HSF1 target gene
recognition and transcription in neurodegenerative disease and in cancer.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4215228
PMID: 25204655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2015 Apr;25(2):188-97. doi:
10.1123/ijsnem.2014-0131. Epub 2014 Sep 8.

L-glutamine supplementations enhance liver glutamine-glutathione axis and heat
shock factor-1 expression in endurance-exercise trained rats.

Petry ÉR(1), Cruzat VF, Heck TG, Homem de Bittencourt PI Jr, Tirapegui J.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Food Science and Experimental Nutrition, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Liver L-glutamine is an important vehicle for the transport of ammonia and
intermediary metabolism of amino acids between tissues, particularly under
catabolic situations, such as high-intensity exercise. Hence, the aim of this
study was to investigate the effects of oral supplementations with L-glutamine in
its free or dipeptide forms (with L-alanine) on liver glutamine-glutathione (GSH)
axis, and 70 kDa heat shock proteins (HSP70)/heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1) expressions. Adult male Wistar rats were 8-week trained (60 min/day, 5
days/week) on a treadmill. During the last 21 days, the animals were daily
supplemented with 1 g of L-glutamine/kg body weight per day in either
l-alanyl-L-glutamine dipeptide (DIP) form or a solution containing L-glutamine
and l-alanine in their free forms (GLN+ALA) or water (controls). Exercise
training increased cytosolic and nuclear HSF1 and HSP70 expression, as compared
with sedentary animals. However, both DIP and GLN+ALA supplements enhanced HSF1
expression (in both cytosolic and nuclear fractions) in relation to exercised
controls. Interestingly, HSF1 rises were not followed by enhanced HSP70
expression. DIP and GLN+ALA supplements increased plasma glutamine concentrations
(by 62% and 59%, respectively) and glutamine to glutamate plasma ratio in
relation to trained controls. This was in parallel with a decrease in plasma
ammonium levels. Supplementations increased liver GSH (by 90%), attenuating the
glutathione disulfide (GSSG) to GSH ratio, suggesting a redox state protection.
In conclusion, oral administration with DIP and GLN+ALA supplements in
endurance-trained rats improve liver glutamine-GSH axis and modulate HSF1
pathway.

PMID: 25202991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Cell Biol. 2014 Sep 15;206(6):735-49. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201402002. Epub 2014 Sep
8.

Expression of HSF2 decreases in mitosis to enable stress-inducible transcription 
and cell survival.

Elsing AN(1), Aspelin C(2), Björk JK(1), Bergman HA(1), Himanen SV(1), Kallio
MJ(3), Roos-Mattjus P(2), Sistonen L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland Turku 
Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520
Turku, Finland. (2)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, 20520
Turku, Finland. (3)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo
Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland VTT Health, VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland, 20520 Turku, Finland. (4)Department of Biosciences, Åbo
Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland Turku Centre for Biotechnology,
University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland
lea.sistonen@abo.fi.

Unless mitigated, external and physiological stresses are detrimental for cells, 
especially in mitosis, resulting in chromosomal missegregation, aneuploidy, or
apoptosis. Heat shock proteins (Hsps) maintain protein homeostasis and promote
cell survival. Hsps are transcriptionally regulated by heat shock factors (HSFs).
Of these, HSF1 is the master regulator and HSF2 modulates Hsp expression by
interacting with HSF1. Due to global inhibition of transcription in mitosis,
including HSF1-mediated expression of Hsps, mitotic cells are highly vulnerable
to stress. Here, we show that cells can counteract transcriptional silencing and 
protect themselves against proteotoxicity in mitosis. We found that the condensed
chromatin of HSF2-deficient cells is accessible for HSF1 and RNA polymerase II,
allowing stress-inducible Hsp expression. Consequently, HSF2-deficient cells
exposed to acute stress display diminished mitotic errors and have a survival
advantage. We also show that HSF2 expression declines during mitosis in several
but not all human cell lines, which corresponds to the Hsp70 induction and
protection against stress-induced mitotic abnormalities and apoptosis.

© 2014 Elsing et al.

PMCID: PMC4164949
PMID: 25202032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Nov;10(5):2313-21. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2547. Epub 2014 Sep 8.

Upregulation of heat shock factor 1 transcription activity is associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma progression.

Li S(1), Ma W(2), Fei T(3), Lou Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Cui X(1), Qin X(1), Zhang J(1),
Liu G(1), Dong Z(1), Ma Y(1), Song Z(4), Hu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Antibody Engineering, Department of Genetics and Cell 
Biology, Henan University School of Medicine, Henan 475004, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Surgery, Huaihe Hospital Affiliated to Henan University,
Kaifeng, Henan 475004, P.R. China. (3)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, Shanghai 20072, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji
University, Shanghai 20072, P.R. China.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is associated with tissue-specific tumorigenesis in a 
number of mouse models, and has been used a as prognostic marker of cancer types,
including breast and prostatic cancer. However, its role in human hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) is not well understood. Using immunoblotting and
immunohistochemical staining, it was identified that HSF1 and its serine (S) 326 
phosphorylation, a biomarker of HSF1 activation, are significantly upregulated in
human HCC tissues and HCC cell lines compared with their normal counterparts.
Cohort analyses indicated that upregulation of the expression of HSF1 and its
phospho-S326 is significantly correlated with HCC progression, invasion and
patient survival prognosis (P<0.001); however, not in the presence of a
hepatitis B virus infection and the expression of alpha-fetoprotein and
carcinoembryonic antigen. Knockdown of HSF1 with shRNA induced the protein
expression of tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein, resulting in attenuated
plc/prf5 cell growth and colony formation in vitro. Taken together, these data
markedly support that HSF1 is a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic
target for the treatment of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4214332
PMID: 25199534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biosystems. 2014 Oct;124:75-85. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 
Sep 6.

Comparison of the molecular topologies of stress-activated transcription factors 
HSF1, AP-1, NRF2, and NF-<U+03BA>B in their induction kinetics of HMOX1.

Pronk TE(1), van der Veen JW(2), Vandebriel RJ(3), van Loveren H(2), de Vink
EP(4), Pennings JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, NL-3720BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands; Department 
of Toxicogenomics, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: tessa.pronk@gmail.com. (2)Centre for Health Protection, National
Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, NL-3720BA
Bilthoven, The Netherlands; Department of Toxicogenomics, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands. (3)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute 
for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), P.O. Box 1, NL-3720BA Bilthoven,
The Netherlands. (4)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven
University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

For cells, reacting aptly to changes in their environment is of critical
importance. The protein Heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) plays a critical role as a guard
of cellular homeostasis and is considered as a reliable indicator of cellular
oxidative stress. A better insight in the regulation of HMOX1 would assist in
understanding the physiological role of HMOX1 as well as improving functional
interpretation of the gene as a biomarker in toxicogenomics. Remarkably, as many 
as four transcription factors are known to regulate the HMOX1 gene: HSF1, AP-1,
NRF2, and NF-<U+03BA>B. To investigate induction kinetics of these transcription
factors, we constructed mathematical simulation models for each of them. We
included the topology of the known interactions of molecules involved in the
activation of the transcription factors, and the feedback loops resulting in
their down-regulation. We evaluate how the molecular circuitries associated with 
the different transcription factors differ in their kinetics regarding HMOX1
induction, under different scenarios of acute and less acute stress. We also
evaluate the combined effect of the four transcription factors on HMOX1
expression and the resulting alleviation of stress. Overall, the results support 
the assumption of different biological roles for the four transcription factors, 
with AP-1 being a fast acting general stress response protein at the expense of
efficiency, and NRF2 being important for cellular homeostasis in maintaining low 
levels of oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25199502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Lett. 2014 Nov 28;354(2):329-35. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.08.029. Epub
2014 Sep 3.

Heat shock factor 1 is required for migration and invasion of human melanoma in
vitro and in vivo.

Nakamura Y(1), Fujimoto M(2), Fukushima S(3), Nakamura A(3), Hayashida N(2),
Takii R(2), Takaki E(2), Nakai A(2), Muto M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,
Ube, Japan. Electronic address: naka629@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, Ube, Japan. (3)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a major transactivator of the heat shock response. 
Recent studies have demonstrated that HSF1 is involved in tumor initiation,
maintenance, and progression by regulating the expression of heat shock proteins 
(HSPs) and other molecular targets. Furthermore, HSF1 was identified as a potent 
proinvasion oncogene in human melanomas. However, the biological functions of
HSF1 in human melanoma remain poorly understood. To determine the functional role
of HSF1 in melanoma, we used short hairpin RNA (shRNA) to silence HSF1 in human
melanoma cell lines and investigated its effect on cell migration and invasive
ability in vitro. We found that HSF1 knockdown led to a marked reduction in
migration and invasive ability, and these functions were restored by
overexpression of wild-type HSF1. To confirm the in vitro results, we performed
subcutaneous xenograft experiments in athymic nude mice. We found that HSF1 was
required for melanoma invasion and metastasis, as well as tumorigenic potential
in vivo. Overall, these results show that HSF1 is indispensable for melanoma
progression and metastasis, and suggests that HSF1 could be a promising
therapeutic target for melanoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25194503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Dec;8(4):333-9. doi: 10.1007/s12079-014-0244-8. Epub
2014 Sep 6.

Differential translocation of heat shock factor-1 after mild and severe stress to
human skin fibroblasts undergoing aging in vitro.

Demirovic D(1), de Toda IM, Nizard C, Rattan SI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Ageing, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Repeated exposure to mild heat shock (HS) has been shown to induce a wide range
of health promoting hormetic effects in various biological systems, including
human cells undergoing aging in vitro. In order to understand how cells
distinguish between mild and severe stress, we have investigated the extent of
early and immediate HS response by analyzing the nuclear translocation of the
transcription factor heat shock factor-1 (HSF1), in serially passaged normal
adult human facial skin fibroblasts exposed to mild (41 °C) or severe (43 °C) HS.
Cells respond differently when exposed to mild and severe HS at different passage
levels in terms of the extent of HSF1 translocation. In early passage young cells
there was a 5-fold difference between mild and severe HS in the extent of HSF1
translocation. However, in near senescent late passage cells, the difference
between mild and severe stress in terms of the extent of HSF1 translocation was
reduced to less than 2-fold. One of the reasons for this age-related attenuation 
of heat shock response is due to the fact there was a higher basal level of HSF1 
in the nuclei of late passage cells, which is indicative of increased intrinsic
stress during cellular aging. These observations are consistent with previously
reported data that whereas repeated mild stress given at younger ages can slow
down aging and increase the lifespan, the same level of stress given at older
ages may not provide the same benefits. Therefore, elucidating the early and
immediate steps in the induction of stress response can be useful in deciding
whether a particular level of stress is potentially hormetically beneficial or
not.

PMCID: PMC4390796
PMID: 25193128  [PubMed]


181. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;21(10):876-83. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2878. Epub 2014
Aug 31.

TRIM28 regulates RNA polymerase II promoter-proximal pausing and pause release.

Bunch H(1), Zheng X(2), Burkholder A(3), Dillon ST(4), Motola S(5), Birrane G(6),
Ebmeier CC(7), Levine S(5), Fargo D(8), Hu G(9), Taatjes DJ(7), Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)1] Laboratory of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA. [2]. (3)1]
Integrative Bioinformatics, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA. [2]. 
(4)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Genomics and Proteomics
Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (5)BioMicro Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (6)1] Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. [2] Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (7)Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
(8)Integrative Bioinformatics, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 
USA. (9)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina, USA.

Promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is a major checkpoint in 
transcription. An unbiased search for new human proteins that could regulate
paused Pol II at the HSPA1B gene identified TRIM28. In vitro analyses indicated
HSF1-dependent attenuation of Pol II pausing upon TRIM28 depletion, whereas in
vivo data revealed de novo expression of HSPA1B and other known genes regulated
by paused Pol II upon TRIM28 knockdown. These results were supported by
genome-wide ChIP-sequencing analyses of Pol II occupancy that revealed a global
role for TRIM28 in regulating Pol II pausing and pause release. Furthermore, in
vivo and in vitro mechanistic studies suggest that transcription-coupled
phosphorylation regulates Pol II pause release by TRIM28. Collectively, our
findings identify TRIM28 as a new factor that modulates Pol II pausing and
transcriptional elongation at a large number of mammalian genes.

PMCID: PMC4189995
PMID: 25173174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Mar;20(2):277-88. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0540-5.
Epub 2014 Aug 29.

An artificial HSE promoter for efficient and selective detection of heat shock
pathway activity.

Ortner V(1), Ludwig A, Riegel E, Dunzinger S, Czerny T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Life Sciences, University of Applied Sciences, FH Campus
Wien, Helmut-Qualtinger-Gasse 2, A-1030, Vienna, Austria.

Detection of cellular stress is of major importance for the survival of cells.
During evolution, a network of stress pathways developed, with the heat shock
(HS) response playing a major role. The key transcription factor mediating HS
signalling activity in mammalian cells is the HS factor HSF1. When activated it
binds to the heat shock elements (HSE) in the promoters of target genes like heat
shock protein (HSP) genes. They are induced by HSF1 but in addition they
integrate multiple signals from different stress pathways. Here, we developed an 
artificial promoter consisting only of HSEs and therefore selectively reacting to
HSF-mediated pathway activation. The promoter is highly inducible but has an
extreme low basal level. Direct comparison with the HSPA1A promoter activity
indicates that heat-dependent expression can be fully recapitulated by isolated
HSEs in human cells. Using this sensitive reporter, we measured the HS response
for different temperatures and exposure times. In particular, long heat induction
times of 1 or 2 h were compared with short heat durations down to 1 min,
conditions typical for burn injuries. We found similar responses to both long and
short heat durations but at completely different temperatures. Exposure times of 
2 h result in pathway activation at 41 to 44 °C, whereas heat pulses of 1 min
lead to a maximum HS response between 47 and 50 °C. The results suggest that the 
HS response is initiated by a combination of temperature and exposure time but
not by a certain threshold temperature.

PMCID: PMC4326385
PMID: 25168173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Brain. 2014 Aug 29;7:62. doi: 10.1186/s13041-014-0062-1.

SIRT1 overexpression ameliorates a mouse model of SOD1-linked amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis via HSF1/HSP70i chaperone system.

Watanabe S, Ageta-Ishihara N, Nagatsu S, Takao K, Komine O, Endo F, Miyakawa T,
Misawa H, Takahashi R, Kinoshita M(1), Yamanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Pathobiology, Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikus, Nagoya 464-8601,
Japan. kinoshita.makoto@c.mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Dominant mutations in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) cause
degeneration of motor neurons in a subset of inherited amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS). The pathogenetic process mediated by misfolded and/or aggregated
mutant SOD1 polypeptides is hypothesized to be suppressed by protein refolding.
This genetic study is aimed to test whether mutant SOD1-mediated ALS pathology
recapitulated in mice could be alleviated by overexpressing a longevity-related
deacetylase SIRT1 whose substrates include a transcription factor heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1), the master regulator of the chaperone system.
RESULTS: We established a line of transgenic mice that chronically overexpress
SIRT1 in the brain and spinal cord. While inducible HSP70 (HSP70i) was
upregulated in the spinal cord of SIRT1 transgenic mice (PrP-Sirt1), no
neurological and behavioral alterations were detected. To test hypothetical
benefits of SIRT1 overexpression, we crossbred PrP-Sirt1 mice with two lines of
ALS model mice: A high expression line that exhibits a severe phenotype
(SOD1G93A-H) or a low expression line with a milder phenotype (SOD1G93A-L). The
Sirt1 transgene conferred longer lifespan without altering the time of
symptomatic onset in SOD1G93A-L. Biochemical analysis of the spinal cord revealed
that SIRT1 induced HSP70i expression through deacetylation of HSF1 and that
SOD1G93A-L/PrP-Sirt1 double transgenic mice contained less insoluble SOD1 than
SOD1G93A-L mice. Parallel experiments showed that Sirt1 transgene could not
rescue a more severe phenotype of SOD1G93A-H transgenic mice partly because their
HSP70i level had peaked out.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic supplementation of SIRT1 can ameliorate a mutant
SOD1-linked ALS mouse model partly through the activation of the HSF1/HSP70i
chaperone system. Future studies shall include testing potential benefits of
pharmacological enhancement of the deacetylation activity of SIRT1 after the
onset of the symptom.

PMCID: PMC4237944
PMID: 25167838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 15;5(17):7805-19.

Clusterin inhibition using OGX-011 synergistically enhances zoledronic acid
activity in osteosarcoma.

Lamoureux F(1), Baud'huin M(2), Ory B(1), Guiho R(3), Zoubeidi A(4), Gleave M(4),
Heymann D(2), Rédini F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Nantes, Nantes atlantique universités, Laboratoire de
Physiopathologie de la Résorption Osseuse et Thérapie des Tumeurs Osseuses
Primitives, Nantes F-44035, France. INSERM, UMR 957, Nantes F-44035, France.
LUNAM Université. Equipe labellisée LIGUE 2012, Nantes, cedex. (2)Université de
Nantes, Nantes atlantique universités, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie de la
Résorption Osseuse et Thérapie des Tumeurs Osseuses Primitives, Nantes F-44035,
France. INSERM, UMR 957, Nantes F-44035, France. LUNAM Université. CHU de Nantes,
Nantes F-44035, France. Equipe labellisée LIGUE 2012, Nantes, cedex.
(3)Université de Nantes, Nantes atlantique universités,Laboratoire de
Physiopathologie de la Résorption Osseuse et Thérapie des Tumeurs Osseuses
Primitives, Nantes F-44035, France. INSERM, UMR 957, Nantes F-44035, France.
LUNAM Université. Equipe labellisée LIGUE 2012, Nantes, cedex. (4)The Vancouver
Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

PURPOSE: Despite recent improvements in therapeutic management of osteosarcoma,
ongoing challenges in improving the response to chemotherapy warrants new
strategies still needed to improve overall patient survival. Among new
therapeutic approaches, zoledronic acid (ZOL) represents a promising adjuvant
molecule to chemotherapy to limit the osteolytic component of bone tumors.
However, ZOL triggers the elevation of heat shock proteins (Hsp), including Hsp27
and clusterin (CLU), which could enhance tumor cell survival and treatment
resistance. We hypothesized that targeting CLU using siRNA or the antisense drug,
OGX-011, will suppress treatment-induced CLU induction and enhance ZOL-induced
cell death in osteosarcoma (OS) cells.
METHODS: The combined effects of OGX-011 and ZOL were investigated in vitro on
cell growth, viability, apoptosis and cell cycle repartition of ZOL-sensitive or 
-resistant human OS cell lines (SaOS2, U2OS, MG63 and MNNG/HOS).
RESULTS: In OS cell lines, ZOL increased levels of HSPs, especially CLU, in a
dose- and time-dependent manner by mechanism including increased HSF1
transcription activity. The OS resistant cells to ZOL exhibited higher CLU
expression level than the sensitive cells. Moreover, CLU overexpression protects 
OS sensitive cells to ZOL-induced cell death by modulating the MDR1 and farnesyl 
diphosphate synthase expression. OGX-011 suppressed treatment-induced increases
in CLU and synergistically enhanced the activity of ZOL on cell growth and
apoptosis. These biologic events were accompanied by decreased expression of
HSPs, MDR1 and HSF1 transcriptional activity. In vivo, OGX-011, administered 3
times a week (IP, 20mg/kg), potentiated the effect of ZOL (s.c; 50µg/kg),
significantly inhibiting tumor growth by 50% and prolonging survival in MNNG/HOS 
xenograft model compared to ZOL alone.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that ZOL-mediated induction of CLU can be
attenuated by OGX-011, with synergistic effects on delaying progression of
osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4202162
PMID: 25138053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nature. 2014 Oct 2;514(7520):117-21. doi: 10.1038/nature13578. Epub 2014 Aug 3.

Promoter sequences direct cytoplasmic localization and translation of mRNAs
during starvation in yeast.

Zid BM(1), O'Shea EK(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA [2] Faculty of Arts and Sciences Center for
Systems Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. (2)1]
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA [2] Faculty of Arts and Sciences Center for Systems
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA [3] Department
of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02138, USA [4] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

A universal feature of the response to stress and nutrient limitation is
transcriptional upregulation of genes that encode proteins important for
survival. Under many such conditions, the overall protein synthesis level is
reduced, thereby dampening the stress response at the level of protein
expression. For example, during glucose starvation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(yeast), translation is rapidly repressed, yet the transcription of many stress- 
and glucose-repressed genes is increased. Here we show, using ribosomal profiling
and microscopy, that this transcriptionally upregulated gene set consists of two 
classes: one class produces messenger RNAs that are translated during glucose
starvation and are diffusely localized in the cytoplasm, including many
heat-shock protein mRNAs; and the other class produces mRNAs that are not
efficiently translated during glucose starvation and are concentrated in foci
that co-localize with P bodies and stress granules, a class that is enriched for 
mRNAs involved in glucose metabolism. Surprisingly, the information specifying
the differential localization and protein production of these two classes of mRNA
is encoded in the promoter sequence: promoter responsiveness to heat-shock factor
1 (Hsf1) specifies diffuse cytoplasmic localization and higher protein production
on glucose starvation. Thus, promoter sequences can influence not only the levels
of mRNAs but also the subcellular localization of mRNAs and the efficiency with
which they are translated, enabling cells to tailor protein production to the
environmental conditions.

PMCID: PMC4184922
PMID: 25119046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Sep;14(9):579. doi: 10.1038/nrc3807. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Microenvironment: HSF1, the troublemaker next door.

Villanueva MT.

Comment on
    Cell. 2014 Jul 31;158(3):564-78.

PMID: 25118604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Stress. 2014 Dec;17(6):504-11. doi: 10.3109/10253890.2014.953477.

Changes in cardiac thrombomodulin and heat shock transcription factor 1
expression and peripheral thrombomodulin and catecholamines during hypothermia in
rats.

Kaija H(1), Pakanen L, Uusitalo J, Nikkilä S, Kortelainen ML, Porvari KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Institute of Diagnostics, Medical Research
Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital, University of Oulu , Oulu , Finland.

Effects of hypothermia and rewarming on thrombomodulin, catecholamines and heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) were studied in rats. The aims of this study 
were to clarify whether cold stress, under anesthesia, is sufficient to change
levels of thrombomodulin in healthy endothelium and in the circulation and
whether adrenaline, noradrenaline and HSF1 could act as regulators in the
process. Rats were divided into control, mild hypothermia (2 and 4.5<U+2009>hours
at<U+2009>+<U+2009>21<U+2009>°C; MH1, MH2), severe hypothermia (2 and 4.5<U+2009>h at<U+2009>+<U+2009>10<U+2009>°C; SH1, SH2) and 
two rewarming groups (2<U+2009>h at<U+2009>+<U+2009>10<U+2009>°C followed by 2<U+2009>h at<U+2009>+<U+2009>21<U+2009>°C or 3<U+2009>h
at<U+2009>+<U+2009>28<U+2009>°C; SHW1, SHW2) (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15/group, except n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6 in MH1).
Fentanyl-fluanisone-midazolam was used as anesthetic. Low levels of
thrombomodulin in plasma and myocardial arterioles/venules measured by ELISA and 
immunohistochemistry were associated with significant increase of thrombomodulin 
transcript level in SH1 rats analyzed by quantitative PCR. Plasma adrenaline
correlated negatively with the relative amount of myocardial thrombomodulin
transcripts and positively with plasma thrombomodulin in SH. Transcript levels of
thrombomodulin and HSF1 correlated strongly (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.83; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) in SH.
Plasma/urine ratio of thrombomodulin and plasma adrenaline (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.87; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005) 
or noradrenaline (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.78; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.023) were strongly correlated in SHW1 rats.
Hence, cellular and soluble levels of thrombomodulin are modified by cold stress 
in healthy rats, possibly via catecholamines and HSF1.

PMID: 25109347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 8;9(8):e104554. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104554. eCollection
2014.

Molecular mechanisms of action of herbal antifungal alkaloid berberine, in
Candida albicans.

Dhamgaye S(1), Devaux F(2), Vandeputte P(3), Khandelwal NK(4), Sanglard D(3),
Mukhopadhyay G(5), Prasad R(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India;
Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India. (2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7238, Laboratoire de
genomique des microorganisms, Paris, France. (3)Institute of Microbiology,
University of Lausanne and University Hospital Center, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.
(5)Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi,
India.

Candida albicans causes superficial to systemic infections in immuno-compromised 
individuals. The concomitant use of fungistatic drugs and the lack of cidal drugs
frequently result in strains that could withstand commonly used antifungals, and 
display multidrug resistance (MDR). In search of novel fungicidals, in this
study, we have explored a plant alkaloid berberine (BER) for its antifungal
potential. For this, we screened an in-house transcription factor (TF) mutant
library of C. albicans strains towards their susceptibility to BER. Our screen of
TF mutant strains identified a heat shock factor (HSF1), which has a central role
in thermal adaptation, to be most responsive to BER treatment. Interestingly,
HSF1 mutant was not only highly susceptible to BER but also displayed collateral 
susceptibility towards drugs targeting cell wall (CW) and ergosterol
biosynthesis. Notably, BER treatment alone could affect the CW integrity as was
evident from the growth retardation of MAP kinase and calcineurin pathway null
mutant strains and transmission electron microscopy. However, unlike BER, HSF1
effect on CW appeared to be independent of MAP kinase and Calcineurin pathway
genes. Additionally, unlike hsf1 null strain, BER treatment of Candida cells
resulted in dysfunctional mitochondria, which was evident from its slow growth in
non-fermentative carbon source and poor labeling with mitochondrial membrane
potential sensitive probe. This phenotype was reinforced with an enhanced ROS
levels coinciding with the up-regulated oxidative stress genes in BER-treated
cells. Together, our study not only describes the molecular mechanism of BER
fungicidal activity but also unravels a new role of evolutionary conserved HSF1, 
in MDR of Candida.

PMCID: PMC4126717
PMID: 25105295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(8):1308-14.

Hyper-O-GlcNAcylation inhibits the induction of heat shock protein 70 (Hsp 70) by
sodium arsenite in HeLa cells.

Miura Y(1), Sato T, Sakurai Y, Sakai R, Hiraoka W, Endo T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Team for Mechanism of Aging, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Gerontology.

O-Linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine-modification (O-GlcNAcylation) is a reversible,
post-translational, and regulatory modification of nuclear, mitochondrial, and
cytoplasmic proteins that is responsive to cellular stress. However, the role of 
O-GlcNAcylation in the induction of heat shock proteins (Hsps) by arsenite
remains unclear. We used O-(2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranosylidene) amino
N-phenyl carbamate (PUGNAc), an inhibitor of O-GlcNAcase, and glucosamine (GlcN),
an enhancer of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway, or O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT)
short interfering RNA (siRNA) to enhance or suppress cellular O-GlcNAcylation
levels, respectively, in HeLa cells. The exposure to arsenite increased
O-GlcNAcylation and Hsp 70 levels in HeLa cells. However, the pre-treatment with 
PUGNAc or GlcN, which enhanced O-GlcNAcylation levels, decreased the
arsenite-induced expression of Hsp 70. The pre-treatment with OGT siRNA, which
suppressed O-GlcNAcylation levels, did not affect the induction of Hsp 70. We
then examined the effects of O-GlcNAcylation on the nuclear translocation and
phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and found that neither the nuclear
translocation nor phosphorylation of HSF1 was regulated by O-GlcNAcylation.
Finally, Hsp 70 mRNA expression was induced by arsenite, whereas the addition of 
PUGNAc slightly suppressed its induction. These results indicate that
O-GlcNAcylation is related to arsenite-induced Hsp 70 expression, and
demonstrated that hyper-O-GlcNAcylation inhibited the induction of Hsp 70 via
transcriptional factors instead of HSF1.

PMID: 25087952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cell. 2014 Jul 31;158(3):564-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.05.045.

The reprogramming of tumor stroma by HSF1 is a potent enabler of malignancy.

Scherz-Shouval R(1), Santagata S(2), Mendillo ML(1), Sholl LM(3), Ben-Aharon
I(4), Beck AH(5), Dias-Santagata D(6), Koeva M(7), Stemmer SM(4), Whitesell L(8),
Lindquist S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(2)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA;
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Center,
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)Institute of Oncology, Davidoff
Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva 49100, Israel; Sackler Faculty of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel. (5)Department of
Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02215, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(7)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA;
Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (8)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address: whitesell@wi.mit.edu. (9)Whitehead 
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address:
lindquist_admin@wi.mit.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Sep;14(9):579.

Stromal cells within the tumor microenvironment are essential for tumor
progression and metastasis. Surprisingly little is known about the factors that
drive the transcriptional reprogramming of stromal cells within tumors. We report
that the transcriptional regulator heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is frequently
activated in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), where it is a potent enabler
of malignancy. HSF1 drives a transcriptional program in CAFs that complements,
yet is completely different from, the program it drives in adjacent cancer cells.
This CAF program is uniquely structured to support malignancy in a
non-cell-autonomous way. Two central stromal signaling molecules-TGF-ß and
SDF1-play a critical role. In early-stage breast and lung cancer, high stromal
HSF1 activation is strongly associated with poor patient outcome. Thus, tumors
co-opt the ancient survival functions of HSF1 to orchestrate malignancy in both
cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous ways, with far-reaching therapeutic
implications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4249939
PMID: 25083868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jul 31;8(7):e3051. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003051.
eCollection 2014.

Immunolocalization of anti-hsf1 to the acetabular glands of infectious
schistosomes suggests a non-transcriptional function for this transcriptional
activator.

Ishida K(1), Varrecchia M(1), Knudsen GM(2), Jolly ER(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
United States of America. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of
America. (3)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
Ohio, United States of America; Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

Schistosomiasis is a chronically debilitating disease caused by parasitic worms
of the genus Schistosoma, and it is a global problem affecting over 240 million
people. Little is known about the regulatory proteins and mechanisms that control
schistosome host invasion, gene expression, and development. Schistosome larvae, 
cercariae, are transiently free-swimming organisms and infectious to man.
Cercariae penetrate human host skin directly using proteases that degrade skin
connective tissue. These proteases are secreted from anucleate acetabular glands 
that contain many proteins, including heat shock proteins. Heat shock
transcription factors are strongly conserved activators that play crucial roles
in the maintenance of cell homeostasis by transcriptionally regulating heat shock
protein expression. In this study, we clone and characterize the schistosome Heat
shock factor 1 gene (SmHSF1). We verify its ability to activate transcription
using a modified yeast one-hybrid system, and we show that it can bind to the
heat shock binding element (HSE) consensus DNA sequence. Our quantitative RT-PCR 
analysis shows that SmHSF1 is expressed throughout several life-cycle stages from
sporocyst to adult worm. Interestingly, using immunohistochemistry, a polyclonal 
antibody raised against an Hsf1-peptide demonstrates a novel localization for
this conserved, stress-modulating activator. Our analysis suggests that
schistosome Heat shock factor 1 may be localized to the acetabular glands of
infective cercariae.

PMCID: PMC4117452
PMID: 25078989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Jan;20(1):95-107. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0529-0.
Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Basal and stress-inducible expression of HSPA6 in human keratinocytes is
regulated by negative and positive promoter regions.

Ramirez VP(1), Stamatis M, Shmukler A, Aneskievich BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 06269-3092, USA.

Epidermal keratinocytes serve as the primary barrier between the body and
environmental stressors. They are subjected to numerous stress events and are
likely to respond with a repertoire of heat shock proteins (HSPs). HSPA6
(HSP70B') is described in other cell types with characteristically low to
undetectable basal expression, but is highly stress induced. Despite this
response in other cells, little is known about its control in keratinocytes. We
examined endogenous human keratinocyte HSPA6 expression and localized some
responsible transcription factor sites in a cloned HSPA6 3 kb promoter. Using
promoter 5' truncations and deletions, negative and positive regulatory regions
were found throughout the 3 kb promoter. A region between -346 and -217 bp was
found to be crucial to HSPA6 basal expression and stress inducibility.
Site-specific mutations and DNA-binding studies show that a previously
uncharacterized AP1 site contributes to the basal expression and maximal stress
induction of HSPA6. Additionally, a new heat shock element (HSE) within this
region was defined. While this element mediates increased transcriptional
response in thermally stressed HaCaT keratinocytes, it preferentially binds a
stress-inducible factor other than heat shock factor (HSF)1 or HSF2.
Intriguingly, this newly characterized HSPA6 HSE competes HSF1 binding a
consensus HSE and binds both HSF1 and HSF2 from other epithelial cells. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that the HSPA6 promoter contains essential
negative and positive promoter regions and newly identified transcription factor 
targets, which are key to the basal and stress-inducible expression of HSPA6.
Furthermore, these results suggest that an HSF-like factor may preferentially
bind this newly identified HSPA6 HSE in HaCaT cells.

PMCID: PMC4255259
PMID: 25073946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Oct;10(4):2172-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2411. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

HSP60 is involved in the neuroprotective effects of naloxone.

Cheng W(1), Li Y(1), Hou X(2), Zhang N(1), Ma J(1), Ding F(1), Li F(1), Miao
Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Qi Q(1), Li G(1), Shen Y(3), Liu J(1), Huang W(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical College of Ningxia Medical University, Ningxia Key Laboratory of
Cerebrocranial Diseases, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750004, P.R. China. (2)The General
Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750004, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology of the
Ministry of Health, Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, P.R. China.

Heat shock protein (HSP)60 is primarily a mitochondrial protein. Previous
experiments have found that changes in the location of intracellular HSP60 have
been associated with apoptosis. Extracellular HSP60 mediates apoptosis via its
ligand, Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4. TLR-4 is an important factor expressed on
microglia, with a central role in generating neuroimmune responses in the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. Naloxone is a highly effective
nonselective opioid receptor antagonist, and has been reported to be
pharmacologically beneficial for the treatment of brain diseases through
inhibiting microglia activation. However, the mechanisms underlying these
beneficial effects of naloxone remain poorly understood. The present study aimed 
to investigate the role of HSP60 in the neuroprotective effects of naloxone on
the production of proinflammatory mediators in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated BV2 murine microglial cells and the possible signaling pathways 
involved. The results demonstrated that naloxone significantly inhibited the
expression and release of HSP60 in BV2 cells. The expression levels of heat shock
factor (HSF)-1 were upregulated in LPS-activated BV2 cells, which indicated that 
the increased expression of HSP60 was driven by HSF-1 activation. However,
increased HSF-1 levels may be downregulated by naloxone. The levels of TLR-4 were
elevated in activated BV2 cells, and then inhibited by naloxone. Activation of
TLR-4 is characterized by activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) followed by the
production of various proinflammatory and neurotoxic factors. Data from the
present study demonstrated that naloxone reduced the expression levels of NF-<U+03BA>B
and its upstream protein caspase-3, and reduced the LPS-induced production of
nitric oxide, inducible nitric oxide synthase, tumor necrosis factor a,
interleukin-1ß and interleukin-6 in BV2 microglia. In light of this data, it was 
concluded that naloxone may exert its neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory
effects by inhibiting microglia activation through a HSP60-TLR-4-NF-<U+03BA>B signaling 
pathway.

PMID: 25051048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Dec;171(23):5265-79. doi: 10.1111/bph.12838.

Celastrol protects ischaemic myocardium through a heat shock response with
up-regulation of haeme oxygenase-1.

Der Sarkissian S(1), Cailhier JF, Borie M, Stevens LM, Gaboury L, Mansour S,
Hamet P, Noiseux N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CRCHUM), Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Surgery, Université de
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Celastrol, a triterpene from plants, has been used in
traditional oriental medicine to treat various diseases. Here, we investigated
the cardioprotective effects of celastrol against ischaemia.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Protective pathways induced by celastrol were investigated
in hypoxic cultures of H9c2 rat cardiomyoblasts and in a rat model of myocardial 
infarction, assessed with echocardiographic and histological analysis.
KEY RESULTS: In H9c2 cells, celastrol triggered reactive oxygen species (ROS)
formation within minutes, induced nuclear translocation of the transcription
factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) resulting in a heat shock response (HSR)
leading to increased expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs). ROS scavenger
N-acetylcysteine reduced expression of HSP70 and HSP32 (haeme oxygenase-1, HO-1).
Celastrol improved H9c2 survival under hypoxic stress, and functional analysis
revealed HSF1 and HO-1 as key effectors of the HSR, induced by celastrol, in
promoting cytoprotection. In the rat ischaemic myocardium, celastrol treatment
improved cardiac function and reduced adverse left ventricular remodelling at 14 
days. Celastrol triggered expression of cardioprotective HO-1 and inhibited
fibrosis and infarct size. In the peri-infarct area, celastrol reduced
myofibroblast and macrophage infiltration, while attenuating up-regulation of
TGF-ß and collagen genes.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Celastrol treatment induced an HSR through
activation of HSF1 with up-regulation of HO-1 as the key effector, promoting
cardiomyocyte survival, reduction of injury and adverse remodelling with
preservation of cardiac function. Celastrol may represent a novel potent
pharmacological cardioprotective agent mimicking ischaemic conditioning that
could have a valuable impact in the treatment of myocardial infarction.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4294039
PMID: 25041185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Jul 15;6(8):1043-61. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201303311.

Heat shock factor 2 is a stress-responsive mediator of neuronal migration defects
in models of fetal alcohol syndrome.

El Fatimy R(1), Miozzo F(1), Le Mouël A(2), Abane R(1), Schwendimann L(3),
Sabéran-Djoneidi D(2), de Thonel A(4), Massaoudi I(2), Paslaru L(5),
Hashimoto-Torii K(6), Christians E(7), Rakic P(6), Gressens P(3), Mezger V(8).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR7216 Épigénétique et Destin Cellulaire, Paris Cedex 13, France Univ
Paris Diderot Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris Cedex 13, France ED 387 iViv UPMC Univ
Paris 06, Paris, France Univ Paris Diderot, Paris Cedex 13, France. (2)CNRS
UMR7216 Épigénétique et Destin Cellulaire, Paris Cedex 13, France Univ Paris
Diderot Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris Cedex 13, France. (3)INSERM U1141, Hôpital
Robert Debré, Paris, France Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Univ Paris Diderot
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. (4)INSERM UMR 866, Dijon, France Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy, Univ Burgundy, Dijon, France. (5)Carol Davila University
of Medicine and Pharmacy Fundeni Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. (6)Department of
Neurobiology and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (7)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement de
Villefranche-sur-mer, Observatoire Océanologique, CNRS, Villefranche-sur-mer,
France Sorbonne Universités UPMC Univ Paris 06, Villefranche-sur-mer, France.
(8)CNRS UMR7216 Épigénétique et Destin Cellulaire, Paris Cedex 13, France Univ
Paris Diderot Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris Cedex 13, France
valerie.mezger@univ-paris-diderot.fr.

Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is a frequent cause of mental retardation.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying brain development defects induced by
maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy are unclear. We used normal and
Hsf2-deficient mice and cell systems to uncover a pivotal role for heat shock
factor 2 (HSF2) in radial neuronal migration defects in the cortex, a hallmark of
fetal alcohol exposure. Upon fetal alcohol exposure, HSF2 is essential for the
triggering of HSF1 activation, which is accompanied by distinctive
post-translational modifications, and HSF2 steers the formation of atypical
alcohol-specific HSF1-HSF2 heterocomplexes. This perturbs the in vivo binding of 
HSF2 to heat shock elements (HSEs) in genes that control neuronal migration in
normal conditions, such as p35 or the MAPs (microtubule-associated proteins, such
as Dclk1 and Dcx), and alters their expression. In the absence of HSF2, migration
defects as well as alterations in gene expression are reduced. Thus, HSF2, as a
sensor for alcohol stress in the fetal brain, acts as a mediator of the neuronal 
migration defects associated with FASD.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4154132
PMID: 25027850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Immunol. 2014 Aug 15;193(4):1975-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303468. Epub 2014
Jul 14.

Moderate alcohol induces stress proteins HSF1 and hsp70 and inhibits
proinflammatory cytokines resulting in endotoxin tolerance.

Muralidharan S(1), Ambade A(1), Fulham MA(1), Deshpande J(1), Catalano D(1),
Mandrekar P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA 01605. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01605 pranoti.mandrekar@umassmed.edu.

Binge or moderate alcohol exposure impairs host defense and increases
susceptibility to infection because of compromised innate immune responses.
However, there is a lack of consensus on the molecular mechanism by which alcohol
mediates this immunosuppression. In this study, we show that cellular stress
proteins HSF1 and hsp70 play a mechanistic role in alcohol-mediated inhibition of
the TLR4/MyD88 pathway. Alcohol exposure induced transcription factor HSF1 mRNA
expression and DNA binding activity in primary human monocytes and murine
macrophages. Furthermore, HSF1 target gene hsp70 mRNA and protein are upregulated
by alcohol in monocytes. In vitro pre-exposure to moderate alcohol reduced
subsequent LPS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activity and downstream TNF-a, IL-6 and
IL-1ß production in monocytes and macrophages, exhibiting endotoxin tolerance.
Mechanistic analysis demonstrates that alcohol-induced HSF1 binds to the TNF-a
promoter in macrophages at early time points, exerting transrepression and
decreased TNF-a expression. Furthermore, association of hsp70 with NF-<U+03BA>B subunit 
p50 in alcohol-treated macrophages correlates with reduced NF-<U+03BA>B activation at
later time points. Hsp70 overexpression in macrophages was sufficient to block
LPS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activity, suggesting alcohol-mediated
immunosuppression by hsp70. The direct crosstalk of hsp70 and HSF1 was further
confirmed by the loss of alcohol-mediated endotoxin tolerance in hsp70- and
HSF1-silenced macrophages. Our data suggest that alcohol-mediated activation of
HSF1 and induction of hsp70 inhibit TLR4-MyD88 signaling and are required for
alcohol-induced endotoxin tolerance. Using stress proteins as direct drug targets
would be clinically relevant in alcohol abuse treatment and may serve to provide 
a better understanding of alcohol-mediated immunosuppression.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4325985
PMID: 25024384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2015 Jan;20(1):47-59. doi: 10.1007/s12192-014-0524-5.
Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Polymorphisms in human heat shock factor-1 and analysis of potential biological
consequences.

Bridges TM(1), Scheraga RG, Tulapurkar ME, Suffredini D, Liggett SB, Ramarathnam 
A, Potla R, Singh IS, Hasday JD.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division, Department of Medicine,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, 110 S. Paca St. 2nd floor, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.

The stress-activated transcription factor, heat shock factor-1 (HSF1), regulates 
many genes including cytoprotective heat shock proteins (HSPs). We hypothesized
that polymorphisms in HSF1 may alter the level or function of HSF1 protein
accounting for interindividual viability in disease susceptibility or prognosis. 
We searched for exomic variants in HSF1 by querying human genome databases and
directly sequencing DNA from 80 anonymous genomic DNA samples. Overall, HSF1
sequence was highly conserved, with no common variations. We found 31 validated
deviations from a reference sequence in the dbSNP database and an additional 5
novel variants by sequencing, with allele frequencies that were 0.06 or less. Of 
these 36, 2 were in 5'-untranslated region (5'UTR), 10 in 3'UTR, and 24 in the
coding region. The potential effects of 5'UTR on secondary structure, protein
structure/function, and 3'UTR targets of microRNAs were analyzed using RNAFold,
PolyPhen-2, SIFT, and MicroSNiper. One of the 5'UTR variants was predicted to
strengthen secondary structure. Eight of 3'UTR variants were predicted to modify 
microRNA target sequences. Eight of the coding region variants were predicted to 
modify HSF1 structure/function. Reducing HSF1 levels in A549 cells using short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) increased sensitivity to heat-induced killing demonstrating
the impact that genetic variants that reduce HSF1 levels might have. Using the
pmirGLO expression system, we found that the wild-type HSF1 3'UTR suppressed
translation of a firefly luciferase reporter plasmid by 65 %. Introducing two of 
four 3'UTR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) increased HSF1 3'UTR
translational suppression by 27-44 % compared with the wild-type HSF1 3'UTR
sequence while a third SNP reduced suppression by 25 %. HSF1 variants may alter
HSF1 protein levels or function with potential effects on cell functions,
including sensitivity to stress.

PMCID: PMC4255257
PMID: 25023647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 15;5(13):5054-64.

Insights from yeast into whether the inhibition of heat shock transcription
factor (Hsf1) by rapamycin can prevent the Hsf1 activation that results from
treatment with an Hsp90 inhibitor.

Millson SH(1), Piper PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Western
Bank, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

In human cells TORC1 mTOR (target of rapamycin) protein kinase complex renders
heat shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1) competent for stress activation. In such
cells, as well as in yeast, the selective TORC1 inhibitor rapamycin blocks this
activation in contrast to Hsp90 inhibitors which potently activate Hsf1.
Potentially therefore rapamycin could prevent the Hsf1 activation that frequently
compromises the efficiency of Hsp90 inhibitor cancer drugs. Little synergy was
found between the effects of rapamycin and the Hsp90 inhibitor radicicol on yeast
growth. However certain rapamycin resistance mutations sensitised yeast to Hsp90 
inhibitor treatment and an Hsp90 mutation that overactivates Hsf1 sensitised
cells to rapamycin. Rapamycin inhibition of the yeast Hsf1 was abolished by this 
Hsp90 mutation, as well as with the loss of Ppt1, the Hsp90-interacting protein
phosphatase that is the ortholog of mammalian PP5. Unexpectedly Hsf1 activation
was found to have a requirement for the rapamycin binding immunophilin FKBP12
even in the absence of rapamycin, while TORC1 "bypass" strains revealed that the 
rapamycin inhibition of yeast Hsf1 is not exerted through two of the major
downstream targets of TORC1, the protein phosphatase regulator Tap42 and the
protein kinase Sch9--the latter the ortholog of human S6 protein kinase
1.SIGNIFICANCE: A problem with most of the Hsp90 inhibitor drugs now in cancer
clinic trials is that they potently activate Hsf1. This leads to an induction of 
heat shock proteins, many of which have a "pro-survival" role in that they help
to protect cells from apopotosis. As the activation of Hsf1 requires TORC1,
inhibitors of mTOR kinase could potentially block this activation of Hsf1 and be 
of value when used in combination drug therapies with Hsp90 inhibitors. However
many of the mechanistic details of the TORC1 regulation of Hsf1, as well as the
interplay between cellular resistances to rapamycin and to Hsp90 inhibitors,
still remain to be resolved.

PMCID: PMC4148121
PMID: 24970820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 23;34(17):2178-88. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.177. Epub 2014 Jun
23.

HSF1 regulation of ß-catenin in mammary cancer cells through control of
HuR/elavL1 expression.

Chou SD(1), Murshid A(1), Eguchi T(1), Gong J(2), Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
(BIDMC), Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Boston University Medical
Center, Boston, MA, USA.

There is now compelling evidence to indicate a place for heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) in mammary carcinogenesis, tumour progression and metastasis. Here we have
investigated a role for HSF1 in regulating the expression of the stem cell
renewal factor ß-catenin in immortalized human mammary epithelial and carcinoma
cells. We found HSF1 to be involved in regulating the translation of ß-catenin,
by investigating effects of gain and loss of HSF1 on this protein. Interestingly,
although HSF1 is a potent transcription factor, it was not directly involved in
regulating levels of ß-catenin mRNA. Instead, our data suggest a complex role in 
translational regulation. HSF1 was shown to regulate levels of the RNA-binding
protein HuR that controlled ß-catenin translation. An extra complexity was added 
to this scenario when it was shown that the long non-coding RNA molecule
lincRNA-p21, known to be involved in ß-catenin mRNA (CTNNB1) translational
regulation, was controlled by HSF1 repression. We have shown previously that HSF1
was positively regulated through phosphorylation by mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) kinase on a key residue, serine 326, essential for transcriptional
activity. In this study, we found that mTOR knockdown not only decreased
HSF1-S326 phosphorylation in mammary cells, but also decreased ß-catenin
expression through a mechanism requiring HuR. Our data point to a complex role
for HSF1 in the regulation of HuR and ß-catenin expression that may be
significant in mammary carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4275421
PMID: 24954509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Eukaryot Cell. 2014 Aug;13(8):1077-84. doi: 10.1128/EC.00138-14. Epub 2014 Jun
20.

Membrane fluidity and temperature sensing are coupled via circuitry comprised of 
Ole1, Rsp5, and Hsf1 in Candida albicans.

Leach MD(1), Cowen LE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom Department 
of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada leah.cowen@utoronto.ca.

Temperature is a ubiquitous environmental variable which can profoundly influence
the physiology of living cells as it changes over time and space. When yeast
cells are exposed to a sublethal heat shock, normal metabolic functions become
repressed and the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 is activated, inducing
heat shock proteins (HSPs). Candida albicans, the most prevalent human fungal
pathogen, is an opportunistic pathogen that has evolved as a relatively harmless 
commensal of healthy individuals. Even though C. albicans occupies thermally
buffered niches, it has retained the classic heat shock response, activating Hsf1
during slow thermal transitions such as the increases in temperature suffered by 
febrile patients. However, the mechanism of temperature sensing in fungal
pathogens remains enigmatic. A few studies with Saccharomyces cerevisiae suggest 
that thermal stress is transduced into a cellular signal at the level of the
membrane. In this study, we manipulated the fluidity of C. albicans membrane to
dissect mechanisms of temperature sensing. We determined that in response to
elevated temperature, levels of OLE1, encoding a fatty acid desaturase, decrease.
Subsequently, loss of OLE1 triggers expression of FAS2, encoding a fatty acid
synthase. Furthermore, depletion of OLE1 prevents full activation of Hsf1,
thereby reducing HSP expression in response to heat shock. This reduction in Hsf1
activation is attributable to the E3 ubiquitin ligase Rsp5, which regulates OLE1 
expression. To our knowledge, this is the first study to define a molecular link 
between fatty acid synthesis and the heat shock response in the fungal kingdom.

Copyright © 2014 Leach and Cowen.

PMCID: PMC4135801
PMID: 24951438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Oct;31(10):1349-60. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0275-3.
Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Developmental competence and expression pattern of bubaline (Bubalus bubalis)
oocytes subjected to elevated temperatures during meiotic maturation in vitro.

Ashraf S(1), Shah SM, Saini N, Dhanda S, Kumar A, Goud TS, Singh MK, Chauhan MS, 
Upadhyay RC.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Centre, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal,
132001, Haryana, India, symaashraf@yahoo.co.in.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the direct effect of physiologically relevant high
temperatures (40.5 and 41.5 °C) for two time periods (12 and 24 h) on bubaline
oocytes during in vitro maturation.
METHOD: The control group oocytes were cultured at 38.5 °C for 24 h. The
treatment 1 (T1) and 3 (T3) group oocytes were cultured at 40.5 and 41.5 °C
respectively, for the first 12 h and at 38.5 °C for rest of the 12 h. However,
treatment 2 (T2) and 4 (T4) group oocytes were cultured at 40.5 and 41.5 °C for
complete 24 h.
RESULTS: Development of oocytes to blastocyst was severely compromised
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) when matured at 40.5 and 41.5 °C for both exposure periods (12 h and 
24 h). It was found that the cleavage rates, blastocyst yield and mean cell
number decreased remarkably (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) in the treatment groups compared to
control. The relative mRNA expression of heat shock protein (Hsp 70.1, 70.2,
70.8, 60, 10 and HSF1), pro-apoptotic (caspases-3, -7, -8, Bid and Bax) and
oxidative stress (iNOS) related genes was significantly higher (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in all 
the treatment groups compared to control. However, mRNA abundance of
anti-apoptotic (Bcl-2, Mcl-1, Bcl-xl), glucose transport (Glut1, Glut3 and
IGF1R), developmental competence (ZAR1 and BMP15) and oxidative stress (MnSOD)
related genes was significantly decreased (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in the treatment groups
compared to control.
CONCLUSION: The present study clearly establishes that physiologically relevant
elevated temperatures during in vitro meiotic maturation reduce developmental
competence of bubaline oocytes.

PMCID: PMC4171417
PMID: 24938361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 Aug;25(8):851-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2014.03.016. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

Effects of Saskatoon berry powder on monocyte adhesion to vascular wall of leptin
receptor-deficient diabetic mice.

Zhao R(1), Le K(2), Li W(3), Ren S(4), Moghadasian MH(2), Beta T(3), Shen GX(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Physiology; Xiangya Boai Rehabilitation
Hospital, Changsha, Hunan, China. (2)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences.
(3)Department of Food Sciences, University of Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Physiology. (5)Department of Internal
Medicine and Physiology. Electronic address: garry.she@med.umanitoba.ca.

HYPOTHESIS: Atherosclerotic cardiovascular complications are the leading cause of
death in diabetic patients. Monocyte adhesion is an early event for
atherogenesis. Previous studies demonstrated that dark-skin berries had
cardiovascular protective effects. We hypothesize that Saskatoon berry (SB)
powder may reduce monocyte adhesion in leptin receptor-deficient (db/db) diabetic
mice.
METHODS: Wild-type and db/db mice were fed with chow or supplemented with SB
powder. Anthocyanins in SB powder were identified using mass spectrometry. Mouse 
monocytes were incubated with mouse aorta. Monocyte adhesion was counted under
microscopy. Inflammatory or metabolic markers in blood or tissue were analyzed
using immunological or biochemical methods.
RESULTS: SB powder significantly reduced monocyte adhesion to aorta from diabetic
db/db mice compared to regular chow. The increased monocyte adhesion to aorta was
normalized in db/db mice treated with =5% of SB powder for 4 weeks. Increased
contents of Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase (NADPH)
oxidase-4, heat shock factor-1, monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1,
intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, P-selectin, tumor necrosis factor-a,
plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 and urokinase plasminogen activator in
aorta or heart apex, elevated plasma PAI-1 and MCP-1 were detected in db/db mice 
on chow compared to wild-type mice on the same diet; 5% SB powder inhibited the
increases of inflammatory, fibrinolytic or stress regulators in aorta or heart
apex of db/db mice. Monocyte adhesion positively correlated with blood glucose,
cholesterol, body weight, heart MCP-1, PAI-1 or ICAM-1.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that SB powder attenuated monocyte adhesion to
aorta of db/db mice, which was potentially mediated through inhibiting the
inflammatory, stress and/or fibrinolyic regulators.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24925752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. FASEB J. 2014 Sep;28(9):4055-67. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-247924. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Heat-shock protein 27 (HSP27, HSPB1) is up-regulated by MET kinase inhibitors and
confers resistance to MET-targeted therapy.

Musiani D(1), Konda JD(1), Pavan S(1), Torchiaro E(1), Sassi F(2), Noghero A(3), 
Erriquez J(4), Perera T(5), Olivero M(1), Di Renzo MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Torino School of Medicine, Turin, Italy;
Laboratory of Cancer Genetics. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, and.
(3)Department of Oncology, University of Torino School of Medicine, Turin, Italy;
Laboratory of Vascular Oncology, Candiolo Cancer Institute, Fondazione del
Piemonte per l'Oncologia (FPO)-Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS), Candiolo, Italy; and. (4)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics.
(5)Janssen Research and Development, Beerse, Belgium.

The tyrosine kinase encoded by the MET oncogene is activated by gene mutation or 
amplification in tumors, which in most instances maintain addiction, i.e.,
dependency, to MET activation. This makes MET an attractive candidate for
targeted therapies. Here we show that, in 3/3 MET-addicted human gastric cancer
cell lines, MET kinase inhibition resulted in a 3- to 4-fold increased expression
of the antiapoptotic small heat-shock protein of 27 kDa (HSP27, HSPB1). HSP27
increase depended on the inhibition of the MEK/ERK pathway and on heat-shock
factor 1 (HSF1) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) regulation. Importantly,
HSP27-silenced MET-addicted cells underwent 2- and 3-fold more apoptosis
following MET inhibition in vitro and in vivo, respectively. Likewise, in human
cancer cells susceptible to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition,
EGFR inhibitors induced HSP27 expression and were strengthened by HSP27
suppression. In control cell lines that were not affected by drugs targeting MET 
or EGFR, these drugs did not induce HSP27 increase. Therefore, in cancer
therapies targeting the MET pathway, the induction of HSP27 might limit the
efficacy of anti-MET agents. As HSP27 increase also impairs the effectiveness of 
EGFR inhibitors and is known to protect cells from chemotherapeutics, the
induction of HSP27 by targeted agents might strongly affect the success of
combination treatments.

© FASEB.

PMID: 24903273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Int J Cancer. 2015 Oct 15;137(8):1791-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29013. Epub 2014 Jun
11.

Molecular mechanisms and anti-cancer aspects of the medicinal phytochemicals
rocaglamides (=flavaglines).

Li-Weber M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumorimmunology Program (D030), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Rocaglamides (= flavaglines) are potent natural anti-cancer phytochemicals that
inhibit cancer growth at nanomolar concentrations by the following mechanisms:
(1) inhibition of translation initiation via inhibition of phosphorylation of the
mRNA cap-binding eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF4E and stabilization
of RNA-binding of the translation initiation factor eIF4A in the eIF4F complex;
(2) blocking cell cycle progression by activation of the ATM/ATR-Chk1/Chk2
checkpoint pathway; (3) inactivation of the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) leading to
up-regulation of thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) and consequent reduction
of glucose uptake and (4) induction of apoptosis through activation of the MAPK
p38 and JNK and inhibition of the Ras-CRaf-MEK-ERK signaling pathway. Besides the
anti-cancer activities, rocaglamides are also shown to protect primary cells from
chemotherapy-induced cell death and alleviate inflammation- and drug-induced
injury in neuronal tissues. This review will focus on the recently discovered
molecular mechanisms of the actions of rocaglamides and highlights the benefits
of using rocaglamides in cancer treatment.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24895251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Microbiol. 2014 Jul;93(2):306-16. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12660. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

CK2-dependent inhibitory phosphorylation is relieved by Ppt1 phosphatase for the 
ethanol stress-specific activation of Hsf1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Cho BR(1), Lee P, Hahn JS.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Program for Bioengineering, Seoul National University, 1
Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 151-744, Korea.

Ethanol, the major fermentation product of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has long
been known as an inducer of heat shock response, but the underlying mechanisms by
which ethanol activates heat shock transcription factor (HSF) are not well
understood. We demonstrate that CK2-dependent phosphorylation on S608 is an
ethanol stress-specific repression mechanism of Hsf1, which does not affect the
basal or heat-induced activity of Hsf1. This repression is relieved by
dephosphorylation by Ppt1 which directly interacts with Hsf1 via its
tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain. In response to ethanol stress, PPT1
deletion and CK2 overexpression exert synergistic inhibitory effects on Hsf1
activation, whereas Hsf1(S608A) mutant shows enhanced activation. Therefore,
regulation of the Hsf1 S608 phosphorylation status by reciprocal actions of CK2
and Ppt1 might play an important role to determine Hsf1 sensitivity towards
ethanol stress.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24894977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Oct;35(10):2316-28. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.029. Epub 2014 May 2.

Histone deacetylase 6 regulates cytotoxic a-synuclein accumulation through
induction of the heat shock response.

Du Y(1), Wang F(1), Zou J(1), Le W(2), Dong Q(1), Wang Z(1), Shen F(1), Yu L(1), 
Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
lliyans@hotmail.com.

Abnormal aggregation of a-synuclein (a-syn) is central to the pathogenesis of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) was previously shown to
control major cell response pathways to the cytotoxic ubiquitinated aggregates in
some protein aggregation diseases. Whether it influences the aggregation process 
of a-syn in PD models and its related mechanisms are not completely known. Here, 
we characterized the expression and function of HDAC6 in the ubiquitin-proteasome
system impairment-induced PD model. Our results showed that HDAC6 inhibition
further exacerbated the nigrostriatal dopamine neurodegeneration and upregulated 
a-syn oligomers levels, whereas HDAC6 overexpression in vitro showed the opposite
effects. More importantly, we provided evidence for the first time that HDAC6
regulating a-syn oligomers levels were related to its ability to trigger the heat
shock response in a heat shock protein 90-dependent manner. HDAC6 mediated the
dissociation of heat shock protein 90-heat shock factor 1-containing complex, and
the activation of heat shock factor 1, which led to the expression of major
molecular chaperones to prevent the deleterious a-syn aggregation. Thus, we
propose that HDAC6 appears as a key modulator of cell protective response to the 
cytotoxic a-syn aggregates and may serve as a potential target for therapy
development in PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24866403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Hepatol. 2014 Oct;61(4):903-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.05.024. Epub 2014 May 
22.

Inhibition of heat shock protein 90 alleviates steatosis and macrophage
activation in murine alcoholic liver injury.

Ambade A(1), Catalano D(1), Lim A(1), Kopoyan A(2), Shaffer SA(2), Mandrekar
P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, United States. (2)Proteomics and Mass
Spectrometry Facility, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation
Street, Worcester, MA 01605, United States. (3)Department of Medicine, University
of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605,
United States. Electronic address: Pranoti.Mandrekar@umassmed.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Heat shock protein 90 (hsp90) is an emerging therapeutic
target in chronic liver diseases. Hsp90 plays an important role in liver immune
cell activation; however its role in alcoholic liver disease (ALD) remains
elusive. Here we hypothesize that hsp90 is crucial in alcohol induced steatosis
and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. To test this hypothesis, we employed a 
pharmacological inhibitor of hsp90, 17-DMAG
(17-Dimethylamino-ethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) in an in vivo mouse model 
of acute and chronic alcoholic liver injury.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were given either a single dose of ethanol via oral gavage 
(acute) or chronically fed alcohol for 2 weeks followed by oral gavage
(chronic-binge). 17-DMAG was administered during or at the end of feeding. Liver 
injury parameters, inflammatory cytokines and lipid metabolism genes were
analysed.
RESULTS: Our results reveal increased expression of hsp90 in human and mouse
alcoholic livers. In vivo inhibition of hsp90, using 17-DMAG, not only prevented 
but also alleviated alcoholic liver injury, determined by lower serum ALT, AST
and reduced hepatic triglycerides. Mechanistic analysis showed that 17-DMAG
decreased alcohol mediated oxidative stress, reduced serum endotoxin, decreased
inflammatory cells, and diminished sensitization of liver macrophages to LPS,
resulting in downregulation of CD14, NF<U+03BA>B inhibition, and decreased
pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Hsp90 inhibition decreased fatty acid
synthesis genes via reduced nuclear SREBP-1 and favoured fatty acid oxidation
genes via PPARa.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of hsp90 decreased alcohol induced steatosis and
pro-inflammatory cytokines and inhibited alcoholic liver injury. Hsp90 is
therefore relevant in human alcoholic cirrhosis and a promising therapeutic
target in ALD.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4169725
PMID: 24859453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 18;289(29):19894-906. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570739. Epub
2014 May 22.

Novel isoforms of heat shock transcription factor 1, HSF1<U+03B3>a and HSF1<U+03B3>ß, regulate 
chaperone protein gene transcription.

Neueder A(1), Achilli F(1), Moussaoui S(2), Bates GP(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, 
London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom and. (2)Neuroscience Discovery, Novartis Institute
for Biomedical Research, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland. (3)From the Department of
Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London SE1 9RT, United
Kingdom and gillian.bates@kcl.ac.uk.

The heat shock response, resulting in the production of heat shock proteins or
molecular chaperones, is triggered by elevated temperature and a variety of other
stressors. Its master regulator is heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Heat
shock factors generally exist in multiple isoforms. The two known isoforms of
HSF1 differ in the inclusion (HSF1a) or exclusion (HSF1ß) of exon 11. Although
there are some data concerning the differential expression patterns and
transcriptional activities of HSF2 isoforms during development, little is known
about the distinct properties of the HSF1 isoforms. Here we present evidence for 
two novel HSF1 isoforms termed HSF1<U+03B3>a and HSF1<U+03B3>ß, and we show that the HSF1
isoform ratio differentially regulates heat shock protein gene transcription.
Hsf1<U+03B3> isoforms are expressed in various mouse tissues and are translated into
protein. Furthermore, after heat shock, HSF1<U+03B3> isoforms are exported from the
nucleus more rapidly or degraded more quickly than HSF1a or HSF1ß. We also show
that each individual HSF1 isoform is sufficient to induce the heat shock response
and that expression of combinations of HSF1 isoforms, in particular HSF1a and
HSF1ß, results in a synergistic enhancement of the transcriptional response. In
addition, HSF1<U+03B3> isoforms potentially suppress the synergistic effect of HSF1a and
HSF1ß co-expression. Collectively, our observations suggest that the expression
of HSF1 isoforms in a specific ratio provides an additional layer in the
regulation of heat shock protein gene transcription.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4106310
PMID: 24855652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Br J Cancer. 2014 Jul 8;111(1):78-84. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.262. Epub 2014 May
22.

High level of HSF1 associates with aggressive endometrial carcinoma and suggests 
potential for HSP90 inhibitors.

Engerud H(1), Tangen IL(1), Berg A(1), Kusonmano K(2), Halle MK(1), Oyan AM(3),
Kalland KH(3), Stefansson I(4), Trovik J(1), Salvesen HB(1), Krakstad C(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway [2] Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (2)1] Centre for Cancer Biomarkers,
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway [2]
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway [3] Computational Biology Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(3)1] Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway [2] Department of Microbiology, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (4)Department of Pathology, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Recent identification of a specific role of HSF1 in cancer
progression has led to new relevance of HSF1 as both a prognostic and a
predictive marker. The role of HSF1 in endometrial cancer has so far been
unexplored.
METHODS: A total of 823 lesions from endometrial carcinoma precursors, primary
tumours and metastases were prospectively collected and explored for HSF1 protein
expression in relation to established markers for aggressive disease and
survival. Transcriptional alterations related to HSF1 protein level were
investigated by microarray analysis for 224 freshly frozen samples in parallel.
RESULTS: High expression of HSF1 protein in endometrial carcinoma is
significantly associated with aggressive disease and poor survival (all P-values 
= 0.02), also among ERa-positive patients presumed to have good prognosis. The
HSF1-related gene signatures increase during disease progression and were also
found to have prognostic value. Gene expression analyses identified HSP90
inhibition as a potential novel therapeutic approach for cases with high protein 
expression of HSF1.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate for the first time in endometrial cancer that high
expression of HSF1 and measures for transcriptional activation of HSF1 associate 
with poor outcome and disease progression. The HSP90 inhibitors are suggested as 
new targeted therapeutics for patients with high HSF1 levels in tumour in
particular.

PMCID: PMC4090731
PMID: 24853175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Neurosci. 2014 May 21;34(21):7253-65. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4936-13.2014.

The systemic amyloid precursor transthyretin (TTR) behaves as a neuronal stress
protein regulated by HSF1 in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells and APP23
Alzheimer's disease model mice.

Wang X(1), Cattaneo F(2), Ryno L(1), Hulleman J(1), Reixach N(1), Buxbaum JN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, and. (2)Department of Molecular and
Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, and Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy. 
(3)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, and jbux@scripps.edu.

Increased neuronal synthesis of transthyretin (TTR) may favorably impact on
Alzheimer's disease (AD) because TTR has been shown to inhibit Aß aggregation and
detoxify cell-damaging conformers. The mechanism whereby hippocampal and cortical
neurons from AD patients and APP23 AD model mice produce more TTR is unknown. We 
now show that TTR expression in SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells, primary
hippocampal neurons and the hippocampus of APP23 mice, is significantly enhanced 
by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
demonstrated occupation of TTR promoter heat shock elements by HSF1 in APP23
hippocampi, primary murine hippocampal neurons, and SH-SY5Y cells, but not in
mouse liver, cultured human hepatoma (HepG2) cells, or AC16 cultured human
cardiomyocytes. Treating SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells with heat shock or the
HSF1 stimulator celastrol increased TTR transcription in parallel with that of
HSP40, HSP70, and HSP90. With both treatments, ChIP showed increased occupancy of
heat shock elements in the TTR promoter by HSF1. In vivo celastrol increased the 
HSF1 ChIP signal in hippocampus but not in liver. Transfection of a human HSF1
construct into SH-SY5Y cells increased TTR transcription and protein production, 
which could be blocked by shHSF1 antisense. The effect is neuron specific. In
cultured HepG2 cells, HSF1 was either suppressive or had no effect on TTR
expression confirming the differential effects of HSF1 on TTR transcription in
different cell types.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/347253-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4028500
PMID: 24849358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 4;289(27):18914-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.574053. Epub 2014
May 15.

Identification of mixed lineage leukemia 1(MLL1) protein as a coactivator of heat
shock factor 1(HSF1) protein in response to heat shock protein 90 (HSP90)
inhibition.

Chen Y(1), Chen J(1), Yu J(2), Yang G(1), Temple E(3), Harbinski F(3), Gao H(1), 
Wilson C(4), Pagliarini R(1), Zhou W(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Oncology. (2)the Department of Oncology, Novartis
Institutes for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, California 94608.
(3)Developmental and Molecular Pathways, and. (4)Neuroscience, Novartis
Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 and. (5)From
the Departments of Oncology, wenlai.zhou@novartis.com.

Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibition inhibits cancer cell proliferation
through depleting client oncoproteins and shutting down multiple oncogenic
pathways. Therefore, it is an attractive strategy for targeting human cancers.
Several HSP90 inhibitors, including AUY922 and STA9090, show promising effects in
clinical trials. However, the efficacy of HSP90 inhibitors may be limited by heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1)-mediated feedback mechanisms. Here, we identify, through an
siRNA screen, that the histone H3 lysine 4 methyltransferase MLL1 functions as a 
coactivator of HSF1 in response to HSP90 inhibition. MLL1 is recruited to the
promoters of HSF1 target genes and regulates their expression in response to
HSP90 inhibition. In addition, a striking combination effect is observed when
MLL1 depletion is combined with HSP90 inhibition in various human cancer cell
lines and tumor models. Thus, targeting MLL1 may block a HSF1-mediated feedback
mechanism induced by HSP90 inhibition and provide a new avenue to enhance HSP90
inhibitor activity in human cancers.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4081932
PMID: 24831003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Kidney Int. 2014 Sep;86(3):515-24. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.73. Epub 2014 May 7.

Mice with an absent stress response are protected against ischemic renal injury.

Sreedharan R(1), Chen S(1), Miller M(1), Haribhai D(2), Williams CB(2), Van Why
SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin, USA. (2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Wauwatosa, Wisconsin, USA.

Inducible heat shock proteins (HSPs), regulated by heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1),
protect against renal cell injury in vitro. To determine whether HSPs ameliorate 
ischemic renal injury in vivo, HSF-1 functional knockout mice (HSF-KO) were
compared with wild-type mice following bilateral ischemic renal injury. Following
injury, the kidneys of wild-type mice had the expected induction of HSP70 and
HSP25; a response absent in the kidneys of HSF-KO mice. Baseline serum creatinine
was equivalent between strains. Serum creatinine at 24 h reflow in HSF-KO mice
was significantly lower than that in the wild type. Histology showed similar
tubule injury in both strains after ischemic renal injury but increased medullary
vascular congestion in wild-type compared with HSF-KO mice. Flow cytometry of
mononuclear cells isolated from kidneys showed no difference between strains in
the number of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in sham-operated animals. At 1 h of
reflow, CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells were doubled in the kidneys of wild-type but not 
HSF-KO mice. Foxp3(+) T-regulatory cells were significantly more abundant in the 
kidneys of sham-operated HSF-KO than wild-type mice. Suppression of
CD25(+)Foxp3(+) cells in HSF-KO kidneys with the anti-CD25 antibody PC61 reversed
the protection against ischemic renal injury. Thus, HSF-KO mice are protected
from ischemic renal injury by a mechanism that depends on an increase in the
T-regulatory cells in the kidney associated with altered T-cell infiltration
early in reflow. Hence, stress response activation may contribute to early injury
by facilitating T-cell infiltration into ischemic kidney.

PMCID: PMC4149847
PMID: 24805105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. PLoS One. 2014 May 6;9(5):e96330. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096330. eCollection 
2014.

Inhibiting heat shock factor 1 in human cancer cells with a potent RNA aptamer.

Salamanca HH(1), Antonyak MA(2), Cerione RA(2), Shi H(3), Lis JT(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, United States of America; College of Medicine, Upstate Medical University, 
Syracuse, New York, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York,
United States of America. (3)Department of Biological Sciences and the RNA
Institute, University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, New York, 
United States of America. (4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States of America; Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul, South Korea.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a master regulator that coordinates chaperone
protein expression to enhance cellular survival in the face of heat stress. In
cancer cells, HSF1 drives a transcriptional program distinct from heat shock to
promote metastasis and cell survival. Its strong association with the malignant
phenotype implies that HSF1 antagonists may have general and effective utilities 
in cancer therapy. For this purpose, we had identified an avid RNA aptamer for
HSF1 that is portable among different model organisms. Extending our previous
work in yeast and Drosophila, here we report the activity of this aptamer in
human cancer cell lines. When delivered into cells using a synthetic gene and
strong promoter, this aptamer was able to prevent HSF1 from binding to its DNA
regulation elements. At the cellular level, expression of this aptamer induced
apoptosis and abolished the colony-forming capability of cancer cells. At the
molecular level, it reduced chaperones and attenuated the activation of the MAPK 
signaling pathway. Collectively, these data demonstrate the advantage of aptamers
in drug target validation and support the hypothesis that HSF1 DNA binding
activity is a potential target for controlling oncogenic transformation and
neoplastic growth.

PMCID: PMC4011729
PMID: 24800749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Aug;21(8):1262-74. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.46. Epub 2014
May 2.

ANG II promotes IGF-IIR expression and cardiomyocyte apoptosis by inhibiting HSF1
via JNK activation and SIRT1 degradation.

Huang CY(1), Kuo WW(2), Yeh YL(3), Ho TJ(4), Lin JY(5), Lin DY(1), Chu CH(1),
Tsai FJ(6), Tsai CH(7), Huang CY(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Department of Biological Science and Technology, China 
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (3)1] Department of Pathology,
Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan, ROC [2] Department of Medical
Technology, Jen-Teh Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management, Miaoli,
Taiwan, ROC. (4)1] Chinese Medicine Department, China Medical University Beigang 
Hospital, Beigang, Taiwan, ROC [2] School of Chinese Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (5)1] Department of Medical Imaging and
Radiological Science, Central Taiwan University of Science and Technology,
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC [2] Department of Nursing, Central Taiwan University of
Science and Technology, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (6)School of Chinese Medicine,
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (7)Department of Healthcare
Administration, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC. (8)1] Graduate Institute 
of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC [2]
School of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC [3]
Department of Health and Nutrition Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung,
Taiwan, ROC.

Hypertension-induced cardiac hypertrophy and apoptosis are major characteristics 
of early-stage heart failure. Our previous studies found that the activation of
insulin-like growth factor receptor II (IGF-IIR) signaling was critical for
hypertensive angiotensin II (ANG II)-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis. However,
the detailed mechanism by which ANG II regulates IGF-IIR in heart cells remains
elusive. In this study, we found that ANG II activated its downstream kinase JNK 
to increase IGF-IIR expression through the ANG II receptor angiotensin type 1
receptor. JNK activation subsequently led to sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) degradation via
the proteasome, thus preventing SIRT1 from deacetylating heat-shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1). The resulting increase in the acetylation of HSF1 impaired its
ability to bind to the IGF-IIR promoter region (nt -748 to -585). HSF1 protected 
cardiomyocytes by acting as a repressor of IGF-IIR gene expression, and ANG II
diminished this HSF1-mediated repression through enhanced acetylation, thus
activating the IGF-IIR apoptosis pathway. Taken together, these results suggest
that HSF1 represses IGF-IIR gene expression to protect cardiomyocytes. ANG II
activates JNK to degrade SIRT1, resulting in HSF1 acetylation, which induces
IGF-IIR expression and eventually results in cardiac hypertrophy and apoptosis.
HSF1 could be a valuable target for developing treatments for cardiac diseases in
hypertensive patients.

PMCID: PMC4085534
PMID: 24786827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Apr 24;5:e1194. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.158.

A gain-of-function mutant p53-HSF1 feed forward circuit governs adaptation of
cancer cells to proteotoxic stress.

Li D(1), Yallowitz A(1), Ozog L(1), Marchenko N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY 11794-8691, USA.

To overcome proteotoxic stress inherent to malignant transformation, cancer cells
induce a range of adaptive mechanisms, with the master transcription factor
heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1)-orchestrated response taking center stage. Here we
define a novel gain-of-function of mutant p53 (mutp53), whereby
mutp53-overexpressing cancer cells acquire superior tolerance to proteotoxic
stress. mutp53 via constitutive stimulation of EGFR and ErbB2 signaling
hyperactivates the MAPK and PI3K cascades, which induce stabilization and
phosphoactivation of HSF1 on Ser326. Moreover, mutp53 protein via direct
interaction with activated p-Ser326 HSF1 facilitates HSF1 recruitment to its
specific DNA-binding elements and stimulates transcription of heat-shock proteins
including Hsp90. In turn, induced Hsp90 stabilizes its oncogenic clients
including EGFR, ErbB2 and mutp53, thereby further reinforcing oncogenic
signaling. Thus, mutp53 initiates a feed forward loop that renders cancer cells
more resistant to adverse conditions, providing a strong survival advantage.

PMCID: PMC4001312
PMID: 24763051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jul;34(1):24-34. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1747. Epub 2014 Apr
22.

Geldanamycin attenuates 3-nitropropionic acid-induced apoptosis and JNK
activation through the expression of HSP 70 in striatal cells.

Choi YJ(1), Kim NH(1), Lim MS(1), Lee HJ(1), Kim SS(1), Chun W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Kangwon National University, 
Chuncheon, Gangwon 200-701, Republic of Korea.

Although selective striatal cell death is a characteristic hallmark in the
pathogenesis of Huntington's disease (HD), the underlying mechanism of striatal
susceptibility remains to be clarified. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) have been
reported to suppress the aggregate formation of mutant huntingtin and concurrent 
striatal cell death. In a previous study, we observed that heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1), a major transcription factor of HSPs,
significantly attenuated 3-nitropropionic acid (3NP)-induced reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production and apoptosis through the expression of HSP 70 in
striatal cells. To investigate the differential roles of HSPs in 3NP-induced
striatal cell death, the effect of geldanamycin (GA), an HSP 90 inhibitor, was
examined in 3NP-stimulated striatal cells. GA significantly attenuated
3NP-induced striatal apoptosis and ROS production with an increased expression of
HSP 70. Triptolide (TL), an HSP 70 inhibitor, abolished GA-mediated protective
effects in 3NP-stimulated striatal cells. To understand the underlying mechanism 
by which GA-mediated HSP 70 protects striatal cells against 3NP stimulation, the 
involvement of various signaling pathways was examined. GA significantly
attenuated 3NP-induced c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation and
subsequent c-Jun phosphorylation in striatal cells. Taken together, the present
study demonstrated that GA exhibits protective properties against 3NP-induced
apoptosis and JNK activation via the induction of HSP 70 in striatal cells,
suggesting that expression of HSP 70 may be a valuable therapeutic target in the 
treatment of HD.

PMCID: PMC4072345
PMID: 24756698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Nat Prod. 2014 May 23;77(5):1123-9. doi: 10.1021/np4009333. Epub 2014 Apr 18.

2,4-Bis(4-hydroxybenzyl)phenol inhibits heat shock transcription factor 1 and
sensitizes lung cancer cells to conventional anticancer modalities.

Yoon T(1), Kang GY, Han AR, Seo EK, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ewha Womans
University , Seoul 120-750, Korea.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a transcription factor that regulates expression of
heat shock protein (HSP) genes in response to stress. HSPs are expressed at high 
levels in a wide range of tumors. It has been reported that HSF1 and HSPs are
associated closely in tumorigenesis. In the present study, a screen was performed
using a luciferase reporter under the control of a heat shock element to find
inhibitors of HSF1 activity, and 2,4-bis(4-hydroxybenzyl)phenol (1), isolated
from the rhizomes of Gastrodia elata, was identified as an active compound. This 
substance effectively inhibited HSF1 activity and decreased levels of HSP27 and
HSP70. Compound 1 induced the degradation of HSF1 protein through
dephosphorylation of HSF1 on S326, which decreases HSF1 protein stability. In
addition, 1 also induced growth arrest and apoptosis of NCI-H460 human lung
cancer cells. Markers of apoptosis, such as cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3,
were detected after treatment with 1. Furthermore, cotreatment with 1 and
conventional anticancer modalities such as paclitaxel, cisplatin, or ionizing
radiation potentiated their effects on lung cancer cells. These results suggest
that inhibition of HSF1 by 1 may help overcome resistance to conventional
anticancer modalities in HSF1-overexpressed cancer cells.

PMID: 24746225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Jun 15;341(1-2):58-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.03.054. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

Neonatal capsaicin treatment in rats affects TRPV1-related noxious heat sensation
and circadian body temperature rhythm.

Jeong KY(1), Seong J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Korea University Medical College, Seoul,
Republic of Korea; Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei University Medical
College, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: cancerout@yuhs.ac.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Yonsei University Medical College, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: JSSEONG@yuhs.ac.

The transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) is a cation channel that
serves as a polymodal detector of noxious stimuli such as capsaicin. Therefore,
capsaicin treatment has been used to investigate the physiological function of
TRPV1. Here, we report physiological changes induced by treating neonatal rats
with capsaicin. Capsaicin (50mg/kg) (cap-treated) or vehicle (vehicle-treated)
was systemically administered to newborn SD rat pups within 48 h after birth.
TRPV1 expression, intake volume of capsaicin water, and noxious heat sensation
were measured 6 weeks after capsaicin treatment. Circadian body temperature and
locomotion were recorded by biotelemetry. Expression of Per1, Per2, Bmal1 and
Hsf1 (clock genes) was also investigated. Neonatal capsaicin treatment not only
decreased TRPV1 expression but also induced desensitization to noxious heat
stimuli. Circadian body temperature of cap-treated rats increased significantly
compared with that of vehicle-treated rats. Additionally, the amplitude of the
circadian body temperature was reversed in cap-treated rats. Expression of the
hypothalamic Hsf1 and liver Per2 clock genes followed a similar trend. Therefore,
we suggest that these findings will be useful in studying various physiological
mechanisms related to TRPV1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Neuron. 2014 May 7;82(3):560-72. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.03.002. Epub 2014 Apr
10.

Roles of heat shock factor 1 in neuronal response to fetal environmental risks
and its relevance to brain disorders.

Hashimoto-Torii K(1), Torii M(2), Fujimoto M(3), Nakai A(3), El Fatimy R(4),
Mezger V(4), Ju MJ(5), Ishii S(6), Chao SH(7), Brennand KJ(8), Gage FH(8), Rakic 
P(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Center for Neuroscience 
Research, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Pharmacology and Physiology, The George Washington
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC 20010, USA.
Electronic address: khtorii@cnmc.org. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Kavli
Institute for Neuroscience, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA; Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Pharmacology and Physiology,
The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Washington, DC 20010, USA; Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, 755-8505 Ube, Japan. (4)CNRS, UMR7216 Epigenetics and Cell Fate,
75205 Paris, France; University Paris Diderot, 75013 Paris, France. (5)Department
of Neurobiology and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. (6)Center for Neuroscience Research,
Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA. (7)Center for
Biosignatures Discovery Automation, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA. (8)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (9)Department of
Neurobiology and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic address: pasko.rakic@yale.edu.

Prenatal exposure of the developing brain to various environmental challenges
increases susceptibility to late onset of neuropsychiatric dysfunction; still,
the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. Here we show that exposure of embryos
to a variety of environmental factors such as alcohol, methylmercury, and
maternal seizure activates HSF1 in cerebral cortical cells. Furthermore, Hsf1
deficiency in the mouse cortex exposed in utero to subthreshold levels of these
challenges causes structural abnormalities and increases seizure susceptibility
after birth. In addition, we found that human neural progenitor cells
differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells derived from schizophrenia
patients show higher variability in the levels of HSF1 activation induced by
environmental challenges compared to controls. We propose that HSF1 plays a
crucial role in the response of brain cells to prenatal environmental insults and
may be a key component in the pathogenesis of late-onset neuropsychiatric
disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4051437
PMID: 24726381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Invest New Drugs. 2014 Aug;32(4):604-17. doi: 10.1007/s10637-014-0084-7. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Oxidative cytotoxic agent withaferin A resensitizes temozolomide-resistant
glioblastomas via MGMT depletion and induces apoptosis through Akt/mTOR pathway
inhibitory modulation.

Grogan PT(1), Sarkaria JN, Timmermann BN, Cohen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.

Temozolomide (TMZ) has remained the chemotherapy of choice in patients with
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) primarily due to the lack of more effective drugs. 
Tumors, however, quickly develop resistance to this line of treatment creating a 
critical need for alternative approaches and strategies to resensitize the cells.
Withaferin A (WA), a steroidal lactone derived from several genera of the
Solanaceae plant family has previously demonstrated potent anti-cancer activity
in multiple tumor models. Here, we examine the effects of WA against
TMZ-resistant GBM cells as a monotherapy and in combination with TMZ. WA
prevented GBM cell proliferation by dose-dependent G2/M cell cycle arrest and
cell death through both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways. This effect
correlated with depletion of principle proteins of the Akt/mTOR and MAPK survival
and proliferation pathways with diminished phosphorylation of Akt, mTOR, and p70 
S6K but compensatory activation of ERK1/2. Depletion of tyrosine kinase cell
surface receptors c-Met, EGFR, and Her2 was also observed. WA demonstrated
induction of N-acetyl-L-cysteine-repressible oxidative stress as measured
directly and through a subsequent heat shock response with HSP32 and HSP70
upregulation and decreased HSF1. Finally, pretreatment of TMZ-resistant GBM cells
with WA was associated with O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)
depletion which potentiated TMZ-mediated MGMT degradation. Combination treatment 
with both WA and TMZ resulted in resensitization of MGMT-mediated TMZ-resistance 
but not resistance through mismatch repair mutations. These studies suggest great
clinical potential for the utilization of WA in TMZ-resistant GBM as both a
monotherapy and a resensitizer in combination with the standard chemotherapeutic 
agent TMZ.

PMCID: PMC4380174
PMID: 24718901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 9;289(19):13602-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.530626. Epub 2014
Apr 1.

Molecular stress-inducing compounds increase osteoclast formation in a heat shock
factor 1 protein-dependent manner.

Chai RC(1), Kouspou MM, Lang BJ, Nguyen CH, van der Kraan AG, Vieusseux JL, Lim
RC, Gillespie MT, Benjamin IJ, Quinn JM, Price JT.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, 
Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

Many anticancer therapeutic agents cause bone loss, which increases the risk of
fractures that severely reduce quality of life. Thus, in drug development, it is 
critical to identify and understand such effects. Anticancer therapeutic and
HSP90 inhibitor 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) causes bone
loss by increasing osteoclast formation, but the mechanism underlying this is not
understood. 17-AAG activates heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1), the master
transcriptional regulator of heat shock/cell stress responses, which may be
involved in this negative action of 17-AAG upon bone. Using mouse bone marrow and
RAW264.7 osteoclast differentiation models we found that HSP90 inhibitors that
induced a heat shock response also enhanced osteoclast formation, whereas HSP90
inhibitors that did not (including coumermycin A1 and novobiocin) did not affect 
osteoclast formation. Pharmacological inhibition or shRNAmir knockdown of Hsf1 in
RAW264.7 cells as well as the use of Hsf1 null mouse bone marrow cells
demonstrated that 17-AAG-enhanced osteoclast formation was Hsf1-dependent.
Moreover, ectopic overexpression of Hsf1 enhanced 17-AAG effects upon osteoclast 
formation. Consistent with these findings, protein levels of the essential
osteoclast transcription factor microphthalmia-associated transcription factor
were increased by 17-AAG in an Hsf1-dependent manner. In addition to HSP90
inhibitors, we also identified that other agents that induced cellular stress,
such as ethanol, doxorubicin, and methotrexate, also directly increased
osteoclast formation, potentially in an Hsf1-dependent manner. These results,
therefore, indicate that cellular stress can enhance osteoclast differentiation
via Hsf1-dependent mechanisms and may significantly contribute to pathological
and therapeutic related bone loss.

PMCID: PMC4036365
PMID: 24692538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Compr Physiol. 2014 Jan;4(1):199-230. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c130025.

Heat acclimation, epigenetics, and cytoprotection memory.

Horowitz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Physiology, Faculty of Dental Medicine, The Hebrew
University, Jerusalem, Israel.

Heat acclimation is a within-life phenotypic adaptation to heat. Plasticity of
the thermoregulatory system is crucial for the induction of heat acclimation. In 
the last two decades, it has become clear that heat causes adaptive shifts in
gene expression which adjust the protein balance. These changes are part of the
evolvement of the acclimated phenotype. The molecular-cellular aspects of some
acclimatory mechanisms that have only been explained by physiological-effectorial
mechanisms have been discovered. This review attempts to bridge the gap between
the classic physiological heat acclimation profile and the molecular/cellular
mechanisms underlying the evolvement of the acclimated phenotype. Heat
acclimation leads to leftward and rightward shifts in temperature thresholds of
heat dissipation organs and thermal injury, respectively, thereby expanding the
acclimated dynamic thermoregulatory range. Interactions between ambient
temperature and afferent drives from effector organs to the hypothalamic
thermoregulatory center with modifications in warm/cold sensitive neuron ratio
and excitability contribute to the threshold changes. The altered threshold for
thermal injury is associated with progressive enhancement of inducible
cytoprotective networks, including HSP70, HSF1, and HIF-1<U+0251>. These molecules are
also important in acclimatory kinetics. Aspects of cross-adaption,
cross-tolerance and interference with heat acclimation are explained using
molecular-cellular physiological interactions, with the heart, skeletal muscles, 
and water secretory glands as models. Lastly, the roles of epigenetic mechanisms 
in transcriptional regulation during induction of the acclimated phenotype, its
decay, and reinduction are discussed. Posttranslational histone modifications in 
the promoters of hsp70 and hsp90 form part of our prototype model of
heat-acclimation-mediated cytoprotective memory.

© 2014 American Physiological Society.

PMID: 24692139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. ACS Chem Biol. 2014 Jun 20;9(6):1273-83. doi: 10.1021/cb500062n. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Characterizing the altered cellular proteome induced by the stress-independent
activation of heat shock factor 1.

Ryno LM(1), Genereux JC, Naito T, Morimoto RI, Powers ET, Shoulders MD, Wiseman
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Experimental Medicine, Department of Chemical
Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla, California 92037, United
States.

The heat shock response is an evolutionarily conserved, stress-responsive
signaling pathway that adapts cellular proteostasis in response to pathologic
insult. In metazoans, the heat shock response primarily functions through the
posttranslational activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a stress-responsive
transcription factor that induces the expression of cytosolic proteostasis
factors including chaperones, cochaperones, and folding enzymes. HSF1 is a
potentially attractive therapeutic target to ameliorate pathologic imbalances in 
cellular proteostasis associated with human disease, although the underlying
impact of stress-independent HSF1 activation on cellular proteome composition
remains to be defined. Here, we employ a highly controllable, ligand-regulated
HSF1 that activates HSF1 to levels compatible with those that could be achieved
using selective small molecule HSF1 activators. Using a combination of RNAseq and
quantitative proteomics, we define the impact of stress-independent HSF1
activation on the composition of the cellular proteome. We show that
stress-independent HSF1 activation selectively remodels cytosolic proteostasis
pathways without globally influencing the composition of the cellular proteome.
Furthermore, we show that stress-independent HSF1 activation decreases
intracellular aggregation of a model polyglutamine-containing protein and reduces
the cellular toxicity of environmental toxins like arsenite that disrupt
cytosolic proteostasis. Collectively, our results reveal a proteome-level view of
stress-independent HSF1 activation, providing a framework to establish
therapeutic approaches to correct pathologic imbalances in cellular proteostasis 
through the selective targeting of HSF1.

PMCID: PMC4076015
PMID: 24689980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 9;289(19):13155-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.530014. Epub 2014
Mar 26.

Hierarchical functional specificity of cytosolic heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70)
nucleotide exchange factors in yeast.

Abrams JL(1), Verghese J, Gibney PA, Morano KA.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Texas Medical School, Houston, Texas 77030.

Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) molecular chaperones play critical roles in protein
homeostasis. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, cytosolic Hsp70
interacts with up to three types of nucleotide exchange factors (NEFs) homologous
to human counterparts: Sse1/Sse2 (Heat shock protein 110 (Hsp110)), Fes1
(HspBP1), and Snl1 (Bag-1). All three NEFs stimulate ADP release; however, it is 
unclear why multiple distinct families have been maintained throughout eukaryotic
evolution. In this study we investigate NEF roles in Hsp70 cell biology using an 
isogenic combinatorial collection of NEF deletion mutants. Utilizing well
characterized model substrates, we find that Sse1 participates in most
Hsp70-mediated processes and is of particular importance in protein biogenesis
and degradation, whereas Fes1 contributes to a minimal extent. Surprisingly,
disaggregation and resolubilization of thermally denatured firefly luciferase
occurred independently of NEF activity. Simultaneous deletion of SSE1 and FES1
resulted in constitutive activation of heat shock protein expression mediated by 
the transcription factor Hsf1, suggesting that these two factors are important
for modulating stress response. Fes1 was found to interact in vivo preferentially
with the Ssa family of cytosolic Hsp70 and not the co-translational Ssb homolog, 
consistent with the lack of cold sensitivity and protein biogenesis phenotypes
for fes1<U+0394> cells. No significant consequence could be attributed to deletion of
the minor Hsp110 SSE2 or the Bag homolog SNL1. Together, these lines of
investigation provide a comparative analysis of NEF function in yeast that
implies Hsp110 is the principal NEF for cytosolic Hsp70, making it an ideal
candidate for therapeutic intervention in human protein folding disorders.

PMCID: PMC4036327
PMID: 24671421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Sep;70(1):301-7. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-9912-9.

Long-term heat exposure prevents hypoxia-induced apoptosis in mouse fibroblast
cells.

Sugimoto N(1), Shido O, Matsuzaki K, Katakura M, Hitomi Y, Tanaka M, Sawaki T,
Fujita Y, Kawanami T, Masaki Y, Okazaki T, Nakamura H, Koizumi S, Yachie A,
Umehara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, 920-8640, Japan,
ns@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Long-term continuous exposure to high ambient temperatures induces complete heat 
acclimation in humans and animals. However, to date, the effects of long-term
exposure to heat stress on cells have not been fully evaluated. In this study, we
investigated an adaptive physiological process induced in culture cells by
continuous exposure to mild heat stress for 60 days. The results of this
investigation provide evidence that after long-term heat acclimation in cells,
(1) heat shock protein levels are increased, (2) hypoxia inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a) expression is upregulated, and (3) heat shock-induced and
hypoxia-induced apoptoses are attenuated. These results suggest that the hypoxia 
response pathway is an intrinsic part of the heat acclimation repertoire and that
the HIF-1 pathway following long-term heat acclimation induces cells with cross
tolerance against hypoxia.

PMID: 24648161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Redox Biol. 2014 Feb 23;2:535-62. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.02.006. eCollection
2014.

Hydrogen peroxide sensing, signaling and regulation of transcription factors.

Marinho HS(1), Real C(1), Cyrne L(1), Soares H(2), Antunes F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Centro de Química e Bioquímica,
Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. (2)Departamento 
de Química e Bioquímica, Centro de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências,
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal ; Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência,
Oeiras, Portugal ; Escola Superior de Tecnologia da Saúde de Lisboa, IPL, Lisboa,
Portugal.

The regulatory mechanisms by which hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) modulates the
activity of transcription factors in bacteria (OxyR and PerR), lower eukaryotes
(Yap1, Maf1, Hsf1 and Msn2/4) and mammalian cells (AP-1, NRF2, CREB, HSF1, HIF-1,
TP53, NF-<U+03BA>B, NOTCH, SP1 and SCREB-1) are reviewed. The complexity of regulatory
networks increases throughout the phylogenetic tree, reaching a high level of
complexity in mammalians. Multiple H2O2 sensors and pathways are triggered
converging in the regulation of transcription factors at several levels: (1)
synthesis of the transcription factor by upregulating transcription or increasing
both mRNA stability and translation; (ii) stability of the transcription factor
by decreasing its association with the ubiquitin E3 ligase complex or by
inhibiting this complex; (iii) cytoplasm-nuclear traffic by exposing/masking
nuclear localization signals, or by releasing the transcription factor from
partners or from membrane anchors; and (iv) DNA binding and nuclear
transactivation by modulating transcription factor affinity towards DNA,
co-activators or repressors, and by targeting specific regions of chromatin to
activate individual genes. We also discuss how H2O2 biological specificity
results from diverse thiol protein sensors, with different reactivity of their
sulfhydryl groups towards H2O2, being activated by different concentrations and
times of exposure to H2O2. The specific regulation of local H2O2 concentrations
is also crucial and results from H2O2 localized production and removal controlled
by signals. Finally, we formulate equations to extract from typical experiments
quantitative data concerning H2O2 reactivity with sensor molecules. Rate
constants of 140 M(-1)<U+2009>s(-1) and =1.3 × 10(3) M(-1)<U+2009>s(-1) were estimated,
respectively, for the reaction of H2O2 with KEAP1 and with an unknown target that
mediates NRF2 protein synthesis. In conclusion, the multitude of H2O2 targets and
mechanisms provides an opportunity for highly specific effects on gene regulation
that depend on the cell type and on signals received from the cellular
microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC3953959
PMID: 24634836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 13;9(3):e91540. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091540. eCollection
2014.

Transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of KIF14 overexpression in ovarian
cancer.

Thériault BL(1), Basavarajappa HD(2), Lim H(3), Pajovic S(1), Gallie BL(4),
Corson TW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Eugene and Marilyn Glick Eye Institute, Department
of Ophthalmology, and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.
(3)Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute, 
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical 
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Division of Visual
Science, Toronto Western Hospital Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Departments of Molecular Genetics and Ophthalmology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (5)Eugene and Marilyn Glick Eye Institute, Department
of Ophthalmology, and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America;
Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana,
United States of America.

KIF14 (kinesin family member 14) is a mitotic kinesin and an important oncogene
in several cancers. Tumor KIF14 expression levels are independently predictive of
poor outcome, and in cancer cells KIF14 can modulate metastatic behavior by
maintaining appropriate levels of cell adhesion and migration proteins at the
cell membrane. Thus KIF14 is an exciting potential therapeutic target.
Understanding KIF14's regulation in cancer cells is crucial to the development of
effective and selective therapies to block its tumorigenic function(s). We
previously determined that close to 30% of serous ovarian cancers (OvCa tumors)
exhibit low-level genomic gain, indicating one mechanism of KIF14 overexpression 
in tumors. We now report on transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of KIF14.
Through promoter deletion analyses, we identified one cis-regulatory region
containing binding sites for Sp1, HSF1 and YY1. siRNA-mediated knockdown of these
transcription factors demonstrated endogenous regulation of KIF14 overexpression 
by Sp1 and YY1, but not HSF1. ChIP experiments confirmed an enrichment of both
Sp1 and YY1 binding to the endogenous KIF14 promoter in OvCa cell lines with high
KIF14 expression. A strong correlation was seen in primary serous OvCa tumors
between Sp1, YY1 and KIF14 expression, further evidence that these transcription 
factors are important players in KIF14 overexpression. Hypomethylation patterns
were observed in primary serous OvCa tumors, suggesting a minor role for promoter
methylation in the control of KIF14 gene expression. miRNA expression analysis
determined that miR-93, miR-144 and miR-382 had significantly lower levels of
expression in primary serous OvCa tumors than normal tissues; treatment of an
OvCa cell line with miRNA mimics and inhibitors specifically modulated KIF14 mRNA
levels, pointing to potential novel mechanisms of KIF14 overexpression in primary
tumors. Our findings reveal multiple mechanisms of KIF14 upregulation in cancer
cells, offering new targets for therapeutic interventions to reduce KIF14 in
tumors, aiming at improved prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3953446
PMID: 24626475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Redox Biol. 2014 Feb 21;2:485-94. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.01.023. eCollection
2014.

Inhibition of APE1/Ref-1 redox activity rescues human retinal pigment epithelial 
cells from oxidative stress and reduces choroidal neovascularization.

Li Y(1), Liu X(2), Zhou T(2), Kelley MR(3), Edwards P(2), Gao H(2), Qiao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Henry Ford Health System, 1 Ford Place 5D,
Detroit, MI, United States ; Department of Ophthalmology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi<U+05F3>an, Shanxi, People<U+05F3>s Republic of China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Henry Ford Health System, 1 Ford Place 5D,
Detroit, MI, United States. (3)Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, United States.

The effectiveness of current treatment for age related macular degeneration (AMD)
by targeting one molecule is limited due to its multifactorial nature and
heterogeneous pathologies. Treatment strategy to target multiple signaling
pathways or pathological components in AMD pathogenesis is under investigation
for better clinical outcome. Inhibition of the redox function of apurinic
endonuclease 1/redox factor-1 (APE1) was found to suppress endothelial
angiogenesis and promote neuronal cell recovery, thereby may serve as a potential
treatment for AMD. In the current study, we for the first time have found that a 
specific inhibitor of APE1 redox function by a small molecule compound E3330
regulates retinal pigment epithelium (RPEs) cell response to oxidative stress.
E3330 significantly blocked sub-lethal doses of oxidized low density lipoprotein 
(oxLDL) induced proliferation decline and senescence advancement of RPEs. At the 
same time, E3330 remarkably decreased the accumulation of intracellular reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and down-regulated the productions of monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
as well as attenuated the level of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) p65 in RPEs. A panel
of stress and toxicity responsive transcription factors that were significantly
upregulated by oxLDL was restored by E3330, including Nrf2/Nrf1, p53, NF-<U+03BA>B,
HIF1, CBF/NF-Y/YY1, and MTF-1. Further, a single intravitreal injection of E3330 
effectively reduced the progression of laser-induced choroidal neovascularization
(CNV) in mouse eyes. These data revealed that E3330 effectively rescued RPEs from
oxidative stress induced senescence and dysfunctions in multiple aspects in
vitro, and attenuated laser-induced damages to RPE-Bruch<U+05F3>s membrane complex in
vivo. Together with its previously established anti-angiogenic and
neuroprotection benefits, E3330 is implicated for potential use for AMD
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3949093
PMID: 24624338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 2014 May 2;289(18):12705-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.513242. Epub 2014
Mar 11.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is a potent inducer of zinc finger AN1-type
domain 2a gene expression: role of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)-heat shock factor 2
(HSF2) heterocomplexes.

Rossi A(1), Riccio A, Coccia M, Trotta E, La Frazia S, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Translational Pharmacology, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche (CNR), 00133 Rome, Italy and.

The zinc finger AN1-type domain 2a gene, also known as arsenite-inducible
RNA-associated protein (AIRAP), was recently identified as a novel human
canonical heat shock gene strictly controlled by heat shock factor (HSF) 1.
Little is known about AIRAP gene regulation in human cells. Here we report that
bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor with anticancer and antiangiogenic properties 
used in the clinic for treatment of multiple myeloma, is a potent inducer of
AIRAP expression in human cells. Using endothelial cells as a model, we unraveled
the molecular mechanism regulating AIRAP expression during proteasome inhibition.
Bortezomib induces AIRAP expression at the transcriptional level early after
treatment, concomitantly with polyubiquitinated protein accumulation and HSF
activation. AIRAP protein is detected at high levels for at least 48 h after
bortezomib exposure, together with the accumulation of HSF2, a factor implicated 
in differentiation and development regulation. Different from heat-mediated
induction, in bortezomib-treated cells, HSF1 and HSF2 interact directly, forming 
HSF1-HSF2 heterotrimeric complexes recruited to a specific heat shock element in 
the AIRAP promoter. Interestingly, whereas HSF1 has been confirmed to be critical
for AIRAP gene transcription, HSF2 was found to negatively regulate AIRAP
expression after bortezomib treatment, further emphasizing an important
modulatory role of this transcription factor under stress conditions. AIRAP
function is still not defined. However, the fact that AIRAP is expressed
abundantly in primary human cells at bortezomib concentrations comparable with
plasma levels in treated patients suggests that AIRAP may participate in the
regulatory network controlling proteotoxic stress during bortezomib treatment.

PMCID: PMC4007460
PMID: 24619424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Jun;81(6):514-23. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22318. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Identification of Hsf1 as a novel androgen receptor-regulated gene in mouse
Sertoli cells.

Yang L(1), Wang Y, Zhang Q, Lai Y, Li C, Zhang Q, Huang W, Duan Y, Jiang Z, Li X,
Cai Z, Mou L, Gui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine and
Genetics, Institute of Urology, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen
PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen, China; Department of Urological Surgery,
Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, China.

Androgen signaling plays a crucial role in spermatogenesis, yet few downstream
targets for this signaling pathway have been identified. In the current study, we
found that the expression of heat-shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1) was
increased in the testes of Sertoli cell-selective androgen receptor knockout
(S-AR(-/y) ) mice compared with wild-type mice by quantitative real-time PCR, and
the expression of HSF1 in the S-AR(-/y) Sertoli cells was significantly
increased, based on immunofluorescence analysis. In vitro cell-culture studies
showed that testosterone repressed the expression of Hsf1 in TM4 cells, a mouse
Sertoli cell line. Moreover, a luciferase assay, electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that testosterone repressed
Hsf1 expression by facilitating the binding of androgen receptor to the Hsf1
promoter. Our experiments also demonstrated that testosterone-mediated inhibition
of Hsf1 transcription down-regulated the expression of heat-shock proteins HSP105
and HSP60. Taken together, these results reveal that Hsf1 is a novel target of
androgen receptor in mouse Sertoli cells, and testosterone and its receptor
regulate the process of spermatogenesis partially by inhibiting Hsf1 expression.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24599545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. BMC Cancer. 2014 Mar 4;14:146. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-146.

Peptide deformylase inhibitor actinonin reduces celastrol's HSP70 induction while
synergizing proliferation inhibition in tumor cells.

Peng B, Zhang X, Cao F, Wang Y, Xu L, Cao L, Yang C, Li M, Uzan G, Zhang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sino-French Cooperative Central Lab, Shanghai Gongli Hospital, 207 Ju Ye Road,
Pudong New District, Shanghai 200135, China. shanghai_zhang@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Celastrol is a promising anti-tumor agent, yet it also elevates heat 
shock proteins (HSPs), especially HSP70, this effect believed to reduce its
anti-tumor effects. Concurrent use of siRNA to increase celastrol's anti-tumor
effects through HSP70 interference has been reported, but because siRNA
technology is difficult to clinically apply, an alternative way to curb unwanted 
HSP70 elevation caused by celastrol treatment is worth exploring.
METHODS: In this work, we explore three alternative strategies to control HSP70
elevation: (1) Searching for cancer cell types that show no HSP70 elevation in
the presence of celastrol (thus recommending themselves as suitable targets); (2)
Modifying HSP70-inducing chemical groups, i.e.: the carboxyl group in celastrol; 
and (3) Using signaling molecule inhibitors to specifically block HSP70 elevation
while protecting and/or enhancing anti-tumor effects.
RESULTS: The first strategy was unsuccessful since celastrol treatment increased 
HSP70 in all 7 of the cancer cell types tested, this result related to HSF1
activation. The ubiquity of HSF1 expression in different cancer cells might
explain why celastrol has no cell-type limitation for HSP70 induction. The second
strategy revealed that modification of celastrol's carboxyl group abolished its
ability to elevate HSP70, but also abolished celastrol's tumor inhibition
effects. In the third strategy, 11 inhibitors for 10 signaling proteins
reportedly related to celastrol action were tested, and five of these could
reduce celastrol-caused HSP70 elevation. Among these, the peptide deformylase
(PDF) inhibitor, actinonin, could synergize celastrol's proliferation inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent use of the chemical agent actinonin could reduce
celastrol's HSP70 elevation and also enhance proliferation inhibition by
celastrol. This combination presents a novel alternative to siRNA technology and 
is worth further investigation for its potentially effective anti-tumor action.

PMCID: PMC3975845
PMID: 24589236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cell. 2014 Feb 27;156(5):975-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.055.

Interplay of acetyltransferase EP300 and the proteasome system in regulating heat
shock transcription factor 1.

Raychaudhuri S(1), Loew C(1), Körner R(1), Pinkert S(1), Theis M(2), Hayer-Hartl 
M(1), Buchholz F(2), Hartl FU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am 
Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. (2)Medical Systems Biology,
University Hospital and Medical Faculty, Carl Gustav Carus University of
Technology, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (3)Department of Cellular
Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152
Martinsried, Germany. Electronic address: uhartl@biochem.mpg.de.

When exposed to proteotoxic environmental conditions, mammalian cells activate
the cytosolic stress response in order to restore protein homeostasis. A key
feature of this response is the heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1)-dependent expression of molecular chaperones. Here, we describe the
results of an RNA interference screen in HeLa cells to identify modulators of
stress response induction and attenuation. The modulator proteins are localized
in multiple cellular compartments, with chromatin modifiers and nuclear protein
quality control playing a central regulatory role. We find that the
acetyltransferase, EP300, controls the cellular level of activatable HSF1. This
involves acetylation of HSF1 at multiple lysines not required for function and
results in stabilization of HSF1 against proteasomal turnover. Acetylation of
functionally critical lysines during stress serves to fine-tune HSF1 activation. 
Finally, the nuclear proteasome system functions in attenuating the stress
response by degrading activated HSF1 in a manner linked with the clearance of
misfolded proteins.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24581496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Redox Biol. 2014 Jan 30;2:323-32. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.01.017. eCollection
2014.

Molecular chaperones and proteostasis regulation during redox imbalance.

Niforou K(1), Cheimonidou C(1), Trougakos IP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, University of
Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Athens 15784, Greece.

Free radicals originate from both exogenous environmental sources and as
by-products of the respiratory chain and cellular oxygen metabolism. Sustained
accumulation of free radicals, beyond a physiological level, induces oxidative
stress that is harmful for the cellular homeodynamics as it promotes the
oxidative damage and stochastic modification of all cellular biomolecules
including proteins. In relation to proteome stability and maintenance, the
increased concentration of oxidants disrupts the functionality of cellular
protein machines resulting eventually in proteotoxic stress and the deregulation 
of the proteostasis (homeostasis of the proteome) network (PN). PN curates the
proteome in the various cellular compartments and the extracellular milieu by
modulating protein synthesis and protein machines assembly, protein recycling and
stress responses, as well as refolding or degradation of damaged proteins.
Molecular chaperones are key players of the PN since they facilitate folding of
nascent polypeptides, as well as holding, folding, and/or degradation of
unfolded, misfolded, or non-native proteins. Therefore, the expression and the
activity of the molecular chaperones are tightly regulated at both the
transcriptional and post-translational level at organismal states of increased
oxidative and, consequently, proteotoxic stress, including ageing and various
age-related diseases (e.g. degenerative diseases and cancer). In the current
review we present a synopsis of the various classes of intra- and extracellular
chaperones, the effects of oxidants on cellular homeodynamics and diseases and
the redox regulation of chaperones.

PMCID: PMC3926111
PMID: 24563850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jul 15;23(14):3641-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu073. Epub 2014 Feb
19.

Contesting the dogma of an age-related heat shock response impairment:
implications for cardiac-specific age-related disorders.

Carnemolla A(1), Labbadia JP(1), Lazell H(1), Neueder A(1), Moussaoui S(2), Bates
GP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, 8th Floor
Tower Wing, Guy's Hosptial, Great Maze Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK. (2)Novartis
Institute for Biomedical Research, Neuroscience Discovery, Basel CH-4002,
Switzerland. (3)Department Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London,
8th Floor Tower Wing, Guy's Hosptial, Great Maze Pond, London SE1 9RT, UK
gillian.bates@kcl.ac.uk.

Ageing is associated with the reduced performance of physiological processes and 
has been proposed as a major risk factor for disease. An age-related decline in
stress response pathways has been widely documented in lower organisms. In
particular, the heat shock response (HSR) becomes severely compromised with age
in Caenorhabditis elegans. However, a comprehensive analysis of the consequences 
of ageing on the HSR in higher organisms has not been documented. We used both HS
and inhibition of HSP90 to induce the HSR in wild-type mice at 3 and 22 months of
age to investigate the extent to which different brain regions, and peripheral
tissues can sustain HSF1 activity and HS protein (HSP) expression with age. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction, western blotting and enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
we were unable to detect a difference in the level or kinetics of HSP expression 
between young and old mice in all brain regions. In contrast, we did observe an
age-related reduction in chaperone levels and HSR-related proteins in the heart. 
This could result in a decrease in the protein folding capacity of old hearts
with implications for age-related cardiac disorders.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4065144
PMID: 24556212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 May;12(5):703-13. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0605. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

mTOR inhibition potentiates HSP90 inhibitor activity via cessation of HSP
synthesis.

Acquaviva J(1), He S, Sang J, Smith DL, Sequeira M, Zhang C, Bates RC, Proia DA.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Synta Pharmaceuticals Corporation, Lexington,
Massachusetts.

Because of their pleiotropic effects on critical oncoproteins, inhibitors of
HSP90 represent a promising new class of therapeutic agents for the treatment of 
human cancer. However, pharmacologic inactivation of HSP90 subsequently triggers 
a heat shock response that may mitigate the full therapeutic benefit of these
compounds. To overcome this limitation, a clinically feasible method was sought
to block HSP synthesis induced by the potent HSP90 inhibitor ganetespib. An
immunoassay screen of 322 late-stage or clinically approved drugs was performed
to uncover compounds that could block upregulation of the stress-inducible HSP70 
that results as a consequence of HSP90 blockade. Interestingly, inhibitors of the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/mTOR class counteracted ganetespib-induced HSP70
upregulation at both the gene and protein level by suppressing nuclear
translocation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the dominant transcription factor
controlling cellular stress responses. This effect was conserved across multiple 
tumor types and was found to be regulated, in part, by mTOR-dependent
translational activity. Pretreatment with cycloheximide, PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, or 
an inhibitor of eIF4E (a translation initiation factor and downstream effector of
mTOR) all reduced ganetespib-mediated nuclear HSF1 accumulation, indicating that 
mTOR blockade confers a negative regulatory effect on HSF1 activity. Moreover,
combined therapy regimens with mTOR or dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors potentiated the 
antitumor efficacy of ganetespib in multiple in vivo models.IMPLICATIONS:
Collectively these data identify a novel strategy to optimize the therapeutic
potential of HSP90 inhibitors.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24554781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 15;192(6):2830-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300157. Epub 2014
Feb 14.

A key regulatory role for Vav1 in controlling lipopolysaccharide endotoxemia via 
macrophage-derived IL-6.

Zenker S(1), Panteleev-Ivlev J, Wirtz S, Kishimoto T, Waldner MJ, Ksionda O,
Tybulewicz VL, Neurath MF, Atreya I.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic 1, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg,
University Hospital of Erlangen, 91054 Erlangen, Germany;

Macrophages are centrally involved in the pathogenesis of acute inflammatory
diseases, peritonitis, endotoxemia, and septic shock. However, the molecular
mechanisms controlling such macrophage activation are incompletely understood. In
this article, we provide evidence that Vav1, a member of the RhoGEF family, plays
a crucial role in macrophage activation and septic endotoxemia. Vav1-deficient
mice demonstrated a significantly increased susceptibility for LPS endotoxemia
that could be abrogated by anti-IL-6R Ab treatment. Subsequent studies showed
that Vav1-deficient macrophages display augmented production of the
proinflammatory cytokine IL-6. Nuclear Vav1 was identified as a key negative
regulator of macrophage-derived IL-6 production. In fact, Vav1 formed a nuclear
DNA-binding complex with heat shock transcription factor 1 at the HSE2 region of 
the IL-6 promoter to suppress IL-6 gene transcription in macrophages. These
findings provide new insights into the pathogenesis of endotoxemia and suggest
new avenues for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3951479
PMID: 24532586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 12;34(7):2464-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0151-13.2014.

Hsp90 chaperone inhibitor 17-AAG attenuates Aß-induced synaptic toxicity and
memory impairment.

Chen Y(1), Wang B, Liu D, Li JJ, Xue Y, Sakata K, Zhu LQ, Heldt SA, Xu H, Liao
FF.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodegenerative Disease Research Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, Department of Pharmacology and Anatomy &
Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, College of Medicine,
Memphis, Tennessee 38163, and Department of Pathophysiology, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030,
China.

The excessive accumulation of soluble amyloid peptides (Aß) plays a crucial role 
in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), particularly in synaptic
dysfunction. The role of the two major chaperone proteins, Hsp70 and Hsp90, in
clearing misfolded protein aggregates has been established. Despite their
abundant presence in synapses, the role of these chaperones in synapses remains
elusive. Here, we report that Hsp90 inhibition by 17-AAG elicited not only a heat
shock-like response but also upregulated presynaptic and postsynaptic proteins,
such as synapsin I, synaptophysin, and PSD95 in neurons. 17-AAG treatment
enhanced high-frequency stimulation-evoked LTP and protected neurons from
synaptic damage induced by soluble Aß. In AD transgenic mice, the daily
administration of 17-AAG over 7 d resulted in a marked increase in PSD95
expression in hippocampi. 17-AAG treatments in wild-type C57BL/6 mice challenged 
by soluble Aß significantly improved contextual fear memory. Further, we
demonstrate that 17-AAG activated synaptic protein expression via transcriptional
mechanisms through the heat shock transcription factor HSF1. Together, our
findings identify a novel function of Hsp90 inhibition in regulating synaptic
plasticity, in addition to the known neuroprotective effects of the chaperones
against Aß and tau toxicity, thus further supporting the potential of Hsp90
inhibitors in treating neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC3921421
PMID: 24523537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Cancer Res Ther. 2013 Oct-Dec;9(4):693-700. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.126485.

A benzophenanthridine alkaloid, chelerythrine induces apoptosis in vitro in a
Dalton's lymphoma.

Kumar S, Deepak P, Kumar S, Gautam PK, Acharya A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of chelerythrine on 
DL cell apoptosis in an in vitro experimental setup.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For tumor model, spontaneous occurring T-cell lymphoma
designated as Dalton's lymphoma (DL) was selected. Double staining, transmission 
electron microscope (TEM), fluorescence microscopy, Western blotting, Reverse
Transcriptase-Polymerase Chain Reaction, and DNA fragmentation assay were used to
detect heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and hsp70 expression and PKC phosphorylation,
and apoptotic characteristic of DL cells.
RESULTS: Chelerythrine exposure resulted in significant morphological alteration 
comparable to that of apoptosis. Furthermore, it was confirmed by fluorescence
microscopy, TEM analysis, and DNA fragmentation assay that 10 µg/mL of
chelerythrine is capable of inducing apoptosis in DL cells. The suppression in
HSF1 expression and subsequent inhibition of hsp70 expression in
chelerythrine-treated DL cells suggest that chelerythrine induces apoptosis in DL
cells by inhibiting the expression of these cytoprotective proteins.
CONCLUSION: Chelerythrine is capable of inducing apoptosis DL cells in vitro and 
therefore, it could be useful in combating tumor growth and progression.

PMID: 24518719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 6;10(2):e1003904. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003904.
eCollection 2014.

The master regulator of the cellular stress response (HSF1) is critical for
orthopoxvirus infection.

Filone CM(1), Caballero IS(2), Dower K(2), Mendillo ML(3), Cowley GS(4),
Santagata S(3), Rozelle DK(2), Yen J(2), Rubins KH(3), Hacohen N(4), Root DE(4), 
Hensley LE(5), Connor J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America ; United States Army Medical Research
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Virology Division, Fort Detrick, Maryland,
United States of America. (2)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (3)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (4)The Broad Institute, Cambridge Massachusetts, United States of
America. (5)United States Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Virology Division, Fort Detrick, Maryland, United States of America.

The genus Orthopoxviridae contains a diverse group of human pathogens including
monkeypox, smallpox and vaccinia. These viruses are presumed to be less dependent
on host functions than other DNA viruses because they have large genomes and
replicate in the cytoplasm, but a detailed understanding of the host factors
required by orthopoxviruses is lacking. To address this topic, we performed an
unbiased, genome-wide pooled RNAi screen targeting over 17,000 human genes to
identify the host factors that support orthopoxvirus infection. We used secondary
and tertiary assays to validate our screen results. One of the strongest hits was
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the ancient master regulator of the cytoprotective
heat-shock response. In investigating the behavior of HSF1 during vaccinia
infection, we found that HSF1 was phosphorylated, translocated to the nucleus,
and increased transcription of HSF1 target genes. Activation of HSF1 was
supportive for virus replication, as RNAi knockdown and HSF1 small molecule
inhibition prevented orthopoxvirus infection. Consistent with its role as a
transcriptional activator, inhibition of several HSF1 targets also blocked
vaccinia virus replication. These data show that orthopoxviruses co-opt host
transcriptional responses for their own benefit, thereby effectively extending
their functional genome to include genes residing within the host DNA. The
dependence on HSF1 and its chaperone network offers multiple opportunities for
antiviral drug development.

PMCID: PMC3916389
PMID: 24516381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Mar;37(1):184-92. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.01.020.
Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Identification and functional characterization of heat shock transcription
factor1 in Litopenaeus vannamei.

Yan H(1), Zhang S(1), Li XY(1), Yuan FH(1), Qiu W(1), Chen YG(2), Weng SP(1), He 
JG(3), Chen YH(4).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety, State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 135 Xingang Road
West, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China. (2)MOE Key Laboratory of
Aquatic Product Safety, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Marine
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 135 Xingang Road West, Guangzhou 510275,
People's Republic of China. (3)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety,
State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, 135 Xingang Road West, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China; 
MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol,
School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 135 Xingang Road West,
Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
lsshjg@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (4)MOE Key Laboratory of Aquatic Product Safety, State
Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 
135 Xingang Road West, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: chenyihong365@gmail.com.

Heat shock transcription factors belong to the heat shock factor (HSF) protein
family, which are involved in heat shock protein (HSP) gene regulation. They are 
critical for cell survival upon exposure to harmful conditions. In this study, we
identified and characterized a HSF1 (LvHSF1) gene in Litopenaeus vannamei, with a
full-length cDNA of 2841 bp and an open reading frame encoding a putative protein
of 632 amino acids. Through multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic
analysis, it was revealed that LvHSF1 was closed to insect HSF family, which
contained a highly conserved DNA-binding domain, oligomerization domains with
HR-A/B, and a nuclear localization signal. Tissues distribution showed that
LvHSF1 was widely expressed in all tissues tested. And it was upregulated in
hemocytes and gills after Vibrio alginolyticus or Staphylococcus aureus
infection. Dual-luciferase reporter assays indicated that LvHSF1 activated the
promoters of L. vannamei HSP70 (LvHSP70) and L. vannamei Cactus (LvCactus), while
inhibited the expressions of Drosophila antimicrobial peptide (AMP) Atta, Mtk,
and L. vannamei AMP PEN4 through NF-<U+03BA>B signal transduction pathway modification. 
Knocked-down expression of LvHSF1 by dsRNA resulted in downregulations of LvHSP70
and LvCactus, as well as cumulative mortality decreasing under V. alginolyticus
or S. aureus infection in L. vannamei. Taken together, our data strongly suggest 
that LvHSF1 is involved in LvHSP70 regulation, therefore plays a great role in
stress resistance. And it also takes part in LvCactus/LvDorsal feedback
regulatory pathway modification of L. vannamei, which is in favor of
V. alginolyticus or S. aureus infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Leukemia. 2014 Aug;28(8):1676-86. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.63. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Dual regulation of SPI1/PU.1 transcription factor by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
during macrophage differentiation of monocytes.

Jego G(1), Lanneau D(1), De Thonel A(1), Berthenet K(1), Hazoumé A(1), Droin
N(2), Hamman A(1), Girodon F(1), Bellaye PS(1), Wettstein G(1), Jacquel A(3),
Duplomb L(4), Le Mouël A(5), Papanayotou C(6), Christians E(7), Bonniaud P(1),
Lallemand-Mezger V(5), Solary E(2), Garrido C(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] INSERM, UMR 866, 'Equipe Labellisée Ligue contre le Cancer', Dijon, France 
[2] Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France.
(2)1] INSERM, UMR 1009, Institut Gustave Roussy, 114 rue Edouard Vaillaint,
Villejuif, France [2] University Paris-Sud 11, Institut Gustave Roussy, 114 rue
Edouard Vaillaint, Villejuif, France. (3)1] INSERM, UMR 866, 'Equipe Labellisée
Ligue contre le Cancer', Dijon, France [2] Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
University of Burgundy, Dijon, France [3] INSERM, U526, Nice, France. (4)1]
Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Génétique et anomalies du développement,
University of Burgundy, Dijon, France [2] CHU, Dijon, France. (5)1] CNRS, UMR7216
Épigénétique et Destin Cellulaire, 35 rue Hélène Brion, Paris, France [2]
University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 35 rue Hélène Brion, Paris,
France. (6)University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut jacques Monod,
UMR 7592, Paris cedex 13, France. (7)CNRS, UMR 5547, Université Paul Sabatier,
118 route de Narbonne, Toulouse, France. (8)1] INSERM, UMR 866, 'Equipe
Labellisée Ligue contre le Cancer', Dijon, France [2] Faculty of Medicine and
Pharmacy, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France [3] Centre de lutte contre le
cancer George-François Leclerc, Dijon, France.

In addition to their cytoprotective role in stressful conditions, heat shock
proteins (HSPs) are involved in specific differentiation pathways, for example,
we have identified a role for HSP90 in macrophage differentiation of human
peripheral blood monocytes that are exposed to macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (M-CSF). Here, we show that deletion of the main transcription factor
involved in heat shock gene regulation, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), affects
M-CSF-driven differentiation of mouse bone marrow cells. HSF1 transiently
accumulates in the nucleus of human monocytes undergoing macrophage
differentiation, including M-CSF-treated peripheral blood monocytes and phorbol
ester-treated THP1 cells. We demonstrate that HSF1 has a dual effect on
SPI1/PU.1, a transcription factor essential for macrophage differentiation and
whose deregulation can lead to the development of leukemias and lymphomas.
Firstly, HSF1 regulates SPI1/PU.1 gene expression through its binding to a heat
shock element within the intron 2 of this gene. Furthermore, downregulation or
inhibition of HSF1 impaired both SPI1/PU.1-targeted gene transcription and
macrophage differentiation. Secondly, HSF1 induces the expression of HSP70 that
interacts with SPI1/PU.1 to protect the transcription factor from proteasomal
degradation. Taken together, HSF1 appears as a fine-tuning regulator of SPI1/PU.1
expression at the transcriptional and post-translational levels during macrophage
differentiation of monocytes.

PMID: 24504023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jun;95(6):941-9. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0513262. Epub 2014 Feb 4.

Involvement of fibrinolytic regulators in adhesion of monocytes to vascular
endothelial cells induced by glycated LDL and to aorta from diabetic mice.

Zhao R(1), Ren S(1), Moghadasain MH(2), Rempel JD(1), Shen GX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and. (2)Human Nutritional Sciences,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. (3)Departments of Internal
Medicine and garry.shen@med.umanitoba.ca.

Diabetes mellitus accelerates the development of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
diseases. Monocyte adhesion is an early cellular event of atherogenesis. Elevated
levels of glyLDL were common in diabetic patients. Our previous studies indicated
that HSF1 and p22-phox (a subunit of the NOX complex) were involved in
glyLDL-induced up-regulation of PAI-1 in vascular EC. The present study
demonstrated that glyLDL significantly increased the adhesion of monocytes to the
surface of cultured human umbilical vein or PAEC. Transfection of siRNA for
PAI-1, p22-phox, or HSF1 in EC prevented glyLDL-induced monocyte adhesion to EC. 
uPA siRNA increased monocyte adhesion to EC. Exogenous uPA reduced monocyte
adhesion induced by glyLDL or uPA siRNA. Exogenous PAI-1 restored monocyte
adhesion to EC inhibited by PAI-1 siRNA or uPA. GlyLDL-induced monocyte adhesion 
to EC was inhibited by treatment of EC with RAP, an antagonist for LRP, and
enhanced by uPAR antibody. The adhesion of monocytes to aorta from leptin db/db
diabetic mice was significantly greater than to that from control mice, which was
associated with elevated contents of PAI-1, uPA, p22-phox, and HSF1 in hearts of 
db/db mice. The results suggest that oxidative stress and fibrinolytic regulators
(PAI-1, uPA, and uPAR) are implicated in the modulation of glyLDL-induced
monocyte adhesion to vascular endothelium, which may play a crucial role in
vascular inflammation under diabetes-associated metabolic disorder.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 24496227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Neurosci. 2014 Jan 29;34(5):1599-612. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3039-13.2014.

HSF1 protects neurons through a novel trimerization- and HSP-independent
mechanism.

Verma P(1), Pfister JA, Mallick S, D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75080.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) protects neurons from death caused by the accumulation
of misfolded proteins. It is believed that this protective effect is mediated by 
the transcriptional stimulation of genes encoding heat shock proteins (HSPs), a
family of chaperones that refold or degrade misfolded proteins. Whether HSF1 is
protective when neuronal death is not caused by protein misfolding has not been
studied. Here, we report that HSF1 expression is necessary for the survival of
rat neurons and that HSF1 mRNA and protein expression is reduced in neurons
primed to die. Knock-down of HSF1 induces death of otherwise healthy neurons,
whereas reestablishment of elevated levels of HSF1 protects neurons even when
death is not due to accumulation of misfolded proteins. Neuroprotection by HSF1
does not require its trimerization, an event obligatory for the binding of HSF1
to heat shock elements within HSP gene promoters. Moreover, knock-down of HSP70
or blockade of HSP90 signaling does not reduce neuroprotection by HSF1. Although 
several neuroprotective molecules and signaling pathways, including CaMK, PKA,
Casein kinase-II, and the Raf-MEK-ERK and PI-3K-Akt pathways, are not required
for HSF1-mediated neuroprotection, protection is abrogated by inhibition of
classical histone deacetylases (HDACs). We report that the novel mechanism of
neuroprotection by HSF1 involves cooperation with SIRT1, an HDAC with well
documented neuroprotective effects. Using a cell culture model of Huntington's
disease, we show that HSF1 trimerization is not required for protection against
mutant huntingtin-induced neurotoxicity, suggesting that HSF1 can protect neurons
against both proteinopathic and nonproteinopathic death through a noncanonical
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3905136
PMID: 24478344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2014;14(2):144-55.

Pleiotropic role of HSF1 in neoplastic transformation.

Vydra N, Toma A, Widlak W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii
Krajowej 15, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland. wwidlak@io.gliwice.pl.

HSF1 (Heat Shock transcription Factor 1) is the main transcription factor
activated in response to proteotoxic stress. Once activated, it induces an
expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) which enables cells to survive in
suboptimal conditions. HSF1 could be also activated by altered kinase signaling
characteristic for cancer cells, which is a probable reason for its high activity
found in a broad range of tumors. There is rapidly growing evidence that HSF1
supports tumor initiation and growth, as well as metastasis and angiogenesis. It 
also modulates the sensitivity of cancer cells to therapy. Functions of HSF1 in
cancer are connected with HSPs' activity, which generally protects cells from
apoptosis, but also are independent of its classical targets. HSF1-dependent
regulation of non-HSPs genes plays a role in cell cycle progression, glucose
metabolism, autophagy and drug efflux. HSF1 affects the key cell-survival and
regulatory pathways, including p53, RAS/MAPK, cAMP/PKA, mTOR and insulin
signaling. Although the exact mechanism of HSF1 action is still somewhat obscure,
HSF1 is becoming an attractive target in anticancer therapies, whose inhibition
could enhance the effects of other treatments.

PMCID: PMC4435066
PMID: 24467529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 21;9(1):e85552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085552. eCollection
2014.

Transcription regulation of HYPK by Heat Shock Factor 1.

Das S(1), Bhattacharyya NP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography & Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, Kolkata, India.

HYPK (Huntingtin Yeast Partner K) was originally identified by yeast two-hybrid
assay as an interactor of Huntingtin, the protein mutated in Huntington's
disease. HYPK was characterized earlier as an intrinsically unstructured protein 
having chaperone-like activity in vitro and in vivo. HYPK has the ability of
reducing rate of aggregate formation and subsequent toxicity caused by mutant
Huntingtin. Further investigation revealed that HYPK is involved in diverse
cellular processes and required for normal functioning of cells. In this study we
observed that hyperthermia increases HYPK expression in human and mouse cells in 
culture. Expression of exogenous Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), upon heat treatment 
could induce HYPK expression, whereas HSF1 knockdown reduced endogenous as well
as heat-induced HYPK expression. Putative HSF1-binding site present in the
promoter of human HYPK gene was identified and validated by reporter assay.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed in vivo interaction of HSF1 and RNA
polymerase II with HYPK promoter sequence. Additionally, acetylation of histone
H4, a known epigenetic marker of inducible HSF1 binding, was observed in response
to heat shock in HYPK gene promoter. Overexpression of HYPK inhibited cells from 
lethal heat-induced death whereas knockdown of HYPK made the cells susceptible to
lethal heat shock-induced death. Apart from elevated temperature, HYPK was also
upregulated by hypoxia and proteasome inhibition, two other forms of cellular
stress. We concluded that chaperone-like protein HYPK is induced by cellular
stress and under transcriptional regulation of HSF1.

PMCID: PMC3897489
PMID: 24465598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 20;9(1):e83437. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083437. eCollection
2014.

Whey protein hydrolysate enhances HSP90 but does not alter HSP60 and HSP25 in
skeletal muscle of rats.

Moura CS(1), Lollo PC(1), Morato PN(1), Nisishima LH(1), Carneiro EM(2),
Amaya-Farfan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Faculty of Food Engineering, University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Institute of Biology (IB),
University of Campinas (UNICAMP), São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/0cb4a83a-2b26-410f-bdda-ff62dae25eea.

Whey protein hydrolysate (WPH) intake has shown to increase HSP70 expression. The
aim of the present study was to investigate whether WPH intake would also
influences HSP90, HSP60 and HSP25 expression, as well as associated parameters.
Forty-eight male Wistar rats were divided into sedentary (unstressed) and
exercised (stressed) groups, and were fed with three different sources of
protein: whey protein (WP), whey protein hydrolysate (WPH) and casein (CAS) as a 
control, based on the AIN93G diet for 3 weeks. WPH intake increased HSP90
expression in both sedentary and exercised animals compared to WP or CAS, however
no alteration was found from exercise or diet to HSP60 or HSP25. Co-chaperone
Aha1 and p-HSF1 were also increased in the exercised animals fed with WPH in
comparison with WP or CAS, consistent with enhanced HSP90 expression. VEGF and
p-AKT were increased in the WPH exercised group. No alteration was found in
BCKDH, PI3-Kinase (p85), GFAT, OGT or PGC for diet or exercise. The antioxidant
system GPx, catalase and SOD showed different responses to diet and exercise. The
data indicate that WPH intake enhanced factors related to cell survival, such as 
HSP90 and VEGF, but does not alter HSP60 or HSP25 in rat skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC3896333
PMID: 24465380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 May 25;389(1-2):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.01.002.
Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Estrogen and the female heart.

Knowlton AA(1), Korzick DH(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Veteran's Affairs, Northern California VA, Sacramento, CA,
USA; Molecular & Cellular Cardiology, Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology,
University of California, Davis, USA. Electronic address: aaknowlton@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Intercollege Program in Physiology and Department of Kinesiology, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.

Estrogen has a plethora of effects in the cardiovascular system. Studies of
estrogen and the heart span human clinical trials and basic cell and molecular
investigations. Greater understanding of cell and molecular responses to
estrogens can provide further insights into the findings of clinical studies.
Differences in expression and cellular/intracellular distribution of the two main
receptors, estrogen receptor (ER) a and ß, are thought to account for the
specificity and differences in responses to estrogen. Much remains to be learned 
in this area, but cellular distribution within the cardiovascular system is
becoming clearer. Identification of GPER as a third ER has introduced further
complexity to the system. 17ß-estradiol (E2), the most potent human estrogen,
clearly has protective properties activating a signaling cascade leading to
cellular protection and also influencing expression of the protective heat shock 
proteins (HSP). E2 protects the heart from ischemic injury in basic studies, but 
the picture is more involved in the whole organism and clinical studies. Here the
complexity of E2's widespread effects comes into play and makes interpretation of
findings more challenging. Estrogen loss occurs primarily with aging, but few
studies have used aged models despite clear evidence of differences between the
response to estrogen deficiency in adult and aged animals. Thus more work is
needed focusing on the effects of aging vs. estrogen loss on the cardiovascular
system.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24462775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Sep;229(9):1224-35. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24556.

SIRT1 knockdown promotes neural differentiation and attenuates the heat shock
response.

Liu DJ(1), Hammer D, Komlos D, Chen KY, Firestein BL, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers State University of New
Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey.

Neurons have a limited capacity for heat shock protein (HSP) induction and are
vulnerable to the pathogenic consequence of protein misfolding and aggregation as
seen in age-related neurodegenerative diseases. Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), an NAD(+)
-dependent lysine deacetylase with important biological functions, has been shown
to sustain the DNA-binding state of HSF1 for HSP induction. Here we show that
differentiation and maturation of embryonic cortical neurons and N2a
neuroprogenitor cells is associated with decreases in SIRT1 expression and heat
shock-dependent induction of HSP70 protein. Tests of a pharmacological activator 
and an inhibitor of SIRT1 affirm the regulatory role of SIRT1 in HSP70 induction.
Protein cross-linking studies show that nuclear SIRT1 and HSF1 form a
co-migrating high molecular weight complex upon stress. The use of retroviral
vectors to manipulate SIRT1 expression in N2a cells show that shRNA-mediated
knock down of SIRT1 causes spontaneous neurite outgrowth coincident with reduced 
growth rate and decreased induction of hsp70-reporter gene, whereas SIRT1
over-expression blocks the induced neural differentiation of N2a cells. Our
results suggest that decreased SIRT1 expression is conducive to neuronal
differentiation and this decrease contributes to the attenuated induction of HSPs
in neurons.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24435709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Shock. 2014 May;41(5):449-53. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000118.

HSF-1 is involved in attenuating the release of inflammatory cytokines induced by
LPS through regulating autophagy.

Tong Z(1), Jiang B, Zhang L, Liu Y, Gao M, Jiang Y, Li Y, Lu Q, Yao Y, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Hunan; and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Burns
Institute, First Hospital Affiliated to the Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

Autophagy plays a protective role in endotoxemic mice. Heat shock factor 1
(HSF-1) also plays a crucial protective role in endotoxemic mice by decreasing
inflammatory cytokines. The purpose of this study was to determine whether HSF-1 
is involved in attenuating the release of inflammatory cytokines in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated mice and peritoneal macrophages (PMs) through
regulating autophagy activity. Autophagosome formation in HSF-1(+/+) and
HSF-1(-/-) mice and PMs stimulated by LPS was examined by Western blotting and
immunofluorescence. Lipopolysaccharide-induced autophagy and inflammatory
cytokines were examined in HSF-1(+/+) and HSF-1(-/-) PMs treated with
3-methyladenine (3-MA) or rapamycin. Results showed that LPS-induced autophagy
was elevated transiently at 12 h but declined at 24 h in the livers and lungs of 
mice. Higher levels of inflammatory cytokines and lower autophagy activity were
detected in HSF-1(-/-) mice and PMs compared with HSF-1(+/+) mice and PMs.
Interestingly, LPS-induced release of inflammatory cytokines did not further
increase in HSF-1(-/-) PMs treated with 3-MA but aggravated in HSF-1(+/+) PMs.
Lipopolysaccharide-induced autophagy did not decrease in HSF-1(-/-) PMs treated
with 3-MA but decreased in HSF-1 PMs(+/+). Taken together, our results suggested 
that HSF-1 attenuated the release of inflammatory cytokines induced by LPS by
regulating autophagy activity.

PMID: 24430550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;32(7):221-37. doi: 10.1159/000356641. Epub 2013 Dec
18.

Pendrin, a novel transcriptional target of the uroguanylin system.

Rozenfeld J(1), Tal O, Kladnitsky O, Adler L, Efrati E, Carrithers SL, Alper SL, 
Zelikovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Nephrology, Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel.

Guanylin (GN) and uroguanylin (UGN) are low-molecular-weight peptide hormones
produced mainly in the intestinal mucosa in response to oral salt load. GN and
UGN (guanylin peptides) induce secretion of electrolytes and water in both
intestine and kidney. Thought to act as "intestinal natriuretic factors", GN and 
UGN modulate renal salt secretion by both endocrine mechanisms (linking the
digestive system and kidney) and paracrine/autocrine (intrarenal) mechanisms. The
cellular function of GN and UGN in intestine and proximal tubule is mediated by
guanylyl cyclase C (GC-C)-, cGMP-, and G protein-dependent pathways, whereas, in 
principal cells of the cortical collecting duct (CCD), these peptide hormones act
via GC-C-independent signaling through phospholipase A2 (PLA2). The Cl(-)/HCO(-)3
exchanger pendrin (SLC26A4), encoded by the PDS gene, is expressed in non-a
intercalated cells of the CCD. Pendrin is essential for CCD bicarbonate secretion
and is also involved in NaCl balance and blood pressure regulation. Our recent
studies have provided evidence that pendrin-mediated anion exchange in the CCD is
regulated at the transcriptional level by UGN. UGN exerts an inhibitory effect on
the pendrin gene promoter likely via heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) action at a
defined heat shock element (HSE) site. Recent studies have unraveled novel roles 
for guanylin peptides in several organ systems including involvement in appetite 
regulation, olfactory function, cell proliferation and differentiation,
inflammation, and reproductive function. Both the guanylin system and pendrin
have also been implicated in airway function. Future molecular research into the 
receptors and signal transduction pathways involved in the action of guanylin
peptides and the pendrin anion exchanger in the kidney and other organs, and into
the links between them, may facilitate discovery of new therapies for
hypertension, heart failure, hepatic failure and other fluid retention syndromes,
as well as for diverse diseases such as obesity, asthma, and cancer.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3970214
PMID: 24429828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Cell Sci. 2014 Jan 15;127(Pt 2):261-6. doi: 10.1242/jcs.132605.

HSF1 at a glance.

Vihervaara A(1), Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is an evolutionarily highly conserved transcription
factor that coordinates stress-induced transcription and directs versatile
physiological processes in eukaryotes. The central position of HSF1 in cellular
homeostasis has been well demonstrated, mainly through its strong effect in
transactivating genes that encode heat shock proteins (HSPs). However, recent
genome-wide studies have revealed that HSF1 is capable of reprogramming
transcription more extensively than previously assumed; it is also involved in a 
multitude of processes in stressed and non-stressed cells. Consequently, the
importance of HSF1 in fundamental physiological events, including metabolism,
gametogenesis and aging, has become apparent and its significance in pathologies,
such as cancer progression, is now evident. In this Cell Science at a Glance
article, we highlight recent advances in the HSF1 field, discuss the organismal
control over HSF1, and present the processes that are mediated by HSF1 in the
context of cell type, cell-cycle phase, physiological condition and received
stimuli.

PMID: 24421309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Signal. 2014 Apr;26(4):825-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.01.002. Epub 2014
Jan 8.

PP2A-AMPKa-HSF1 axis regulates the metal-inducible expression of HSPs and ROS
clearance.

Zhu XN(1), Chen LP(1), Bai Q(1), Ma L(1), Li DC(1), Zhang JM(1), Gao C(1), Lei
ZN(1), Zhang ZB(1), Xing XM(1), Liu CX(1), He ZN(1), Li J(1), Xiao YM(1), Zhang
AH(2), Zeng XW(3), Chen W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (2)School of Public Health, Guiyang Medical University, 
Guiyang 550004, China. (3)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address:
zengxw123@163.com. (4)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address:
chenwen@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Metals such as cadmium and arsenic are ubiquitous toxicants that cause a variety 
of adverse health effects. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) response to metal-induced
stress and protect cells from further damage. However, the intracellular
signalling pathways responsible for activation of HSPs expression are not fully
understood. Here, we demonstrate that protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) regulates
expression of HSP70 and HSP27 via dephosphorylation of an AMP-activated protein
kinase a subunit (AMPKa) at Thr172. Dephosphorylated AMPKa phosphorylates heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1) at Ser303, leading to significant transcriptional
suppression of HSP70 and HSP27 in CdCl2- or NaAsO2-treated cells. Suppression of 
PP2A regulatory B56d subunit resulted in the sustained phosphorylation of AMPKa
upon CdCl2 treatment, subsequent reduction in expression of HSP70 and HSP27, and 
thereby dramatic reduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) clearance. We further
revealed that PP2A B56d physically interacted with AMPKa, providing evidence that
PP2A B56d-AMPKa-HSF1 signalling pathway participated in regulating the inducible 
expression of HSPs and ROS clearance. Taken together, we identified a novel
PP2A-dependent signalling pathway involved in regulation of HSPs expression in
response to metal stress.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jan 2;5:e980. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.508.

HER2/ErbB2 activates HSF1 and thereby controls HSP90 clients including MIF in
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer.

Schulz R(1), Streller F(1), Scheel AH(2), Rüschoff J(2), Reinert MC(1),
Dobbelstein M(1), Marchenko ND(3), Moll UM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Oncology, GZMB, University of Göttingen, Göttingen
37077, Germany. (2)Institute for Pathology Nordhessen, Kassel 34119, Germany.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(4)1] Institute of Molecular Oncology, GZMB, University of Göttingen, Göttingen
37077, Germany [2] Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
NY 11794, USA.

Overexpression of the human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) in breast
cancer strongly correlates with aggressive tumors and poor prognosis. Recently, a
positive correlation between HER2 and MIF (macrophage migration inhibitory
factor, a tumor-promoting protein and heat-shock protein 90 (HSP90) client)
protein levels was shown in cancer cells. However, the underlying mechanistic
link remained unknown. Here we show that overexpressed HER2 constitutively
activates heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), the master transcriptional regulator of the
inducible proteotoxic stress response of heat-shock chaperones, including HSP90, 
and a crucial factor in initiation and maintenance of the malignant state.
Inhibiting HER2 pharmacologically by Lapatinib (a dual HER2/epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitor) or CP724.714 (a specific HER2 inhibitor), or by
knockdown via siRNA leads to inhibition of phosphoactivated Ser326 HSF1, and
subsequently blocks the activity of the HSP90 chaperone machinery in
HER2-overexpressing breast cancer lines. Consequently, HSP90 clients, including
MIF, AKT, mutant p53 and HSF1 itself, become destabilized, which in turn inhibits
tumor proliferation. Mechanistically, HER2 signals via the
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT- mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) axis
to induce activated pSer326 HSF1. Heat-shock stress experiments confirm this
functional link between HER2 and HSF1, as HER2 (and PI3K) inhibition attenuate
the HSF1-mediated heat-shock response. Importantly, we confirmed this axis in
vivo. In the mouse model of HER2-driven breast cancer, ErbB2 inhibition by
Lapatinib strongly suppresses tumor progression, and this is associated with
inactivation of the HSF1 pathway. Moreover, ErbB2-overexpressing cancer cells
derived from a primary mouse ErbB2 tumor also show HSF1 inactivation and HSP90
client destabilization in response to ErbB2 inhibition. Furthermore, in
HER2-positive human breast cancers HER2 levels strongly correlate with pSer326
HSF1 activity. Our results show for the first time that HER2/ErbB2 overexpression
controls HSF1 activity, with subsequent stabilization of numerous tumor-promoting
HSP90 clients such as MIF, AKT and HSF1 itself, thereby causing a robust
promotion in tumor growth in HER2-positive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4040658
PMID: 24384723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 May 15;23(10):2737-51. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt667. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

Dexamethasone induces heat shock response and slows down disease progression in
mouse and fly models of Huntington's disease.

Maheshwari M(1), Bhutani S, Das A, Mukherjee R, Sharma A, Kino Y, Nukina N, Jana 
NR.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience Laboratory, National Brain Research
Centre, Manesar, Gurgaon 122 050, India.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disorder caused by
abnormal expansion of glutamine repeats in the protein huntingtin. In HD brain,
mutant huntingtin undergoes proteolytic processing, and its N-terminal fragment
containing poly-glutamine repeats accumulate as insoluble aggregates leading to
the defect in cellular protein quality control system and heat shock response
(HSR). Here we demonstrate that the defective HSR in the brain is due to the
down-regulation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in both mice and fly models of HD. 
Interestingly, treatment of dexamethasone (a synthetic glucocorticoid) to HD mice
or flies significantly increased the expression and transactivation of HSF1 and
induction of HSR and these effects are mediated through the down-regulation of
HSP90. Dexamethasone treatment also significantly decreased the aggregate load
and transient recovery of HD-related behavioural phenotypes in both disease
models. These results suggest that dexamethasone could be a potential therapeutic
molecule for the treatment of HD and related poly-glutamine disorders.

PMID: 24381308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 15;386(2):448-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.038. Epub 2013 
Dec 28.

An essential role for heat shock transcription factor binding protein 1 (HSBP1)
during early embryonic development.

Eroglu B(1), Min JN(2), Zhang Y(3), Szurek E(4), Moskophidis D(5), Eroglu A(6),
Mivechi NF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, One Freedom Way, Augusta, GA 30904, United 
States; Chaperone Biology, Georgia Regents University (GRU) Cancer Center,
Medical College of Georgia (MCG), 1120 15th St., Augusta, GA 30912, United
States. (2)Chaperone Biology, Georgia Regents University (GRU) Cancer Center,
Medical College of Georgia (MCG), 1120 15th St., Augusta, GA 30912, United
States. Electronic address: jin-na.min@yale.edu. (3)Chaperone Biology, Georgia
Regents University (GRU) Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia (MCG), 1120
15th St., Augusta, GA 30912, United States. Electronic address: yanzhang@vt.edu. 
(4)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, GRU, MCG, GA, United States.
(5)Chaperone Biology, Georgia Regents University (GRU) Cancer Center, Medical
College of Georgia (MCG), 1120 15th St., Augusta, GA 30912, United States.
(6)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, GRU, MCG, GA, United States.
Electronic address: Aeroglu@gru.edu. (7)Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, One
Freedom Way, Augusta, GA 30904, United States; Chaperone Biology, Georgia Regents
University (GRU) Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia (MCG), 1120 15th St., 
Augusta, GA 30912, United States. Electronic address: nmivechi@gru.edu.

Heat shock factor binding protein 1 (HSBP1) is a 76 amino acid polypeptide that
contains two arrays of hydrophobic heptad repeats and was originally identified
through its interaction with the oligomerization domain of heat shock factor 1
(Hsf1), suppressing Hsf1's transcriptional activity following stress. To examine 
the function of HSBP1 in vivo, we generated mice with targeted disruption of the 
hsbp1 gene and examined zebrafish embryos treated with HSBP1-specific morpholino 
oligonucleotides. Our results show that hsbp1 is critical for preimplantation
embryonic development. Embryonic stem (ES) cells deficient in hsbp1 survive and
proliferate normally into the neural lineage in vitro; however, lack of hsbp1 in 
embryoid bodies (EBs) leads to disorganization of the germ layers and a reduction
in the endoderm-specific markers (such as a-fetoprotein). We further show that
hsbp1-deficient mouse EBs and knockdown of HSBP1 in zebrafish leads to an
increase in the expression of the neural crest inducers Snail2, Tfap2a and Foxd3,
suggesting a potential role for HSBP1 in the Wnt pathway. The hsbp1-deficient ES 
cells, EBs and zebrafish embryos with reduced HSBP1 levels exhibit elevated
levels of Hsf1 activity and expression of heat shock proteins (Hsps). We conclude
that HSBP1 plays an essential role during early mouse and zebrafish embryonic
development.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4114229
PMID: 24380799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Front Integr Neurosci. 2013 Dec 11;7:89. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2013.00089.
eCollection 2013.

HSF1 transcriptional activity mediates alcohol induction of Vamp2 expression and 
GABA release.

Varodayan FP(1), Harrison NL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University New York City, NY, USA ;
Department of Anesthesiology, Columbia University New York City, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Columbia University New York City, NY, USA ;
Department of Pharmacology, Columbia University New York City, NY, USA.

Many central synapses are highly sensitive to alcohol, and it is now accepted
that short-term alterations in synaptic function may lead to longer-term changes 
in circuit function. The regulation of postsynaptic receptors by alcohol has been
well studied, but the mechanisms underlying the effects of alcohol on the
presynaptic terminal are relatively unexplored. To identify a pathway by which
alcohol regulates neurotransmitter release, we recently investigated the
mechanism by which ethanol induces Vamp2, but not Vamp1, in mouse primary
cortical cultures. These two genes encode isoforms of synaptobrevin, a vesicular 
soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE)
protein required for synaptic vesicle fusion. We found that alcohol activates the
transcription factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) to induce Vamp2 expression, while
Vamp1 mRNA levels remain unaffected. As the Vamp2 gene encodes a SNARE protein,
we then investigated whether ethanol exposure and HSF1 transcriptional activity
alter neurotransmitter release using electrophysiology. We found that alcohol
increased the frequency of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated miniature IPSCs
via HSF1, but had no effect on mEPSCs. Overall, these data indicate that alcohol 
induces HSF1 transcriptional activity to trigger a specific coordinated
adaptation in GABAergic presynaptic terminals. This mechanism could explain some 
of the changes in synaptic function that occur soon after alcohol exposure, and
may underlie some of the more enduring effects of chronic alcohol intake on local
circuit function.

PMCID: PMC3858671
PMID: 24376402  [PubMed]


257. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Dec 23;54(13):8353-63. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-12618.

Inhibition of polo-like kinase 1 promotes hyperthermia sensitivity via
inactivation of heat shock transcription factor 1 in human retinoblastoma cells.

Yunoki T(1), Tabuchi Y, Hayashi A, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

PURPOSE: Hyperthermia (HT) has been recognized as an effective focal treatment in
retinoblastoma. However, one of the problems with HT therapy is that cells
acquire acquisition. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether the
inhibition of polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) would promote HT sensitivity in human
retinoblastoma cells.
METHODS: We examined the effects of PLK1 knockdown by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) or by the inhibition of PLK1 activity with PLK1 inhibitor (BI-2536) on
the sensitivity to HT (44°C, 1 hour) in human retinoblastoma Y79 and WERI-Rb-1
cells by evaluating apoptosis and cell proliferation using flow cytometry,
Western blotting, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and WST-8
assay. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of activating heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) through a combination of PLK1 knockdown and HT
using Western blotting and immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: The combination of PLK1 inhibition and HT enhanced sensitivity to HT
synergistically. Furthermore, PLK1 knockdown inhibited HT-induced phosphorylation
of HSF1, the nuclear translocation of HSF1 from the cytoplasm, and nuclear
granule formation of HSF1. Heat shock transcription factor 1, inactivated by the 
silencing of PLK1, reduced the expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs), such as 
HSP70 and HSP40, as well as the expression of Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3
(BAG3).
CONCLUSIONS: Polo-like kinase 1 inhibition may attenuate the thermoresistance of 
HT through the inactivation of HSF1 concomitant with reductions in HSPs and BAG3.
The combination of PLK1 inhibition and HT may become an option for HT therapy in 
patients with retinoblastoma.

PMID: 24366665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Mar;1840(3):1181-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.12.006.
Epub 2013 Dec 19.

Heat shock transcription factor HSF1 regulates the expression of the
Huntingtin-interacting protein HYPK.

Sakurai H(1), Sawai M(2), Ishikawa Y(2), Ota A(2), Kawahara E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. Electronic
address: hsakurai@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Division of Health Sciences,
Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno,
Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Huntingtin-interacting protein HYPK possesses chaperone-like
activity. We hypothesized that the expression of HYPK could be regulated by heat 
shock factor HSF1, a transcriptional regulator of chaperone genes.
METHODS: HYPK expression in HeLa cells was assessed by RT-PCR and Western blot
analysis. In vivo binding of HSF1 to the HYPK promoter was analyzed by chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays. The requirement for HYPK in heat-shocked cells was
examined using HYPK-knockdown cells.
RESULTS: Levels of HYPK mRNA were slightly increased by heat treatment; however, 
the levels decreased in HSF1-silenced cells. The HYPK promoter was bound by HSF1 
in a heat-inducible manner; however, its core promoter activity was notably
suppressed upon heat shock. When cells were exposed to heat shock, silencing HYPK
caused a decrease in cell viability.
CONCLUSIONS: HYPK is a novel target gene of HSF1. HSF1 maintains HYPK expression 
in heat-shocked cells.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The maintenance of HYPK expression by HSF1 is necessary for
the survival of cells under thermal stress conditions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jan 15;24(2):661-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.11.059.
Epub 2013 Dec 1.

A heat shock protein 90 inhibitor that modulates the immunophilins and regulates 
hormone receptors without inducing the heat shock response.

McConnell JR(1), Alexander LA(2), McAlpine SR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2052, 
Australia. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, San Diego State
University, 5500 Campanile Drive, San Diego, CA 92182-1030, United States.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of New South Wales, Kensington, NSW 2052, 
Australia. Electronic address: s.mcalpine@UNSW.edu.au.

When a cell encounters external stressors, such as lack of nutrients, elevated
temperatures, changes in pH or other stressful environments, a key set of
evolutionarily conserved proteins, the heat shock proteins (hsps), become
overexpressed. Hsps are classified into six major families with the hsp90 family 
being the best understood; an increase in cell stress leads to increased levels
of hsp90, which leads to cellular protection. A hallmark of hsp90 inhibitors is
that they induce a cell rescue mechanism, the heat shock response. We define the 
unique molecular profile of a compound (SM145) that regulates hormone receptor
protein levels through hsp90 inhibition without inducing the heat shock response.
Modulation of the binding event between heat shock protein 90 and the
immunophilins/homologs using SM145, leads to a decrease in hormone receptor
protein levels. Unlike N-terminal hsp90 inhibitors, this hsp90 inhibitor does not
induce a heat shock response. This work is proof of principle that controlling
hormone receptor expression can occur by inhibiting hsp90 without inducing
pro-survival protein heat shock protein 70 (hsp70) or other proteins associated
with the heat shock response. Innovatively, we show that blocking the heat shock 
response, in addition to hsp90, is key to regulating hsp90-associated pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4547841
PMID: 24360559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Reprod Toxicol. 2014 Jan;43:111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.12.002. Epub
2013 Dec 16.

Eye-specific gene expression following embryonic ethanol exposure in zebrafish:
roles for heat shock factor 1.

Kashyap B(1), Pegorsch L(2), Frey RA(2), Sun C(1), Shelden EA(3), Stenkamp DL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844,
United States; Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID
83844, United States. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, 
Moscow, ID 83844, United States. (3)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, WA 99164, United States; Center for Reproductive
Biology, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, United States. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, United States;
Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, United
States; Center for Reproductive Biology, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844,
United States. Electronic address: dstenkam@uidaho.edu.

The mechanisms through which ethanol exposure results in developmental defects
remain unclear. We used the zebrafish model to elucidate eye-specific mechanisms 
that underlie ethanol-mediated microphthalmia (reduced eye size), through
time-series microarray analysis of gene expression within eyes of embryos exposed
to 1.5% ethanol. 62 genes were differentially expressed (DE) in ethanol-treated
as compared to control eyes sampled during retinal neurogenesis (24-48 h
post-fertilization). The EDGE (extraction of differential gene expression)
algorithm identified >3000 genes DE over developmental time in ethanol-exposed
eyes as compared to controls. The DE lists included several genes indicating a
mis-regulated cellular stress response due to ethanol exposure. Combined
treatment with sub-threshold levels of ethanol and a morpholino targeting heat
shock factor 1 mRNA resulted in microphthalmia, suggesting convergent molecular
pathways. Thermal preconditioning partially prevented ethanol-mediated
microphthalmia while maintaining Hsf-1 expression. These data suggest roles for
reduced Hsf-1 in mediating microphthalmic effects of embryonic ethanol exposure.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3918430
PMID: 24355176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Biol Sci. 2013 Dec 1;9(10):1121-33. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.6666. eCollection
2013.

The regulation of the autophagic network and its implications for human disease.

Yang J(1), Carra S, Zhu WG, Kampinga HH.

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Cell Biology; University Medical Center Groningen, University
of Groningen; Groningen, The Netherlands. ; 2. Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis
and Translational Research (Ministry of Education); Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology; Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191,
China;

Autophagy has attracted a lot of attention in recent years. More and more
proteins and signaling pathways have been discovered that somehow feed into the
autophagy regulatory pathways. Regulation of autophagy is complex and
condition-specific, and in several diseases, autophagic fluxes are changed. Here,
we review the most well-established concepts in this field as well as the
reported signaling pathways or components which steer the autophagy machinery.
Furthermore, we will highlight how autophagic fluxes are changed in various
diseases either as cause for or as response to deal with an altered cellular
homeostasis and how modulation of autophagy might be used as potential therapy
for such diseases.

PMCID: PMC3858585
PMID: 24339733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40(1):1-17. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131544.

Late-onset Alzheimer's disease, heating up and foxed by several proteins:
pathomolecular effects of the aging process.

Perez FP(1), Bose D(1), Maloney B(2), Nho K(3), Shah K(4), Lahiri DK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Geriatric Medicine Division, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of
Psychiatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN,
USA. (3)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (4)Department of Chemistry, Purdue
University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. (5)Department of Psychiatry, and of Medical 
& Molecular Genetics, Institute of Psychiatric Research, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) is the most common neurodegenerative
disorder in older adults, affecting over 50% of those over age 85. Aging is the
most important risk factor for the development of LOAD. Aging is associated with 
the decrease in the ability of cells to cope with cellular stress, especially
protein aggregation. Here we describe how the process of aging affects pathways
that control the processing and degradation of abnormal proteins including
amyloid-ß (Aß). Genetic association studies in LOAD have successfully identified 
a large number of genetic variants involved in the development of the disease.
However, there is a gap in understanding the interconnections between these
pathomolecular events that prevent us from discovering therapeutic targets. We
propose novel, pertinent links to elucidate how the biology of aging affects the 
sequence of events in the development of LOAD. Furthermore we analyze and
synthesize the molecular-pathologic-clinical correlations of the aging process,
involving the HSF1 and FOXO family pathways, Aß metabolic pathway, and the
different clinical stages of LOAD. Our new model postulates that the aging
process would precede Aß accumulation, and attenuation of HSF1 is an "upstream"
event in the cascade that results in excess Aß and synaptic dysfunction, which
may lead to cognitive impairment and/or trigger "downstream" neurodegeneration
and synaptic loss. Specific host factors, such as the activity of FOXO family
pathways, would mediate the response to Aß toxicity and the pace of progression
toward the clinical manifestations of AD.

PMCID: PMC4126605
PMID: 24326519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2014 Apr;52(4):214-24. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2013.10.007. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Multiple physical stresses induce <U+03B3>-globin gene expression and fetal hemoglobin
production in erythroid cells.

Schaeffer EK(1), West RJ(1), Conine SJ(1), Lowrey CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover,
NH 03755, USA; Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of
Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA; Program in Experimental and 
Molecular Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH
03755, USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center,
Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine,
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA;
Program in Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine,
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. Electronic address:
Christopher.H.Lowrey@dartmouth.edu.

Increased fetal hemoglobin (HbF) expression is beneficial for ß-hemoglobinopathy 
patients; however, current inducing agents do not possess the ideal combination
of efficacy, safety and ease of use. Better understanding the mechanisms involved
in <U+03B3>-globin gene induction is critical for designing improved therapies, as no
complete mechanism for any inducing agent has been identified. Given the
cytotoxic nature of most known inducing drugs, we hypothesized that <U+03B3>-globin is a
cell stress response gene, and that induction occurs via activation of cell
stress signaling pathways. We tested this hypothesis by investigating the ability
of physical stresses including heat-shock (HS), UV- and X-irradiation and osmotic
shock to increase <U+03B3>-globin gene expression in erythroid cells. Experiments in
K562 and KU812 cells showed that each of these stresses increased steady-state
<U+03B3>-globin mRNA levels, but only after 3-5days of treatments. HS and UV also
increased <U+03B3>-globin mRNA and HbF levels in differentiating primary human erythroid
cells. Mechanistic studies showed that HS affects <U+03B3>-globin mRNA at multiple
levels, including nascent transcription and transcript stability, and that
induction is dependent on neither the master regulator of the canonical HS
response, HSF1, nor p38 MAPK. Inhibitor panel testing identified PI3K inhibitor
LY294002 as a novel inducing agent and revealed potential roles for NF<U+03BA>B and
VEGFR/PDGFR/Raf kinases in HS-mediated <U+03B3>-globin gene induction. These findings
suggest that cell stress signaling pathways play an important role in <U+03B3>-globin
gene induction and may provide novel targets for the pharmacologic induction of
fetal hemoglobin.

© 2013.

PMID: 24314748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 2;8(12):e82006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082006. eCollection
2013.

ROS stress resets circadian clocks to coordinate pro-survival signals.

Tamaru T(1), Hattori M, Ninomiya Y, Kawamura G, Varès G, Honda K, Mishra DP, Wang
B, Benjamin I, Sassone-Corsi P, Ozawa T, Takamatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Advanced Research Center for Medical Science, Toho 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Dysfunction of circadian clocks exacerbates various diseases, in part likely due 
to impaired stress resistance. It is unclear how circadian clock system responds 
toward critical stresses, to evoke life-protective adaptation. We identified a
reactive oxygen species (ROS), H2O2 -responsive circadian pathway in mammals.
Near-lethal doses of ROS-induced critical oxidative stress (cOS) at the branch
point of life and death resets circadian clocks, synergistically evoking
protective responses for cell survival. The cOS-triggered clock resetting and
pro-survival responses are mediated by transcription factor, central
clock-regulatory BMAL1 and heat shock stress-responsive (HSR) HSF1. Casein kinase
II (CK2) -mediated phosphorylation regulates dimerization and function of BMAL1
and HSF1 to control the cOS-evoked responses. The core cOS-responsive
transcriptome includes CK2-regulated crosstalk between the circadian, HSR,
NF-kappa-B-mediated anti-apoptotic, and Nrf2-mediated anti-oxidant pathways. This
novel circadian-adaptive signaling system likely plays fundamental protective
roles in various ROS-inducible disorders, diseases, and death.

PMCID: PMC3846904
PMID: 24312621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;47:29-37. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.004.
Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Phosphorylation of heat shock protein 40 (Hsp40/DnaJB1) by mitogen-activated
protein kinase-activated protein kinase 5 (MK5/PRAK).

Kostenko S(1), Jensen KL(2), Moens U(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Inflammation Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, NO-9037 Tromsø, Norway. Electronic
address: sergiy.kostenko@mbi.uib.no. (2)Molecular Inflammation Research Group,
Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, 
NO-9037 Tromsø, Norway. (3)Molecular Inflammation Research Group, Department of
Medical Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, NO-9037
Tromsø, Norway. Electronic address: ugo.moens@uit.no.

Heat shock protein 40 (Hsp40) acts as a co-chaperone with Hsp70 to promote
protein folding, protein transport and degradation. The human Hsp40 family
contains more than 40 members, some of which can exist as phosphoproteins in the 
cell. However, little is known about the protein kinases responsible for their
phosphorylation and the functional relevance of this post-translational
modification remains elusive. Here we show that Hsp40/DnaJB1 is an in vitro and
in vivo substrate for the mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein
kinase 5 (MK5). MK5 and Hsp40/DnaJB1 form complexes in cells and this interaction
is accomplished by the C-terminal regions of both proteins. MK5 can phosphorylate
Hsp40/DnaJB1 at several residues in vitro. Studies with specific
phosphoantibodies indicate that MK5 phosphorylates Hsp40/DnaJB1 in vivo at
Ser-149 or/and Ser-151 and Ser-171 in the C-terminal domain of Hsp40/DnaJB1. MK5 
modestly stimulates the ATP hydrolyse activity of Hsp40/Hsp70 complex and
enhances the repression of heat shock factor 1 driven transcription by
Hsp40/DnaJB1.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24309468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Feb;36(2):590-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.11.013.
Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Molecular cloning, characterization and expression analysis of three heat shock
responsive genes from Haliotis diversicolor.

Huang Y(1), Cai X(1), Zou Z(1), Wang S(1), Wang G(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture in the East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture in the East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China. Electronic address:
ylwang@jmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, State
University of New York at Cobleskill, NY 12043, USA. Electronic address:
zhangziping@hotmail.com.

In this study, molecular characterization and expression of three heat shock
responsive genes were analyzed as indicators to understand the mechanism of heat 
shock response of small abalone Haliotis diversicolor under stresses. The full
length cDNA of heat shock transcriptional factor 1 (HdHSF1), heat shock factor
binding protein 1(HSBP1), and heat shock protein 90 (HdHSP90) are 1548 bp,
809 bp, and 2592 bp respectively, encoding a protein of 515 aa, 75 aa, and 728 aa
respectively. Real time quantitative PCR analysis revealed that these three genes
are constitutively expressed in 7 selected tissues. The expression level of
HdHSF1 in gills was higher than that in other tissues (p < 0.05). The highest
expression level of HdHSBP1 was detected in hemocytes. The highest expression
level of HdHSP90 was in the digestive tract and colleterial gland. The HdHSF1
expression level in the gills was up-regulated significantly (p < 0.05) after
thermal stress and hypoxia exposure respectively. On the contrary, HdHSBP1 was
down-regulated both in gills and hemocytes after thermal stress and the same as
in gills after hypoxia stress. HdHSP90 expression level was also up-regulated in 
gills and hemocytes after both thermal and hypoxia stresses. These results
indicated that these three heat shock responsive genes play important roles in
response to thermal and hypoxia stress.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24309137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Physiol Rep. 2013 Aug;1(3):e00071. doi: 10.1002/phy2.71. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Regeneration of injured skeletal muscle in heat shock transcription factor 1-null
mice.

Nishizawa S(1), Koya T, Ohno Y, Goto A, Ikuita A, Suzuki M, Ohira T, Egawa T,
Nakai A, Sugiura T, Ohira Y, Yoshioka T, Beppu M, Goto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Marianna University School of Medicine 
Kawasaki, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to investigate a role of heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1)-mediated stress response during regeneration of injured soleus
muscle by using HSF1-null mice. Cardiotoxin (CTX) was injected into the left
muscle of male HSF1-null and wild-type mice under anesthesia with intraperitoneal
injection of pentobarbital sodium. Injection of physiological saline was also
performed into the right muscle. Soleus muscles were dissected bilaterally 2 and 
4 weeks after the injection. The relative weight and fiber cross-sectional area
in CTX-injected muscles of HSF1-null, not of wild-type, mice were less than
controls with injection of physiological saline 4 weeks after the injury,
indicating a slower regeneration. Injury-related increase of Pax7-positive muscle
satellite cells in HSF1-null mice was inhibited versus wild-type mice.
HSF1-deficiency generally caused decreases in the basal expression levels of heat
shock proteins (HSPs). But the mRNA expression levels of HSP25 and HSP90a in
HSF1-null mice were enhanced in response to CTX-injection, compared with
wild-type mice. Significant up-regulations of proinflammatory cytokines, such as 
interleukin (IL) -6, IL-1ß, and tumor necrosis factor mRNAs, with greater
magnitude than in wild-type mice were observed in HSF1-deficient mouse muscle.
HSF1 and/or HSF1-mediated stress response may play a key role in the regenerating
process of injured skeletal muscle. HSF1 deficiency may depress the regenerating 
process of injured skeletal muscle via the partial depression of increase in
Pax7-positive satellite cells. HSF1-deficiency-associated partial depression of
skeletal muscle regeneration might also be attributed to up-regulation of
proinflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3835021
PMID: 24303143  [PubMed]


268. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2014 Jan 5;130:47-56. doi:
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2013.11.005. Epub 2013 Nov 14.

Molecular mechanism of polypeptides from Chlamys farreri (PCF)'s anti-apoptotic
effect in UVA-exposed HaCaT cells involves HSF1/HSP70, JNK, XO, iNOS and NO/ROS.

Wang X(1), Jiang Q(2), Wang W(2), Su L(2), Han Y(2), Wang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Qingdao University Medical College, 308 Ningxia
Road, Qingdao 266071, Shandong, China; Qingdao Institute for Drug Control,
Chemistry Department, 7 Longde Road, Qingdao 266071, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Qingdao University Medical College, 308 Ningxia
Road, Qingdao 266071, Shandong, China. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Qingdao
University Medical College, 308 Ningxia Road, Qingdao 266071, Shandong, China.
Electronic address: cbwang666@126.com.

This study investigated the molecular mechanisms of polypeptides from Chlamys
farreri (PCF)'s anti-apoptotic effects in ultraviolet A-rays (UVA) exposed HaCaT 
cells. UVA-induced apoptosis in HaCaT cells was confirmed with Hoechst 33258
fluorescent staining; PCF treatment inhibited UVA-induced apoptosis in HaCaT
cells, increased transcriptional activities of heat shock factor protein 1 (HSF1)
and the expression of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), whereas inhibited activation
of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK), expression of xanthine oxidese (XO), inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and release of nitric oxide (NO)/reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Meanwhile, the HSF1 transcription inhibitor quercetin increased
UVA-induced apoptosis, activation of JNK, expression of XO and iNOS and release
of NO/ROS. Among the two NO release peaks we found in UVA exposed HaCaT cells, XO
inhibitor oxypurinol was found to be able to inhibit NO release at 3h post UVA
exposure but not 18h, while iNOS inhibitor S-methylisothiourea sulfate (SMT) was 
found to inhibit iNOS expression and NO release at 18h but not 3h. PCF's
protection against UVA-induced apoptosis in HaCaT cells involves increased
transcriptional activity of HSF1, increased expression of HSP70, and the
subsequential inhibition of JNK pathway, XO and iNOS expression and ROS/NO
release.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24296267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Hum Reprod. 2014 Feb;29(2):234-41. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det427. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Addition of lysophosphatidic acid to mouse oocyte maturation media can enhance
fertilization and developmental competence.

Jo JW(1), Jee BC, Suh CS, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Seoul National University Bundang
Hospital, 300 Gumi, Bundang, Seongnam, Gyeonggi 463-707 Korea.

STUDY QUESTION: Does exposure to lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) during in vitro
maturation (IVM) enhance the maturation and developmental competence of mouse
oocytes?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Supplementation of IVM medium with 30 µM LPA enhanced the
developmental competence of in vitro matured oocytes and so made them more
comparable to in vivo matured control oocytes.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: LPA is a small phospholipid that acts as an extracellular 
signaling molecule by binding to and activating at least five G protein-coupled
receptors. LPA has various biological actions, with both developmental and
physiological effects.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: During IVM, LPA at six different doses (0, 1, 10,
30, 50 or 100 µM) was added into the TCM-199 medium. After maturation, the
developmental competence and other parameters of the oocytes were assessed.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Immature GV stage oocytes from 5- to
6-week-old female BDF-1 mice were incubated for 17-18 h in IVM medium containing 
0, 1, 10 or 30 µM LPA and then either fertilized in vitro with epididymal sperm, 
or assessed for spindle morphology, mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m) or the
mRNA expression of a meiotic checkpoint gene (Mad2), a microtubule structure gene
(Hook1), two maternally derived genes (Mater and Hsf1) and an apoptosis-related
gene (Caspase6). The fertilized embryos were grown in vitro to assess
blastocyst-formation rates, differential cell counts and apoptosis.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Rates of maturation, fertilization and
blastocyst formation and hatching were significantly higher in the 30 µM
LPA-supplemented group (94.3, 96.3, 79.1 and 51.3%, respectively) than in the
unsupplemented control (0 µM) group (80.5, 87.5, 61.3 and 37.8%, respectively)
and more comparable to that of the in vivo matured oocytes (100, 96.5, 95.3 and
92.9%, respectively). LPA did not adversely affect mitochondrial activity,
spindle integrity, blastocyst cell number, caspase positivity or Mad2 expression.
Oocytes matured in 30 µM LPA had reduced Caspase6 expression, but Hook1, Mater
and Hsf1 were up-regulated in all of the LPA-supplemented groups.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Chromosomal aneuploidy in the resultant
blastocysts and the production of normal pups were not assessed. Only mouse
oocytes were assessed.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Supplementation of IVM medium with 30 µM LPA 
may enhance the developmental competence of mouse oocytes without affecting
apoptosis, spindle normalcy or mitochondrial integrity.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This study was supported by a research grant
(02-2012-021) from the Seoul National University Bundang Hospital. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.

PMID: 24293550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Feb 1;87(3):445-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.11.014. Epub 
2013 Nov 28.

Heat shock factor 1 confers resistance to Hsp90 inhibitors through p62/SQSTM1
expression and promotion of autophagic flux.

Samarasinghe B(1), Wales CT(1), Taylor FR(1), Jacobs AT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy,
University of Hawaii at Hilo, 200 W. Kawili St., Hilo, HI 96720, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Daniel K. Inouye College of Pharmacy,
University of Hawaii at Hilo, 200 W. Kawili St., Hilo, HI 96720, United States;
University of Hawaii Cancer Center, 701 Ilalo Street, Honolulu, HI 96813, United 
States. Electronic address: jacobsa@hawaii.edu.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) has an important role in many cancers. Biochemical 
inhibitors of Hsp90 are in advanced clinical development for the treatment of
solid and hematological malignancies. At the cellular level, their efficacy is
diminished by the fact that Hsp90 inhibition causes activation of heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1). We report a mechanism by which HSF1 activation diminishes the
effect of Hsp90 inhibitors geldanamycin and 17-allylaminogeldanamycin (17-AAG,
tanespimycin). Silencing HSF1 with siRNA or inhibiting HSF1 activity with KRIBB11
lowers the threshold for apoptosis in geldanamycin and 17-AAG-treated cancer
cells. Autophagy also mitigates the actions of Hsp90 inhibitors. Blocking
autophagy with 3-methyladenine (3-MA), bafilomycin A1, or beclin 1 siRNA also
lower the threshold for apoptosis. Exploring a potential relationship between
HSF1 and autophagy, we monitored autophagosome formation and autophagic flux in
control and HSF1-silenced cells. Results show HSF1 is required for autophagy in
Hsp90 inhibitor-treated cells. The reduced autophagy observed in HSF1-silenced
cells correlates with enhanced cell death. To investigate how HSF1 promotes
autophagy, we monitored the expression of genes involved in the autophagic
cascade. These data show that sequestosome 1 (p62/SQSTM1), a protein involved in 
the delivery of autophagic substrates and nucleation of autophagosomes, is an
HSF1-regulated gene. Gene silencing was used to evaluate the significance of
p62/SQSTM1 in Hsp90 inhibitor resistance. Cells where p62/SQSTM1 was silenced
showed a dramatic increase in sensitivity to Hsp90 inhibitors. Results highlight 
the importance of HSF1 and HSF1-dependent p62/SQSTM1 expression in resistance
Hsp90 inhibitors, underscoring the potential of targeting HSF1 to improve the
efficacy of Hsp90 inhibitors in cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3934577
PMID: 24291777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Pharmacol Sci. 2013;123(4):336-46. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

Possible involvement of HSP90-HSF1 multichaperone complex in impairment of HSP72 
induction in the failing heart following myocardial infarction in rats.

Marunouchi T(1), Araki M, Murata M, Takagi N, Tanonaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Tokyo University of
Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Japan.

It is generally accepted that an increase in the myocardial level of heat-shock
protein 72 (HSP72) protects viable cardiac tissue against myocardial infarction
(MI)-induced stress. However, the induction of HSP72 after exposure to heat shock
(HS) is blunted in the failing rat heart following MI. The mechanisms underlying 
this impairment in the HSP72 induction ability of the failing heart are not yet
clearly defined. In the present study, we examined the involvement in heat-shock 
factor 1 (HSF1), a transcription factor of HSPs, in decreased ability for HSP72
induction in the failing rat heart following MI. In the failing heart, nuclear
translocation of the HSF1 after exposure to hyperthermia was markedly reduced,
whereas HSF1 in the cytosolic fraction and the HSP90 chaperone complex containing
HSF1, a repressor of HSF1, were increased. Treatment with an HSP90 inhibitor,
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygel-danamycin, appeared to dissociate the interaction
of HSF1 with HSP90, and then induced HSP72 in the failing heart after exposure to
hyperthermia. These results suggest that an increase in the multichaperone
complex, especially the HSF1-HSP90 interaction, associated with attenuation of
HSF1 translocation into the nucleus, was involved in the impairment of HS-induced
HSP72 induction in the failing heart following MI.

PMID: 24285117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Life Sci. 2014 Jan 17;94(2):130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.11.009. Epub 2013 Nov 
20.

Alanyl-glutamine and glutamine plus alanine supplements improve skeletal redox
status in trained rats: involvement of heat shock protein pathways.

Petry ER(1), Cruzat VF(2), Heck TG(3), Leite JS(1), Homem de Bittencourt PI
Jr(4), Tirapegui J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Experimental Nutrition, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of São Paulo, Av. Professor Lineu Prestes,
580, bloco 14, São Paulo, SP, 05508-900, Brazil. (2)Department of Food Science
and Experimental Nutrition, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of São
Paulo, Av. Professor Lineu Prestes, 580, bloco 14, São Paulo, SP, 05508-900,
Brazil. Electronic address: vinifc@usp.br. (3)Laboratory of Cellular Physiology, 
Department of Physiology, Institute of Basic Health Sciences, Federal University 
of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; Regional University of the
Northwest of Rio Grande do Sul State, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. (4)Laboratory of
Cellular Physiology, Department of Physiology, Institute of Basic Health
Sciences, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

AIMS: We hypothesized that oral l-glutamine supplementations could attenuate
muscle damage and oxidative stress, mediated by glutathione (GSH) in
high-intensity aerobic exercise by increasing the 70-kDa heat shock proteins
(HSP70) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1).
MAIN METHODS: Adult male Wistar rats were 8-week trained (60-min/day, 5
days/week) on a treadmill. During the last 21 days, the animals were supplemented
with either l-alanyl-l-glutamine dipeptide (1.5 g/kg, DIP) or a solution
containing the amino acids l-glutamine (1g/kg) and l-alanine (0.67 g/kg) in their
free form (GLN+ALA) or water (controls).
KEY FINDINGS: Plasma from both DIP- and GLN+ALA-treated animals showed higher
l-glutamine concentrations and reduced ammonium, malondialdehyde, myoglobin and
creatine kinase activity. In the soleus and gastrocnemius muscle of both
supplemented groups, l-glutamine and GSH contents were increased and GSH
disulfide (GSSG) to GSH ratio was attenuated (p<0.001). In the soleus muscle,
cytosolic and nuclear HSP70 and HSF1 were increased by DIP supplementation.
GLN+ALA group exhibited higher HSP70 (only in the nucleus) and HSF1 (cytosol and 
nucleus). In the gastrocnemius muscle, both supplementations were able to
increase cytosolic HSP70 and cytosolic and nuclear HSF1.
SIGNIFICANCE: In trained rats, oral supplementation with DIP or GLN+ALA solution 
increased the expression of muscle HSP70, favored muscle l-glutamine/GSH status
and improved redox defenses, which attenuate markers of muscle damage, thus
improving the beneficial effects of high-intensity exercise training.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Future Med Chem. 2013 Dec;5(18):2185-97. doi: 10.4155/fmc.13.177.

Flavaglines: potent anticancer drugs that target prohibitins and the helicase
eIF4A.

Basmadjian C(1), Thuaud F, Ribeiro N, Désaubry L.

Author information: 
(1)Therapeutic Innovation Laboratory (UMR 7200), CNRS/University of Strasbourg,
Faculty of Pharmacy, 67401 Illkirch Cedex, France.

Flavaglines are complex natural products that are found in several medicinal
plants of Southeast Asia in the genus Aglaia; these compounds have shown
exceptional anticancer and cytoprotective activities. This review describes the
significance of flavaglines as a new class of pharmacological agents and presents
recent developments in their synthesis, structure-activity relationships,
identification of their molecular targets and modes of action. Flavaglines
display a unique profile of anticancer activities that are mediated by two
classes of unrelated proteins: prohibitins and the translation initiation factor 
eIF4A. The identification of these molecular targets is expected to accelerate
advancement toward clinical studies. The selectivity of cytotoxicity towards
cancer cells has been shown to be due to an inhibition of the transcription
factor HSF1 and an upregulation of the tumor suppressor TXNIP. In addition,
flavaglines display potent anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective and
neuroprotective activities; however, the mechanisms underlying these activities
are yet to be elucidated.

PMID: 24261894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Neurodegener. 2013 Nov 21;8:43. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-8-43.

Heat shock factor 1 over-expression protects against exposure of hydrophobic
residues on mutant SOD1 and early mortality in a mouse model of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.

Lin PY(1), Simon SM, Koh WK, Folorunso O, Umbaugh CS, Pierce A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA. an2pierc@utmb.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene (SOD1) are
responsible for 20% of familial forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and
mutant SOD1 has been shown to have increased surface hydrophobicity in vitro.
Mutant SOD1 may adopt a complex array of conformations with varying toxicity in
vivo. We have used a novel fluorescence-based proteomic assay using
4,4'-bis-1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonate (bisANS) to assess the surface
hydrophobicity, and thereby distinguish between different conformations, of SOD1 
and other proteins in situ.
RESULTS: Covalent bisANS labeling of spinal cord extracts revealed that
alterations in surface hydrophobicity of H46R/H48Q mutations in SOD1 provoke
formation of high molecular weight SOD1 species with lowered solubility, likely
due to increased exposure of hydrophobic surfaces. BisANS was docked on the
H46R/H48Q SOD1 structure at the disordered copper binding and electrostatic loops
of mutant SOD1, but not non-mutant WT SOD1. 16 non-SOD1 proteins were also
identified that exhibited altered surface hydrophobicity in the H46R/H48Q mutant 
mouse model of ALS, including proteins involved in energy metabolism,
cytoskeleton, signaling, and protein quality control. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) 
were also enriched in the detergent-insoluble fractions with SOD1. Given that
chaperones recognize proteins with exposed hydrophobic surfaces as substrates and
the importance of protein homeostasis in ALS, we crossed SOD1 H46R/H48Q mutant
mice with mice over-expressing the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) transcription
factor. Here we showed that HSF1 over-expression in H46R/H48Q ALS mice enhanced
proteostasis as evidenced by increased expression of HSPs in motor neurons and
astrocytes and increased solubility of mutant SOD1. HSF1 over-expression
significantly reduced body weight loss, delayed ALS disease onset, decreases
cases of early disease, and increased survival for the 25th percentile in an
H46R/H48Q SOD1 background. HSF1 overexpression did not affect macroautophagy in
the ALS background, but was associated with maintenance of carboxyl terminus of
Hsp70 interacting protein (CHIP) expression which declined in H46R/H48Q mice.
CONCLUSION: Our results uncover the potential importance of changes in protein
surface hydrophobicity of SOD1 and other non-SOD1 proteins in ALS, and how
strategies that activate HSF1 are valid therapies for ALS and other
age-associated proteinopathies.

PMCID: PMC3907013
PMID: 24256636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 29;441(4):838-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.145. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Cholesterol glucosylation is catalyzed by transglucosylation reaction of
ß-glucosidase 1.

Akiyama H(1), Kobayashi S, Hirabayashi Y, Murakami-Murofushi K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences, Department of Life Science,
Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 Ohtsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan; Brain
Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

Cholesteryl glucoside (ß-ChlGlc), a monoglucosylated derivative of cholesterol,
is involved in the regulation of heat shock responses. ß-ChlGlc, which is rapidly
induced in response to heat shock, activates heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1) leading to the expression of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) in human
fibroblasts. Identification and biochemical characterization of the enzyme
responsible for ß-ChlGlc formation is important for a complete understanding of
the molecular mechanisms leading to HSP70-induction following heat shock.
Recently, we demonstrated that ß-ChlGlc synthesis is not dependent on UDP-Glucose
but glucosylceramide (GlcCer) in animal tissue and human fibroblasts. In this
study, we examined the possibility of glucocerebrosidase, a GlcCer-degrading
glycosidase, acting as ß-ChlGlc-synthesizing enzyme. Overexpression of
ß-glucosidase 1 (GBA1, lysosomal acid ß-glucocerebrosidase) led to an increase in
cholesterol glucosylation activity in human fibroblasts. Using a cell line
generated from type 2 Gaucher disease patients with severe defects in GBA1
activity, we found that cholesterol glucosylation activity was very low in the
cells and the overexpression of GBA1 rescued the activity. In addition, purified 
recombinant GBA1 exhibits conduritol B-epoxide-sensitive cholesterol
glucosylation activity. The optimum pH and temperature for cholesterol
glucosylation by GBA1 were at about 5.3 and 43 °C, respectively. Short chain
C8:0-GlcCer was the most effective donor for cholesterol glucosylation activity
among GlcCer containing saturated fatty acid (C8:0 to C18:0) tested. GlcCer
containing mono-unsaturated fatty acid was more preferred substrate for
cholesterol glucosylation when compared with GlcCer containing same chain length 
of saturated fatty acid. These results demonstrate, for the first time, a novel
function of GBA1 as a ß-ChlGlc-synthesizing enzyme. Therefore, our results also
reveal a new pathway for glycolipid metabolism in mammals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Inflamm Res. 2014 Jan;63(1):91-8. doi: 10.1007/s00011-013-0676-2. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

Microgravity inhibition of lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor-a
expression in macrophage cells.

Wang C(1), Luo H, Zhu L, Yang F, Chu Z, Tian H, Feng M, Zhao Y, Shang P.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Biology Research Division, State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane
and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beichen West Road 1-5, Chaoyang District, Beijing, 100101, China.

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Microgravity environments in space can cause major
abnormalities in human physiology, including decreased immunity. The underlying
mechanisms of microgravity-induced inflammatory defects in macrophages are
unclear.
MATERIAL OR SUBJECTS: RAW264.7 cells and primary mouse macrophages were used in
the present study. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced cytokine expression in mouse 
macrophages was detected under either simulated microgravity or 1g control.
METHODS: Freshly isolated primary mouse macrophages and RAW264.7 cells were
cultured in a standard simulated microgravity situation using a rotary cell
culture system (RCCS-1) and 1g control conditions. The cytokine expression was
determined by real-time PCR and ELISA assays. Western blots were used to
investigate the related intracellular signals.
RESULTS: LPS-induced tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) expression, but not
interleukin-1ß expression, in mouse macrophages was significantly suppressed
under simulated microgravity. The molecular mechanism studies showed that
LPS-induced intracellular signal transduction including phosphorylation of IKK
and JNK and nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B in macrophages was identical under
normal gravity and simulated microgravity. Furthermore, TNF-a mRNA stability did 
not decrease under simulated microgravity. Finally, we found that heat shock
factor-1 (HSF1), a known repressor of TNF-a promoter, was markedly activated
under simulated microgravity.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term treatment with microgravity caused significantly
decreased TNF-a production. Microgravity-activated HSF1 may contribute to the
decreased TNF-a expression in macrophages directly caused by microgravity, while 
the LPS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B pathway is resistant to microgravity.

PMID: 24196691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Exp Eye Res. 2014 Jan;118:125-34. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.10.018. Epub 2013 Nov 
1.

Lens specific RLIP76 transgenic mice show a phenotype similar to microphthalmia.

Sahu M(1), Sharma R(1), Yadav S(2), Wakamiya M(3), Chaudhary P(1), Awasthi S(2), 
Awasthi YC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas
Health Science Center, 3500 Camp Bowie Blvd., Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA.
(2)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Department of Diabetes and
Metabolic Diseases Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, National
Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA. (3)Department of Neurology, University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, USA. (4)Department of Molecular
Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas Health Science Center, 3500
Camp Bowie Blvd., Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA. Electronic address:
Yogesh.Awasthi@live.unthsc.edu.

RALBP1/RLIP76 is a ubiquitously expressed protein, involved in promotion and
regulation of functions initiated by Ral and R-Ras small GTPases. Presence of
multiple domains in its structure enables RLIP76 to be involved in a number of
physiological processes such as endocytosis, exocytosis, mitochondrial fission,
actin cytoskeleton remodeling, and transport of exogenous and endogenous
toxicants. Previously, we have established that RLIP76 provides protection to
ocular tissues against oxidative stress by transporting the
glutathione-conjugates of the toxic, electrophilic products of lipid peroxidation
generated during oxidative stress. Therefore, we developed lens specific RLIP76
transgenic mice (lensRLIP76 Tg) to elucidate the role of RLIP76 in protection
against oxidative stress, but these transgenic mice showed impaired lens
development and a phenotype with small eyes similar to that observed in
microphthalmia. These findings prompted us to investigate the mechanisms via
which RLIP76 affects lens and eye development. In the present study, we report
engineering of lensRLIP76 Tg mice, characterization of the associated phenotype, 
and the possible molecular mechanisms that lead to the impaired development of
eye and lens in these mice. The results of microarray array analysis indicate
that the genes involved in pathways for G-Protein signaling, actin cytoskeleton
reorganization, endocytosis, and apoptosis are affected in these transgenic mice.
The expression of transcription factors, Pax6, Hsf1, and Hsf4b known to be
involved in lens development is down regulated in the lens of these Tg mice.
However, the expression of heat shock proteins (Hsps), the downstream targets of 
Hsfs, is differentially affected in the lens showing down regulation of Hsp27,
Hsp40, up regulation of Hsp60, and no effect on Hsp70 and Hsp90 expression. The
disruption in the organization of actin cytoskeleton of these Tg mice was
associated with the inhibition of the activation of Cdc42 and down regulation of 
cofilin phosphorylation. These mice may provide useful animal model for
elucidating the mechanisms of lens development, and etiology of microphthalmia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24188744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Elife. 2013 Oct 29;2:e01236. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01236.

Global cellular response to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis.

Wiita AP(1), Ziv E, Wiita PJ, Urisman A, Julien O, Burlingame AL, Weissman JS,
Wells JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry , University of California, San
Francisco , San Francisco , United States ; Department of Laboratory Medicine ,
University of California, San Francisco , San Francisco , United States.

Erratum in
    Elife. 2013;2:e01816.

Comment in
    Elife. 2013;2:e01587.

How cancer cells globally struggle with a chemotherapeutic insult before
succumbing to apoptosis is largely unknown. Here we use an integrated
systems-level examination of transcription, translation, and proteolysis to
understand these events central to cancer treatment. As a model we study myeloma 
cells exposed to the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, a first-line therapy.
Despite robust transcriptional changes, unbiased quantitative proteomics detects 
production of only a few critical anti-apoptotic proteins against a background of
general translation inhibition. Simultaneous ribosome profiling further reveals
potential translational regulation of stress response genes. Once the apoptotic
machinery is engaged, degradation by caspases is largely independent of upstream 
bortezomib effects. Moreover, previously uncharacterized non-caspase proteolytic 
events also participate in cellular deconstruction. Our systems-level data also
support co-targeting the anti-apoptotic regulator HSF1 to promote cell death by
bortezomib. This integrated approach offers unique, in-depth insight into
apoptotic dynamics that may prove important to preclinical evaluation of any
anti-cancer compound. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01236.001.

PMCID: PMC3808542
PMID: 24171104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 22;8(10):e77788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077788.
eCollection 2013.

Heat shock transcription factor 1-deficiency attenuates overloading-associated
hypertrophy of mouse soleus muscle.

Koya T(1), Nishizawa S, Ohno Y, Goto A, Ikuta A, Suzuki M, Ohira T, Egawa T,
Nakai A, Sugiura T, Ohira Y, Yoshioka T, Beppu M, Goto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.

Hypertrophic stimuli, such as mechanical stress and overloading, induce stress
response, which is mediated by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), and
up-regulate heat shock proteins (HSPs) in mammalian skeletal muscles. Therefore, 
HSF1-associated stress response may play a key role in loading-associated
skeletal muscle hypertrophy. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
effects of HSF1-deficiency on skeletal muscle hypertrophy caused by overloading. 
Functional overloading on the left soleus was performed by cutting the distal
tendons of gastrocnemius and plantaris muscles for 4 weeks. The right muscle
served as the control. Soleus muscles from both hindlimbs were dissected 2 and 4 
weeks after the operation. Hypertrophy of soleus muscle in HSF1-null mice was
partially inhibited, compared with that in wild-type (C57BL/6J) mice. Absence of 
HSF1 partially attenuated the increase of muscle wet weight and fiber
cross-sectional area of overloaded soleus muscle. Population of Pax7-positive
muscle satellite cells in HSF1-null mice was significantly less than that in
wild-type mice following 2 weeks of overloading (p<0.05). Significant
up-regulations of interleukin (IL)-1ß and tumor necrosis factor mRNAs were
observed in HSF1-null, but not in wild-type, mice following 2 weeks of
overloading. Overloading-related increases of IL-6 and AFT3 mRNA expressions seen
after 2 weeks of overloading tended to decrease after 4 weeks in both types of
mice. In HSF1-null mice, however, the significant overloading-related increase in
the expression of IL-6, not ATF3, mRNA was noted even at 4th week. Inhibition of 
muscle hypertrophy might be attributed to the greater and prolonged enhancement
of IL-6 expression. HSF1 and/or HSF1-mediated stress response may, in part, play 
a key role in loading-induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3805596
PMID: 24167582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 29;13:504. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-504.

Overexpression of Heat Shock Transcription Factor 1 enhances the resistance of
melanoma cells to doxorubicin and paclitaxel.

Vydra N(1), Toma A, Glowala-Kosinska M, Gogler-Piglowska A, Widlak W.

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, Gliwice, Poland. nvydra@yahoo.co.uk.

BACKGROUND: Heat Shock Transcription Factor 1 (HSF1) is activated under stress
conditions. In turn, it induces expression of Heat Shock Proteins (HSPs), which
are well-known regulators of protein homeostasis. Elevated levels of HSF1 and
HSPs were observed in many types of tumors. The aim of the present study was to
determine whether HSF1 could have an effect on the survival of cancer cells
treated with chemotherapeutic cytotoxic agents.
METHODS: We constructed mouse (B16F10) and human (1205Lu, WM793B) melanoma cells 
overexpressing full or mutant form of human HSF1: a constitutively active one
with a deletion in regulatory domain or a dominant negative one with a deletion
in the activation domain. The impact of different forms of HSF1 on the expression
of HSP and ABC genes was studied by RT-PCR and Western blotting. Cell cultures
were treated with increasing amounts of doxorubicin, paclitaxel, cisplatin,
vinblastine or bortezomib. Cell viability was determined by MTT, and IC50 was
calculated. Cellular accumulation of fluorescent dyes and side population cells
were studied using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Cells overexpressing HSF1 and characterized by increased HSPs
accumulation were more resistant to doxorubicin or paclitaxel, but not to
cisplatin, vinblastine or bortezomib. This resistance correlated with the
enhanced efflux of fluorescent dyes and the increased number of side population
cells. The expression of constitutively active mutant HSF1, also resulting in
HSPs overproduction, did not reduce the sensitivity of melanoma cells to drugs,
unlike in the case of dominant negative form expression. Cells overexpressing a
full or dominant negative form of HSF1, but not a constitutively active one, had 
higher transcription levels of ABC genes when compared to control cells.
CONCLUSIONS: HSF1 overexpression facilitates the survival of melanoma cells
treated with doxorubicin or paclitaxel. However, HSF1-mediated chemoresistance is
not dependent on HSPs accumulation but on an increased potential for drug efflux 
by ABC transporters. Direct transcriptional activity of HSF1 is not necessary for
increased expression of ABC genes, which is probably mediated by HSF1 regulatory 
domain.

PMCID: PMC4231344
PMID: 24165036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(10):e1003886. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003886. Epub 2013 Oct
17.

Hsp70-Hsp40 chaperone complex functions in controlling polarized growth by
repressing Hsf1-driven heat stress-associated transcription.

Vjestica A(1), Zhang D, Liu J, Oliferenko S.

Author information: 
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, Singapore ; Department of Biological
Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

How the molecular mechanisms of stress response are integrated at the cellular
level remains obscure. Here we show that the cellular polarity machinery in the
fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe undergoes dynamic adaptation to thermal
stress resulting in a period of decreased Cdc42 activity and altered, monopolar
growth. Cells where the heat stress-associated transcription was genetically
upregulated exhibit similar growth patterning in the absence of temperature
insults. We identify the Ssa2-Mas5/Hsp70-Hsp40 chaperone complex as repressor of 
the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1. Cells lacking this chaperone activity
constitutively activate the heat-stress-associated transcriptional program.
Interestingly, they also exhibit intermittent monopolar growth within a
physiological temperature range and are unable to adapt to heat stress. We
propose that by negatively regulating the heat stress-associated transcription,
the Ssa2-Mas5 chaperone system could optimize cellular growth under different
temperature regiments.

PMCID: PMC3798271
PMID: 24146635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. FEBS Lett. 2013 Nov 15;587(22):3648-55. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.10.004. Epub 
2013 Oct 15.

Rim15-dependent activation of Hsf1 and Msn2/4 transcription factors by direct
phosphorylation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lee P(1), Kim MS, Paik SM, Choi SH, Cho BR, Hahn JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 1
Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-744, Republic of Korea.

Rim15 kinase, a downstream effector of PKA and TORC1 signaling pathways,
initiates the quiescent program upon nutrient starvation via induction of genes
whose expression depends on transcription factors Msn2, Msn4, and Gis1. Here, we 
demonstrate that Rim15 also induces expression of Hsf1 target genes upon glucose 
depletion by both transcriptional activation and stabilization of the
transcripts. Rim15 phosphorylates Hsf1 in vitro, suggesting that Rim15 might
directly activate Hsf1. In addition, Igo1 and Igo2, Rim15 substrate proteins
involved in mRNA stabilization, regulate mRNA levels of Hsf1 target genes. We
also show that Rim15 can phosphorylate Msn2, but not Gis1, in vitro, implying
different mechanisms for the activation of these transcription factors.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Br J Cancer. 2013 Nov 12;109(10):2654-64. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.606. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Deregulation of DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit contributes to
human hepatocarcinogenesis development and has a putative prognostic value.

Evert M(1), Frau M, Tomasi ML, Latte G, Simile MM, Seddaiu MA, Zimmermann A, Ladu
S, Staniscia T, Brozzetti S, Solinas G, Dombrowski F, Feo F, Pascale RM, Calvisi 
DF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The DNA-repair gene DNA-dependent kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs)
favours or inhibits carcinogenesis, depending on the cancer type. Its role in
human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is unknown.
METHODS: DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit, H2A histone family
member X (H2AFX) and heat shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1) levels were
assessed by immunohistochemistry and/or immunoblotting and qRT-PCR in a
collection of human HCC. Rates of proliferation, apoptosis, microvessel density
and genomic instability were also determined. Heat shock factor-1 cDNA or
DNA-PKcs-specific siRNA were used to explore the role of both genes in HCC.
Activator protein 1 (AP-1) binding to DNA-PKcs promoter was evaluated by
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Kaplan-Meier curves and multivariate Cox model
were used to study the impact on clinical outcome.
RESULTS: Total and phosphorylated DNA-PKcs and H2AFX were upregulated in HCC.
Activated DNA-PKcs positively correlated with HCC proliferation, genomic
instability and microvessel density, and negatively with apoptosis and patient's 
survival. Proliferation decline and massive apoptosis followed DNA-PKcs silencing
in HCC cell lines. Total and phosphorylated HSF1 protein, mRNA and activity were 
upregulated in HCC. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that HSF1 induces DNA-PKcs
upregulation through the activation of the MAPK/JNK/AP-1 axis.
CONCLUSION: DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit transduces HSF1
effects in HCC cells, and might represent a novel target and prognostic factor in
human HCC.

PMCID: PMC3833205
PMID: 24136149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Feb;35(2):272-81. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt343. Epub 2013 Oct 
15.

Heat shock factor 1 accelerates hepatocellular carcinoma development by
activating nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B/mitogen-activated protein kinase.

Chuma M(1), Sakamoto N, Nakai A, Hige S, Nakanishi M, Natsuizaka M, Suda G, Sho
T, Hatanaka K, Matsuno Y, Yokoo H, Kamiyama T, Taketomi A, Fujii G, Tashiro K,
Hikiba Y, Fujimoto M, Asaka M, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hokkaido University, Kita 15,
Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a major transactivator of stress responses, has been 
implicated in carcinogenesis in various organs. However, little is known about
the biological functions of HSF1 in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). To clarify the functional role of HSF1 in HCC, we established
HSF1-knockdown (HSF1 KD) KYN2 HCC cells by stably expressing either small hairpin
RNA (shRNA) against HSF1 (i.e. HSF1 KD) or control shRNA (HSF1 control).
Tumorigenicity was significantly reduced in orthotopic mice with HSF1 KD cells
compared with those with HSF1 control cells. Reduced tumorigenesis in HSF1 KD
cells appeared attributable to increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation.
Tumor necrosis factor-a-induced apoptosis was increased in HSF1 KD cells and
HSF1(-/-) mouse hepatocytes compared with controls. Decreased expression of I<U+03BA>B
kinase <U+03B3>, a positive regulator of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B, was also observed in HSF1 KD
cells and HSF1(-/-) mouse hepatocytes. Furthermore, expression of
bcl-2-associated athanogene domain 3 (BAG3) was dramatically reduced in HSF1 KD
cells and HSF1(-/-) mouse hepatocytes. We also found that epidermal growth
factor-stimulated mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling was impaired in HSF1
KD cells. Clinicopathological analysis demonstrated frequent overexpression of
HSF1 in human HCCs. Significant correlations between HSF1 and BAG3 protein levels
and prognosis were also observed. In summary, these results identify a
mechanistic link between HSF1 and liver tumorigenesis and may provide as a
potential molecular target for the development of anti-HCC therapies.

PMID: 24130164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):33927-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.500983. Epub
2013 Oct 15.

Triptolide-induced cell death in pancreatic cancer is mediated by O-GlcNAc
modification of transcription factor Sp1.

Banerjee S(1), Sangwan V, McGinn O, Chugh R, Dudeja V, Vickers SM, Saluja AK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery, 
and.

Pancreatic cancer, the fourth most prevalent cancer-related cause of death in the
United States, is a disease with a dismal survival rate of 5% 5 years after
diagnosis. One of the survival proteins responsible for its extraordinary ability
to evade cell death is HSP70. A naturally derived compound, triptolide, and its
water-soluble prodrug, Minnelide, down-regulate the expression of this protein in
pancreatic cancer cells, thereby causing cell death. However, the mechanism of
action of triptolide has not been elucidated. Our study shows that
triptolide-induced down-regulation of HSP70 expression is associated with a
decrease in glycosylation of the transcription factor Sp1. We further show that
triptolide inhibits glycosylation of Sp1, inhibiting the hexosamine biosynthesis 
pathway, particularly the enzyme O-GlcNAc transferase. Inhibition of O-GlcNAc
transferase prevents nuclear localization of Sp1 and affects its DNA binding
activity. This in turn down-regulates prosurvival pathways like NF-<U+03BA>B, leading to
inhibition of HSF1 and HSP70 and eventually to cell death. In this study, we
evaluated the mechanism by which triptolide affects glycosylation of Sp1, which
in turn affects downstream pathways controlling survival of pancreatic cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC3837133
PMID: 24129563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Reproduction. 2013 Nov 16;147(1):33-43. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0383. Print 2014 Jan.

Effects of Escherichia coli- and Staphylococcus aureus-induced mastitis in
lactating cows on oocyte developmental competence.

Asaf S(1), Leitner G, Furman O, Lavon Y, Kalo D, Wolfenson D, Roth Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment,
the Hebrew University, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Mastitis is associated with decreased fertility in dairy cows. In the current
study, we created an experimental model to simulate short-term mastitis by a
single intramammary administration of Gram-negative endotoxin of Escherichia coli
origin (G-), or Gram-positive toxin of Staphylococcus aureus origin (G+), to
examine the effect of mastitis on oocyte developmental competence. Healthy
Holstein cows were synchronized, and follicular fluid (FF) of cows treated with
G+ or G- and of uninfected cows (controls) was aspirated from the preovulatory
follicles by transvaginal ultrasound procedure. The aspirated FF was used as
maturation medium for in vitro embryo production. The distribution of matured
oocytes into different cortical granule classes and meiotic stages was affected
by G- administration (P<0.05) but not by G+ administration. The proportion of
oocytes that cleaved to two- and four-cell stage embryos (44 h postfertilization)
was lower in both G+ and G- groups than in controls (P<0.05). Blastocyst
formation rate (7-8 days postfertilization) was lower in the G- group (P<0.05)
and numerically lower in the G+ group compared with their uninfected
counterparts. The total cell number in blastocysts did not differ among groups;
however, the apoptotic index was higher in the G+ group (P<0.05), but not in the 
G- group, relative to controls. Examining mRNA relative abundance in oocytes and 
early embryos revealed mastitis-induced alterations in PTGS2 (COX2), POU5F1, and 
HSF1 but not in SLC2A1 (GLUT1) or GDF9. Results indicate a differential
disruptive effect of mastitis induced by G- and G+ on oocyte developmental
competence in association with alterations in maternal gene expression.

PMID: 24129150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. FEBS J. 2013 Dec;280(24):6672-80. doi: 10.1111/febs.12570. Epub 2013 Nov 5.

The proto-oncogene JUN is a target of the heat shock transcription factor HSF1.

Sawai M(1), Ishikawa Y, Ota A, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medical Science, Ishikawa, Japan.

The transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1) participates in many aspects 
of cell physiology, such as cellular proliferation, transformation, and death.
AP-1 is a dimeric complex that primarily contains Jun and Fos family members.
Here, we report that JUN is a target of heat shock transcription factor HSF1.
HSF1 is the master regulator of genes encoding molecular chaperones, and is
involved in cellular processes such as the stress response, cell differentiation,
aging and carcinogenesis. In HeLa cells, JUN transcription was rapidly induced by
heat treatment. We found that HSF1 bound to the JUN promoter and was necessary
for its efficient response to heat shock. In heat-shocked cells, c-Jun-mediated
gene expression was induced slowly following accumulation of c-Jun protein.
Forced expression of active HSF1 in cells resulted in an increase in c-Jun
expression and activation of c-Jun target genes. These results show that HSF1
regulates JUN expression, thereby modulating AP-1 activity.

© 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 24127737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Dec;48(12):1455-68. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.10.001. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Characterization of global gene expression during assurance of lifespan extension
by caloric restriction in budding yeast.

Choi KM(1), Kwon YY, Lee CK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

Caloric restriction (CR) is the best-studied intervention known to delay aging
and extend lifespan in evolutionarily distant organisms ranging from yeast to
mammals in the laboratory. Although the effect of CR on lifespan extension has
been investigated for nearly 80years, the molecular mechanisms of CR are still
elusive. Consequently, it is important to understand the fundamental mechanisms
of when and how lifespan is affected by CR. In this study, we first identified
the time-windows during which CR assured cellular longevity by switching cells
from culture media containing 2% or 0.5% glucose to water, which allows us to
observe CR and non-calorically-restricted cells under the same conditions. We
also constructed time-dependent gene expression profiles and selected 646 genes
that showed significant changes and correlations with the lifespan-extending
effect of CR. The positively correlated genes participated in transcriptional
regulation, ribosomal RNA processing and nuclear genome stability, while the
negatively correlated genes were involved in the regulation of several metabolic 
pathways, endoplasmic reticulum function, stress response and cell cycle
progression. Furthermore, we discovered major upstream regulators of those
significantly changed genes, including AZF1 (YOR113W), HSF1 (YGL073W) and XBP1
(YIL101C). Deletions of two genes, AZF1 and XBP1 (HSF1 is essential and was thus 
not tested), were confirmed to lessen the lifespan extension mediated by CR. The 
absence of these genes in the tor1<U+0394> and ras2<U+0394> backgrounds did show
non-overlapping effects with regard to CLS, suggesting differences between the CR
mechanism for Tor and Ras signaling.

© 2013.

PMID: 24126084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;33(24):4889-99. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00475-13. Epub 2013 Oct 
14.

Hyperthermia stress activates heat shock protein expression via propyl isomerase 
1 regulation with heat shock factor 1.

Wang HY(1), Fu JC, Lee YC, Lu PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Medical
College, Tainan, Taiwan.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs), which are members of the chaperone family of
proteins, are essential factors for cellular responses to environmental
stressors, such as hyperthermia, and are antiapoptotic. The transcription of HSPs
is mainly controlled by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). In response to 
environmental stress, HSF1 forms a trimer, undergoes hyperphosphorylation, and is
translocated to the nucleus. In this study, we show that upon heat shock
treatment of cells, a WW domain-containing propyl-isomerase, PIN1, is able to
colocalize to and associate with phospho-HSF1 at Ser(326) in the nucleus via its 
WW domain. This interaction is required for the DNA-binding activity of HSF1 and 
is consistent with the lower induction of HSPs in PIN1-deficient cells. This
function of PIN1 is further demonstrated by in vivo refolding and survival
assays, which have shown that PIN1-deficient cells are temperature sensitive and 
develop apoptosis upon exposure to an environmental challenge. Moreover, the
reduced levels of HSPs in PIN1-deficient cells resulted in less efficient
refolding of denatured proteins. Based on our results, we propose a novel role
for PIN1 whereby it acts as a stress sensor regulating HSF1 activity in response 
to stress on multiple levels through the transcriptional activation of stress
response elements in embryonic fibroblast cells, tumor cells, and neurons.

PMCID: PMC3889542
PMID: 24126052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Stem Cells. 2014 Feb;32(2):462-72. doi: 10.1002/stem.1571.

Heat shock improves Sca-1+ stem cell survival and directs ischemic cardiomyocytes
toward a prosurvival phenotype via exosomal transfer: a critical role for
HSF1/miR-34a/HSP70 pathway.

Feng Y(1), Huang W, Meng W, Jegga AG, Wang Y, Cai W, Kim HW, Pasha Z, Wen Z, Rao 
F, Modi RM, Yu X, Ashraf M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangdong Provincial Cardiovascular Institute, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells. 2014 Apr;32(4):1055.

Stem cell-based therapy is a promising intervention for ischemic heart diseases. 
However, the functional integrity of stem cells is impaired in an ischemic
environment. Here, we report a novel finding that heat shock significantly
improves Sca-1(+) stem cell survival in an ischemic environment by the regulation
of the triangle: heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), HSF1/miR-34a, and heat shock protein
70 (HSP70). Initially we prove that HSP70 is the key chaperone-mediating
cytoprotective effect of heat shock in Sca-1(+) cells and then we establish
miR-34a as a direct repressor of HSP70. We found that miR-34a was downregulated
in heat shocked Sca-11 stem cells (HSSca-11 cells) [corrected]. Intriguingly, we 
demonstrate that the downregulation of miR-34a is attributed to HSF1-mediated
epigenetic repression through histone H3 Lys27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) on
miR-34a promoter. Moreover, we show that heat shock induces exosomal transfer of 
HSF1 from Sca-1(+) cells, which directs ischemic cardiomyocytes toward a
prosurvival phenotype by epigenetic repression of miR-34a. In addition, our in
vivo study demonstrates that transplantation of (HS) Sca-1(+) cells significantly
reduces apoptosis, attenuates fibrosis, and improves global heart functions in
ischemic myocardium. Hence, our study provides not only novel insights into the
effects of heat shock on stem cell survival and paracrine behavior but also may
have therapeutic values for stem cell therapy in ischemic heart diseases.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24123326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Future Oncol. 2013 Oct;9(10):1573-86. doi: 10.2217/fon.13.106.

HSF1-mediated regulation of tumor cell apoptosis: a novel target for cancer
therapeutics.

Kumar S(1), Tomar MS, Acharya A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Advance Study in Zoology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi-221 005, U.P., India.

Programmed cell death/apoptosis is a genetically conserved phenomenon involved in
many biological processes including reconstruction of multicellular organisms and
elimination of old or damaged cells. It is regulated by the
activation/deactivation of PKC in response to exogenous and endogenous stimuli.
PKC is activated under stress by a series of downstream signaling cascades, which
ultimately induce HSF1 activation, which results in overexpression of heat shock 
proteins. Overexpression of heat shock proteins interferes in the apoptotic
pathway, while their blocking results in apoptosis. Therefore, HSF1 could be a
novel therapeutic target against a variety of tumors. Several pharmacological
inhibitors of PKC have been demonstrated to exert inhibitory effects on the
activation of HSF1 and, therefore, induce apoptosis in tumor cells. However,
studies regarding the role of pharmacological inhibitors in the regulation of
apoptosis and possible anti-tumor therapeutic intervention are still unknown or
in their infancy. Therefore, an attempt has been made to delineate the precise
role of HSF1 in the regulation of apoptosis and its prospects in cancer
therapeutics.

PMID: 24106905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 30;8(9):e75964. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075964. eCollection
2013.

Expression analysis of an evolutionarily conserved alternative splicing factor,
Sfrs10, in age-related macular degeneration.

Karunakaran DK(1), Banday AR, Wu Q, Kanadia R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut, Physiology and Neurobiology, Storrs, Connecticut,
United States of America.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most common cause of blindness in
the elderly population. Hypoxic stress created in the micro-environment of the
photoreceptors is thought to be the underlying cause that results in the
pathophysiology of AMD. However, association of AMD with alternative splicing
mediated gene regulation is not well explored. Alternative Splicing is one of the
primary mechanisms in humans by which fewer protein coding genes are able to
generate a vast proteome. Here, we investigated the expression of a known stress 
response gene and an alternative splicing factor called Serine-Arginine rich
splicing factor 10 (Sfrs10). Sfrs10 is a member of the serine-arginine (SR) rich 
protein family and is 100% identical at the amino acid level in most mammals.
Immunoblot analysis on retinal extracts from mouse, rat, and chicken showed a
single immunoreactive band. Further, immunohistochemistry on adult mouse, rat and
chicken retinae showed pan-retinal expression. However, SFRS10 was not detected
in normal human retina but was observed as distinct nuclear speckles in AMD
retinae. This is in agreement with previous reports that show Sfrs10 to be a
stress response gene, which is upregulated under hypoxia. The difference in the
expression of Sfrs10 between humans and lower mammals and the upregulation of
SFRS10 in AMD is further reflected in the divergence of the promoter sequence
between these species. Finally, SFRS10+ speckles were independent of the SC35+ SR
protein speckles or the HSF1+ stress granules. In all, our data suggests that
SFRS10 is upregulated and forms distinct stress-induced speckles and might be
involved in AS of stress response genes in AMD.

PMCID: PMC3786888
PMID: 24098751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Neuroscience. 2013;255:265-77. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.09.050. Epub 2013
Oct 3.

Reduction in heat shock protein 90 correlates to neuronal vulnerability in the
rat piriform cortex following status epilepticus.

Kim YJ(1), Kim JY, Ko AR, Kang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, College of Medicine, Hallym
University, Chunchon 200-702, South Korea; Institute of Epilepsy Research,
College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon 200-702, South Korea.

In the present study, we addressed the question of whether the distinct patterns 
of heat shock protein (HSP) 70 and HSP90 expressions in the brain region
represents the regional specific responses to status epilepsticus (SE) in an
effort to better understand the role of HSPs in epileptogenic insult. HSP70
immunoreactivity was increased in CA3 pyramidal cells as well as dentate granule 
cells at 12h-1week after SE. HSP70 immunoreactivity was transiently increased in 
neurons within the piriform cortex (PC) following SE. Linear regression analysis 
showed no correlation between the intensity of NeuN and that of HSP70. In
contrast to HSP70, HSP90 immunoreactivity was decreased in CA1-3 pyramidal cells 
at 4days-4weeks after SE. In addition, HSP90 immunoreactivity was decreased in PC
neurons at 12h-4weeks after SE. linear regression analysis showed a direct
proportional relationship between the intensity of NeuN and that of HSP90.
Therefore, these findings suggest that HSP90 degradation may be closely related
to neuronal vulnerability to SE insult.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Neuroscience. 2013;255:19-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.09.049. Epub 2013 
Oct 3.

N-Acetyl cysteine blunts proteotoxicity in a heat shock protein-dependent manner.

Jiang Y(1), Rumble JL, Gleixner AM, Unnithan AS, Pulugulla SH, Posimo JM, Choi
HJ, Crum TS, Pant DB, Leak RK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Mylan School of Pharmacy, Duquesne
University, Pittsburgh, PA 15282, United States.

N-Acetyl cysteine, a glutathione precursor, has been shown to benefit patients
with Alzheimer's disease and reduce the symptoms of traumatic brain injury in
soldiers. Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease are both characterized by stress
from protein misfolding, or proteotoxicity. We have developed a high-throughput
model of proteotoxicity by treating neuroblastoma N2a cells with the proteasome
inhibitor MG132 and performing three independent assays for viability. Our
previous study showed that N-acetyl cysteine protects N2a cells against two
sequential treatments of MG132 and raises glutathione levels in a two-hit model
of synergistic neurodegeneration. In the present study, however, N-acetyl
cysteine was found to reduce the toxicity of a single hit of MG132 independent of
its effect on glutathione. All three viability assays confirmed this protection. 
We measured heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) levels because Hsp70 is a protective
chaperone that helps refold proteins or guides ubiquitinated proteins toward
degradation by the proteasome. Hsp70 levels were higher in MG132-treated cells
when N-acetyl cysteine was applied. No parallel change in heat shock cognate 70
(Hsc70) was elicited. Inhibition of Hsp70/Hsc70 activity with VER 155008
attenuated the protection afforded by N-acetyl cysteine in a dose-responsive
manner. MG132 induced a large rise in ubiquitinated proteins and N-acetyl
cysteine reduced this effect. Consistent with the chaperone functions of Hsp70,
VER 155008 also prevented the reduction in ubiquitin-conjugated proteins by
N-acetyl cysteine. These data reveal a new role for N-acetyl cysteine: this
compound may reduce misfolded protein levels and ameliorate proteotoxicity
through heat shock proteins. These findings broaden the potential mechanisms of
action for this dietary supplement in neurodegenerative proteinopathies.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. BMC Plant Biol. 2013 Oct 4;13:150. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-150.

Genome-wide identification of WRKY45-regulated genes that mediate
benzothiadiazole-induced defense responses in rice.

Nakayama A(1), Fukushima S, Goto S, Matsushita A, Shimono M, Sugano S, Jiang CJ, 
Akagi A, Yamazaki M, Inoue H, Takatsuji H.

Author information: 
(1)Disease Resistant Crops Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological
Sciences, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan. takatsuh@affrc.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: The rice transcription factor WRKY45 plays a crucial role in
salicylic acid (SA)/benzothiadiazole (BTH)-induced disease resistance. Its
knockdown severely reduces BTH-induced resistance to the fungal pathogen
Magnaporthe oryzae and the bacterial pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae
(Xoo). Conversely, overexpression of WRKY45 induces extremely strong resistance
to both of these pathogens. To elucidate the molecular basis of WRKY45-dependent 
disease resistance, we analyzed WRKY45-regulated gene expression using rice
transformants and a transient gene expression system.
RESULTS: We conducted a microarray analysis using WRKY45-knockdown (WRKY45-kd)
rice plants, and identified WRKY45-dependent genes among the BTH-responsive
genes. The BTH-responsiveness of 260 genes was dependent on WRKY45. Among these, 
220 genes (85%), many of which encoded PR proteins and proteins associated with
secondary metabolism, were upregulated by BTH. Only a small portion of these
genes overlapped with those regulated by OsNPR1/NH1, supporting the idea that the
rice SA pathway branches into WRKY45- regulated and OsNPR1/NH1-regulated
subpathways. Dexamethazone-induced expression of myc-tagged WRKY45 in rice
immediately upregulated transcription of endogenous WRKY45 and genes encoding the
transcription factors WRKY62, OsNAC4, and HSF1, all of which have been reported
to have defense-related functions. This was followed by upregulation of defense
genes encoding PR proteins and secondary metabolic enzymes. Many of these genes
were also induced after M. oryzae infection. Their temporal transcription
patterns were consistent with those after dexamethazone-induced WRKY45
expression. In a transient expression system consisting of particle bombardment
of rice coleoptiles, WRKY45 acted as an effector to trans-activate reporter genes
in which the luciferase coding sequence was fused to upstream and intragenic
sequences of WRKY62 and OsNAC4. Trans-activation of transcription occurred
through a W-box-containing sequence upstream of OsNAC4 and mutations in the
W-boxes abolished the trans-activation.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a role of WRKY45 in BTH-induced disease
resistance as a master regulator of the transcriptional cascade regulating
defense responses in one of two branches in the rice SA pathway.

PMCID: PMC3850545
PMID: 24093634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 May;19(3):421-35. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0467-2.
Epub 2013 Oct 3.

A novel small molecule HSP90 inhibitor, NXD30001, differentially induces heat
shock proteins in nervous tissue in culture and in vivo.

Cha JR(1), St Louis KJ, Tradewell ML, Gentil BJ, Minotti S, Jaffer ZM, Chen R,
Rubenstein AE, Durham HD.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute and Department of Neurology/Neurosurgery,
McGill University, 3801 University St, Montreal, QC, Canada, H3A 2B4.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are attractive therapeutic targets for
neurodegenerative diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS),
characterized by aberrant formation of protein aggregates. Although motor neurons
have a high threshold for activation of HSP genes, HSP90 inhibitors are effective
inducers. This study evaluated NXD30001, a novel, small molecule HSP90 inhibitor 
based on the radicicol backbone, for its ability to induce neuronal HSPs and for 
efficacy in an experimental model of ALS based on mutations in
superoxide-dismutase 1 (SOD1). In motor neurons of dissociated murine spinal cord
cultures, NXD30001-induced expression of HSP70/HSPA1 (iHSP70) and its
co-chaperone HSP40/DNAJ through activation of HSF1 and exhibited a protective
profile against SOD1(G93A) similar to geldanamycin, but with less toxicity.
Treatment prevented protein aggregation, mitochondrial fragmentation, and motor
neuron death, important features of mutant SOD1 toxicity, but did not effectively
prevent aberrant intracellular Ca(2+) accumulation. NXD30001 distributed to brain
and spinal cord of wild-type and SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice following
intraperitoneal injection; however, unlike in culture, in vivo levels of SOD1
were not reduced. NXD30001-induced expression of iHSP70 in skeletal and cardiac
muscle and, to a lesser extent, in kidney, but not in liver, spinal cord, or
brain, with either single or repeated administration. NXD30001 is a very useful
experimental tool in culture, but these data point to the complex nature of HSP
gene regulation in vivo and the necessity for early evaluation of the efficacy of
novel HSP inducers in target tissues in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3982033
PMID: 24092395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1323-34. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.08.014. Epub 2013 
Sep 8.

Heat shock instructs hESCs to exit from the self-renewal program through negative
regulation of OCT4 by SAPK/JNK and HSF1 pathway.

Byun K(1), Kim TK, Oh J, Bayarsaikhan E, Kim D, Lee MY, Pack CG, Hwang D, Lee B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Proteomics & Stem Cell Core Facility, Lee Gil Ya
Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Incheon 406-840, Republic of
Korea; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Gachon University Medical School, 
Incheon 406-840, Republic of Korea.

Environmental factors affect self-renewal of stem cells by modulating the
components of self-renewal networks. Heat shock, an environmental factor, induces
heat shock factors (HSFs), which up-regulate stress response-related genes.
However, the link of heat shock to self-renewal of stem cells has not been
elucidated yet. Here, we present the direct link of heat shock to a core stem
cell regulator, OCT4, in the self-renewal network through SAPK/JNK and HSF1
pathway. We first showed that heat shock initiated differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Gene expression analysis revealed that heat shock
increased the expression of many genes involved in cellular processes related to 
differentiation of stem cells. We then examined the effects of HSFs induced by
heat shock on core self-renewal factors. Among HSFs, heat shock induced mainly
HSF1 in hESCs. The HSF1 repressed the expression of OCT4, leading to the
differentiation of hESCs and the above differentiation-related gene expression
change. We further examined the effects of the upstream MAP (mitogen-activated
protein) kinases of HSF1 on the repression of OCT4 expression by HSF1. Among the 
MAP kinases, SAPK/JNK controlled predominantly the repression of the OCT4
expression by HSF1. The direct link of heat shock to the core self-renewal
regulator through SAPK/JNK and HSF1 provides a fundamental basis for
understanding the effect of heat and other stresses involving activation of HSF1 
on the self-renewal program and further controlling differentiation of hESCs in a
broad spectrum of stem cell applications using these stresses.

© 2013.

PMID: 24090933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Gene. 2014 Jan 10;533(2):500-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.051. Epub 2013 Sep
27.

Genome-wide analysis of the heat stress response in Zebu (Sahiwal) cattle.

Mehla K(1), Magotra A, Choudhary J, Singh AK, Mohanty AK, Upadhyay RC, Srinivasan
S, Gupta P, Choudhary N, Antony B, Khan F.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Cattle Physiology Division, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal
132001 (Haryana), India. Electronic address: mehla.kusum@gmail.com.

Environmental-induced hyperthermia compromises animal production with drastic
economic consequences to global animal agriculture and jeopardizes animal
welfare. Heat stress is a major stressor that occurs as a result of an imbalance 
between heat production within the body and its dissipation and it affects
animals at cellular, molecular and ecological levels. The molecular mechanism
underlying the physiology of heat stress in the cattle remains undefined. The
present study sought to evaluate mRNA expression profiles in the cattle blood in 
response to heat stress. In this study we report the genes that were
differentially expressed in response to heat stress using global scale genome
expression technology (Microarray). Four Sahiwal heifers were exposed to 42°C
with 90% humidity for 4h followed by normothermia. Gene expression changes
include activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), increased
expression of heat shock proteins (HSP) and decreased expression and synthesis of
other proteins, immune system activation via extracellular secretion of HSP. A
cDNA microarray analysis found 140 transcripts to be up-regulated and 77
down-regulated in the cattle blood after heat treatment (P<0.05). But still a
comprehensive explanation for the direction of fold change and the specific genes
involved in response to acute heat stress still remains to be explored. These
findings may provide insights into the underlying mechanism of physiology of heat
stress in cattle. Understanding the biology and mechanisms of heat stress is
critical to developing approaches to ameliorate current production issues for
improving animal performance and agriculture economics.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24080481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Proteome Res. 2013 Dec 6;12(12):5570-86. doi: 10.1021/pr400535z. Epub 2013 Oct 
11.

Identification of GABA(C) receptor protein homeostasis network components from
three tandem mass spectrometry proteomics approaches.

Wang YJ(1), Han DY, Tabib T, Yates JR 3rd, Mu TW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Proteomics and Bioinformatics and Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics and Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine , 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106,
United States.

<U+03B3>-Amino butyric acid type C (GABA(C)) receptors inhibit neuronal firing primarily
in retina. Maintenance of GABA(C) receptor protein homeostasis in cells is
essential for its function. However, a systematic study of GABA(C) receptor
protein homeostasis (proteostasis) network components is absent. Here
coimmunoprecipitation of human GABA(C)-<U+03C1>1-receptor complexes was performed in
HEK293 cells overexpressing <U+03C1>1 receptors. To enhance the coverage and reliability
of identified proteins, immunoisolated <U+03C1>1-receptor complexes were subjected to
three tandem mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic analyses, namely, gel-based
tandem MS (GeLC-MS/MS), solution-based tandem MS (SoLC-MS/MS), and
multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT). From the 107
identified proteins, we assembled GABA(C)-<U+03C1>1-receptor proteostasis network
components, including proteins with protein folding, degradation, and trafficking
functions. We studied representative individual <U+03C1>1-receptor-interacting proteins,
including calnexin, a lectin chaperone that facilitates glycoprotein folding, and
LMAN1, a glycoprotein trafficking receptor, and global effectors that regulate
protein folding in cells based on bioinformatics analysis, including HSF1, a
master regulator of the heat shock response, and XBP1, a key transcription factor
of the unfolded protein response. Manipulating selected GABA(C) receptor
proteostasis network components is a promising strategy to regulate GABA(C)
receptor folding, trafficking, degradation and thus function to ameliorate
related retinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC3864119
PMID: 24079818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2013 Sep;1(3):142-154.

Increased Rate of Sporadic and Recurrent Rare Genic Copy Number Variants in
Parkinson's Disease Among Ashkenazi Jews.

Liu X(1), Cheng R, Ye X, Verbitsky M, Kisselev S, Mejia-Santana H, Louis E, Cote 
L, Andrews H, Waters C, Ford B, Fahn S, Marder K, Lee J, Clark L.

Author information: 
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

To date, only one genome-wide study has assessed the contribution of CNVs to
Parkinson's Disease (PD). We conducted a genome-wide scan for CNVs in a
case-control dataset of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) origin (268 PD cases and 178
controls). Using high-confidence CNVs, we examined the global genome wide burden 
of large (=100Kb) and rare (=1% in the dataset) CNVs between cases and controls. 
A total of 986 such CNVs were observed in our dataset of 432 subjects. Overall
global burden analyses did not reveal significant differences between cases and
controls in CNV rate, distribution of deletions or duplications or number of
genes affected by CNVs. Overall deletions (total CNV size and >2x frequency) were
found 1.4 times more often in cases than in controls (p=0.019). The large CNVs
(>500kb) were also significantly associated with PD (p=0.046, 1.24-folder higher 
in cases than in controls). Global burden was elevated for rare CNV regions.
Specifically, for OVOS2 on Chr12p11.21, CNVs were observed only in PD cases (n=7)
but not in controls (p=0.028) and this was experimentally validated. A total of
81 PD cases carried a rare genic CNV that was absent in controls. Ingenuity
pathway analysis (IPA) identified ATXN3, FBXW7, CHCHD3, HSF1, KLC1 and MBD3 in
the same disease pathway with known PD genes.

PMCID: PMC3782064
PMID: 24073418  [PubMed]


301. Toxicol Lett. 2013 Nov 25;223(2):116-23. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.09.010. Epub 
2013 Sep 23.

Crotonaldehyde induces heat shock protein 72 expression that mediates
anti-apoptotic effects in human endothelial cells.

Ryu DS(1), Yang H, Lee SE, Park CS, Jin YH, Park YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Crotonaldehyde is a highly reactive aldehyde and a common environmental
pollutant. It occurs in cigarette smoke and automobile exhaust, and is also
endogenously generated by lipid peroxidation. Reactive aldehydes, such as
crotonaldehyde, are considered to be important mediators of cell damage. Since
endothelial apoptosis is considered to be the first step in the pathogenesis of
cardiovascular disease, there have been many efforts to protect endothelial cell 
from oxidative stress. Heat shock protein 72 (HSP72) is a representative
stress-inducible HSP70 family protein, and its synthesis is increased in response
to multiple stressors. In the present study, we investigated the effect of
crotonaldehyde on the up-regulation of HSP72 in human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (HUVECs). Crotonaldehyde treatment caused nuclear accumulation of the heat 
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), leading to the induction of HSP72.
Inhibition of the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) signaling pathways, reduction of
intracellular calcium level and blocking of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generation resulted in significant blockage of crotonaldehyde-mediated HSP72
induction. In addition, HSP72 silencing by siRNA or calcium chelating by BAPTA/AM
resulted in an obvious increase in the rate of apoptosis in
crotonaldehyde-stimulated HUVECs. In summary, our data demonstrated that
crotonaldehyde-induced HSP72 expression in HUVECs is mediated by the JNK-HSF1
pathway, and involves calcium ions and ROS, which is an adaptive response to
oxidative stress caused by crotonaldehyde.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. FEBS Lett. 2013 Nov 1;587(21):3541-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.09.012. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Chicken IL-6 is a heat-shock gene.

Prakasam R(1), Fujimoto M, Takii R, Hayashida N, Takaki E, Tan K, Wu F, Inouye S,
Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

The febrile response is elicited by pyrogenic cytokines including IL-6 in
response to microorganism infections and diseases in vertebrates. Mammalian HSF1,
which senses elevations in temperature, negatively regulates the response by
suppressing pyrogenic cytokine expression. We here showed that HSF3, an avian
ortholog of mammalian HSF1, directly binds to and activates IL-6 during heat
shock in chicken cells. Other components of the febrile response mechanism, such 
as IL-1ß and ATF3, were also differently regulated in mammalian and chicken
cells. These results suggest that the febrile response is exacerbated by a
feed-forward circuit composed of the HSF3-IL-6 pathway in birds.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Metab. 2013 May 10;2(3):184-93. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2013.05.002.
eCollection 2013.

Role of the circadian clock gene Per2 in adaptation to cold temperature.

Chappuis S(1), Ripperger JA, Schnell A, Rando G, Jud C, Wahli W, Albrecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Unit of Biochemistry, University of Fribourg,
Switzerland.

Adaptive thermogenesis allows mammals to resist to cold. For instance, in brown
adipose tissue (BAT) the facultative uncoupling of the proton gradient from ATP
synthesis in mitochondria is used to generate systemic heat. However, this system
necessitates an increase of the Uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) and its activation by
free fatty acids. Here we show that mice without functional Period2 (Per2) were
cold sensitive because their adaptive thermogenesis system was less efficient.
Upon cold-exposure, Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) induced Per2 in the BAT.
Subsequently, PER2 as a co-activator of PPARa increased expression of Ucp1. PER2 
also increased Fatty acid binding protein 3 (Fabp3), a protein important to
transport free fatty acids from the plasma to mitochondria to activate UCP1.
Hence, in BAT PER2 is important for the coordination of the molecular response of
mice exposed to cold by synchronizing UCP1 expression and its activation.

PMCID: PMC3773826
PMID: 24049733  [PubMed]


304. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4068-79. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202831. Epub 2013
Sep 16.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 is activated as a consequence of lymphocyte
activation and regulates a major proteostasis network in T cells critical for
cell division during stress.

Gandhapudi SK(1), Murapa P, Threlkeld ZD, Ward M, Sarge KD, Snow C, Woodward JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky School of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is a major transcriptional regulator of 
the heat shock response in eukaryotic cells. HSF1 is evoked in response to a
variety of cellular stressors, including elevated temperatures, oxidative stress,
and other proteotoxic stressors. Previously, we demonstrated that HSF1 is
activated in naive T cells at fever range temperatures (39.5°C) and is critical
for in vitro T cell proliferation at fever temperatures. In this study, we
demonstrated that murine HSF1 became activated to the DNA-binding form and
transactivated a large number of genes in lymphoid cells strictly as a
consequence of receptor activation in the absence of apparent cellular stress.
Microarray analysis comparing HSF1(+/+) and HSF1(-/-) gene expression in T cells 
activated at 37°C revealed a diverse set of 323 genes significantly regulated by 
HSF1 in nonstressed T cells. In vivo proliferation studies revealed a significant
impairment of HSF1(-/-) T cell expansion under conditions mimicking a robust
immune response (staphylococcal enterotoxin B-induced T cell activation). This
proliferation defect due to loss of HSF1 is observed even under nonfebrile
temperatures. HSF1(-/-) T cells activated at fever temperatures show a dramatic
reduction in cyclin E and cyclin A proteins during the cell cycle, although the
transcription of these genes was modestly affected. Finally, B cell and
hematopoietic stem cell proliferation from HSF1(-/-) mice, but not HSF1(+/+)
mice, were also attenuated under stressful conditions, indicating that HSF1 is
critical for the cell cycle progression of lymphoid cells activated under
stressful conditions.

PMCID: PMC4520533
PMID: 24043900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cancer Sci. 2013 Dec;104(12):1683-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12277. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Nucleoside analog inhibits microRNA-214 through targeting heat-shock factor 1 in 
human epithelial ovarian cancer.

Chen YF(1), Dong Z, Xia Y, Tang J, Peng L, Wang S, Lai D.

Author information: 
(1)The International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China.

The important functions of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in certain malignant
cancers have granted it to be an appealing target for developing novel strategy
for cancer therapy. Here, we report that higher HSF1 expression is associated
with more aggressive malignization in epithelial ovarian tumors, indicating that 
targeting HSF1 is also a promising strategy against ovarian cancer. We found that
a nucleoside analog (Ly101-4B) elicits efficient inhibition on HSF1 expression
and potent anticancer activity on epithelial ovarian cancer both in vitro and in 
vivo. Moreover, by targeting HSF1, Ly101-4B inhibits the biogenesis of
microRNA-214, which has been revealed to be overexpressed and to promote cell
survival in human ovarian epithelial tumors. These findings demonstrate that
Ly101-4B is a promising candidate for ovarian cancer therapy, and expand our
understanding of HSF1, by revealing that it can regulate microRNA biogenesis in
addition to its canonical function of regulating protein-coding RNAs.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 24033540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Genes Cancer. 2013 Mar;4(3-4):172-82. doi: 10.1177/1947601913484497.

Stress Inducibility of SIRT1 and Its Role in Cytoprotection and Cancer.

Raynes R(1), Brunquell J, Westerheide SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of
Arts and Sciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.

Cells must continuously respond to stressful insults via the upregulation of
cytoprotective pathways. The longevity factor and deacetylase SIRT1 plays a
critical role in coordinating this cellular response to stress. SIRT1 activity
and levels are regulated by cellular stressors, including metabolic, genotoxic,
oxidative, and proteotoxic stress. As a stress sensor, SIRT1 impacts cell
survival by deacetylating substrate proteins to drive the cell towards a
cytoprotective pathway. Extreme stress conditions, however, can cause SIRT1 to
lead cells down an apoptotic pathway instead. SIRT1 is frequently dysregulated in
cancer cells and has been characterized to have a dual role as both an oncogene
and a tumor suppressor, likely due to its pivotal function in regulating
cytoprotection. Recently, the ability of SIRT1 to regulate HSF1-dependent
induction of the heat shock response has highlighted another pathway through
which SIRT1 can modulate cytoprotection. Activation of HSF1 results in the
production of cytoprotective chaperones that can facilitate the transformed
phenotype of cancer cells. In this review, we discuss the stress-dependent
regulation of SIRT1. We highlight the role of SIRT1 in stress management and
cytoprotection and emphasize SIRT1-dependent activation of HSF1 as a potential
mechanism for cancer promotion.

PMCID: PMC3764474
PMID: 24020008  [PubMed]


307. Br J Cancer. 2013 Sep 17;109(6):1648-56. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.488. Epub 2013 Sep
3.

Prognostic value of peritumoral heat-shock factor-1 in patients receiving
resection of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang JB(1), Guo K, Sun HC, Zhu XD, Zhang B, Lin ZH, Zhang BH, Liu YK, Ren ZG,
Fan J.

Author information: 
(1)1] Liver Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 136 Yi Xue
Yuan Road, Shanghai, China [2] Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer
Invasion, Ministry of Education, 136 Yi Xue Yuan Road, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The cross-talk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells and abnormal
metabolic signals in peritumoral microenvironment modifies our knowledge of
hepatocarcinogenesis. As an indispensable modulator of various stresses, the
clinical significance of heat-shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1) in HCC
microenvironment has never been defined.
METHODS: Hepatocellular carcinoma and matched peritumoral liver tissues (n=332)
were semiquantitatively analysed for HSF1 expression, followed by correlation
with clinicopathological parameters (patient outcomes). Moreover, the effects of 
HSF1 deficiency in L02 on monocarboxylate transporter-4 (MCT4) and HCC cells'
colonisation and proliferation were investigated.
RESULTS: High expression of HSF1 in peritumoral tissue but not in HCC tissue was 
associated with poorer overall survival (OS) and time to recurrence (TTR),
especially early recurrence (ER), which was further reconfirmed in validation
cohort. Multivariate analysis showed that prognostic performance of peritumoral
HSF1 was independent of other clinicopathological factors (hazard ratio for
OS=2.60, P=0.002, for TTR=2.52, P<0.001). Notably, downregulation of HSF1 in L02 
decreased MCT4 expression significantly. The supernatant from L02-shRNA-HSF1 in
hypoxia, NOT normoxia condition, inhibited HCC cell colonisation and
proliferation. Moreover, the combination of peritumoral HSF1 and MCT4 was the
best predictor for ER and OS.
CONCLUSION: High peritumoral HSF1 expression can serve as a sensitive 'readout'
for high-risk HCC ER, and could be a potential metabolic intervention target
following curative resection.

PMCID: PMC3776997
PMID: 24002609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Pflugers Arch. 2014 May;466(5):833-50. doi: 10.1007/s00424-013-1339-4. Epub 2013 
Sep 3.

Nutritional models of foetal programming and nutrigenomic and epigenomic
dysregulations of fatty acid metabolism in the liver and heart.

Guéant JL(1), Elakoum R, Ziegler O, Coelho D, Feigerlova E, Daval JL,
Guéant-Rodriguez RM.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U954, Nutrition-Genetics-Environmental Risk Exposure (N-GERE),
University of Lorraine and University Hospital Center of Nancy, BP 184, 54511,
Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France, jean-louis.gueant@univ-lorraine.fr.

Barker's concept of 'foetal programming' proposes that intrauterine growth
restriction (IUGR) predicts complex metabolic diseases through relationships that
may be further modified by the postnatal environment. Dietary restriction and
deficit in methyl donors, folate, vitamin B12, and choline are used as
experimental conditions of foetal programming as they lead to IUGR and decreased 
birth weight. Overfeeding and deficit in methyl donors increase central fat mass 
and lead to a dramatic increase of plasma free fatty acids (FFA) in offspring.
Conversely, supplementing the mothers under protein restriction with folic acid
reverses metabolic and epigenomic phenotypes of offspring. High-fat diet or
methyl donor deficiency (MDD) during pregnancy and lactation produce liver
steatosis and myocardium hypertrophy that result from increased import of FFA and
impaired fatty acid ß-oxidation, respectively. The underlying molecular
mechanisms show dysregulations related with similar decreased expression and
activity of sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and hyperacetylation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a). High-fat diet and
overfeeding impair AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of PGC-1a, while MDD decreases 
PGC-1a methylation through decreased expression of PRMT1 and cellular level of
S-adenosyl methionine. The visceral manifestations of metabolic syndrome are
under the influence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in overnourished animal 
models. These mechanisms should also deserve attention in the foetal programming 
effects of MDD since vitamin B12 influences ER stress through impaired SIRT1
deacetylation of HSF1. Taken together, similarities and synergies of high-fat
diet and MDD suggest, therefore, considering their consecutive or contemporary
influence in the mechanisms of complex metabolic diseases.

PMID: 23999818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3054-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.08.013. Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Symplekin, a polyadenylation factor, prevents MOZ and MLL activity on HOXA9 in
hematopoietic cells.

Largeot A(1), Paggetti J, Broséus J, Aucagne R, Lagrange B, Martin RZ, Berthelet 
J, Quéré R, Lucchi G, Ducoroy P, Bastie JN, Delva L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U866, Labex LipSTIC team, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne,
21000 Dijon, France.

MOZ and MLL encoding a histone acetyltransferase and a histone methyltransferase,
respectively, are targets for recurrent chromosomal translocations found in acute
myeloblastic or lymphoblastic leukemia. We have previously shown that MOZ and MLL
cooperate to activate HOXA9 gene expression in hematopoietic stem/progenitors
cells. To dissect the mechanism of action of this complex, we decided to identify
new proteins interacting with MOZ. We found that the scaffold protein Symplekin
that supports the assembly of polyadenylation machinery was identified by mass
spectrometry. Symplekin interacts and co-localizes with both MOZ and MLL in
immature hematopoietic cells. Its inhibition leads to a decrease of the HOXA9
protein level but not of Hoxa9 mRNA and to an over-recruitment of MOZ and MLL
onto the HOXA9 promoter. Altogether, our results highlight the role of Symplekin 
in transcription repression involving a regulatory network between MOZ, MLL and
Symplekin.

© 2013.

PMID: 23994619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Theriogenology. 2013 Dec;80(9):970-8. doi: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2013.07.023. 
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Development competence and relative transcript abundance of oocytes derived from 
small and medium follicles of prepubertal gilts.

Kohata C(1), Izquierdo-Rico MJ, Romar R, Funahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Graduate School of Natural Science and
Technology, Okayama University, Tsushima-Naka, Kita-Ku, Okayama, Japan.

The objective of this study was to examine the competence of mature oocytes
aspirated from small follicles (SF, <2 mm in diameter) and medium follicles (MF, 
3-6 mm) of abattoir-derived prepubertal gilt ovaries. Oocytes were selected by
the presence of the first polar body (1pb) after IVM in a chemically defined
medium, for sperm penetration, pronuclear formation, cleavage rate, and
development to the blastocyst stage. Relative transcript abundance of genes
associated with regulation of oocyte maturation (AURKA, AURKB, and MOS),
fertilization (ZP3 and ZP4), maternal effect (NALP9 and HSF1), and anti-apoptosis
(BCL2) were also examined in oocytes at germinal vesicle (GV) and metaphase-II
(MII) stages. In SF, compared with MF, the maturation rate post-IVM was lower (P 
< 0.05), but there were no differences in sperm penetration rate (78.2% and 68.5%
at 6 hours after insemination and 90.8% and 91.9% at 9 hours after insemination, 
P = 0.51 and P = 0.67, respectively), the percentage of oocytes that formed both 
female and male pronuclei (27.9% and 25.8% at 6 hours after insemination and
79.4% and 76.1% at 9 hours after insemination), or cleavage rate at 48 hours
after insemination (85.9% and 89.7%, respectively, P = 0.46), whereas blastocyst 
formation rate was lower (P < 0.05) in oocytes from SF versus MF (14.7% and
31.0%). Transcript abundances decreased (P < 0.05) in all genes examined between 
the GV and MII stages, although only transcript abundance for MOS was lower (P < 
0.05) in GV oocytes from SF versus MF. In conclusion, mature oocytes from SF and 
MF of prepubertal gilts with a visible 1pb had similar fertilizability in vitro
and relative transcript abundance of nine genes. However, follicle size affected 
meiotic competence, early embryonic development to the blastocyst stage, and
transcript abundance of the MOS gene.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23987988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 4;288(40):28713-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.488346. Epub 2013
Aug 27.

The natural compound cantharidin induces cancer cell death through inhibition of 
heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) and Bcl-2-associated athanogene domain 3 (BAG3)
expression by blocking heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) binding to promoters.

Kim JA(1), Kim Y, Kwon BM, Han DC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Biomedical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology and.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) enhances the survival of cancer cells under various
stresses. The knock-out of HSF1 impairs cancer formation and progression,
suggesting that HSF1 is a promising therapeutic target. To identify inhibitors of
HSF1 activity, we performed cell-based screening with a library of marketed and
experimental drugs and identified cantharidin as an HSF1 inhibitor. Cantharidin
is a potent antitumor agent from traditional Chinese medicine. Cantharidin
inhibited heat shock-induced luciferase activity with an IC50 of 4.2 µm. In
contrast, cantharidin did not inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B luciferase reporter activity,
demonstrating that cantharidin is not a general transcription inhibitor. When the
HCT-116 colorectal cancer cells were exposed to heat shock in the presence of
cantharidin, the induction of HSF1 downstream target proteins, such as HSP70 and 
BAG3 (Bcl-2-associated athanogene domain 3), was suppressed. HSP70 and its
co-chaperone BAG3 have been reported to protect cells from apoptosis by
stabilizing anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins. As expected, treating HCT-116
cancer cells with cantharidin significantly decreased the amounts of BCL-2,
BCL-xL, and MCL-1 protein and induced apoptotic cell death. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that cantharidin inhibited the binding of
HSF1 to the HSP70 promoter and subsequently blocked HSF1-dependent p-TEFb
recruitment. Therefore, the p-TEFb-dependent phosphorylation of the C-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase II was blocked, arresting transcription at the
elongation step. Protein phosphatase 2A inhibition with PP2CA siRNA or okadaic
acid did not block HSF1 activity, suggesting that cantharidin inhibits HSF1 in a 
protein phosphatase 2A-independent manner. We show for the first time that
cantharidin inhibits HSF1 transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3789968
PMID: 23983126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 15;8(8):e72258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072258. eCollection
2013.

An exploration of heat tolerance in mice utilizing mRNA and microRNA expression
analysis.

Islam A(1), Deuster PA, Devaney JM, Ghimbovschi S, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
aminul.islam@usuhs.edu

BACKGROUND: Individuals who rapidly develop hyperthermia during heat exposure
(heat-intolerant) are vulnerable to heat associated illness and injury. We
recently reported that heat intolerant mice exhibit complex alterations in stress
proteins in response to heat exposure. In the present study, we further explored 
the role of genes and molecular networks associated with heat tolerance in mice.
METHODOLOGY: Heat-induced physiological and biochemical changes were assessed to 
determine heat tolerance levels in mice. We performed RNA and microRNA expression
profiling on mouse gastrocnemius muscle tissue samples to determine novel
biological pathways associated with heat tolerance.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mice (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>18) were assigned to heat-tolerant (TOL) and
heat-intolerant (INT) groups based on peak core temperatures during heat
exposures. This was followed by biochemical assessments (Hsp40, Hsp72, Hsp90 and 
Hsf1 protein levels). Microarray analysis identified a total of 3,081 mRNA
transcripts that were significantly misregulated in INT compared to TOL mice
(p<0.05). Among them, Hspa1a, Dnajb1 and Hspb7 were differentially expressed by
more than two-fold under these conditions. Furthermore, we identified 61 distinct
microRNA (miRNA) sequences significantly associated with TOL compared to INT
mice; eight miRNAs corresponded to target sites in seven genes identified as
being associated with heat tolerance pathways (Hspa1a, Dnajb1, Dnajb4, Dnajb6,
Hspa2, Hspb3 and Hspb7).
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of mRNA and miRNA data from the skeletal muscle of
adult mice following heat stress provides new insights into the pathophysiology
of thermoregulatory disturbances of heat intolerance.

PMCID: PMC3744453
PMID: 23967293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 3;110(36):E3388-97. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305275110. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Transcriptional response to stress in the dynamic chromatin environment of
cycling and mitotic cells.

Vihervaara A(1), Sergelius C, Vasara J, Blom MA, Elsing AN, Roos-Mattjus P,
Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, 20520 Turku, Finland.

Heat shock factors (HSFs) are the master regulators of transcription under
protein-damaging conditions, acting in an environment where the overall
transcription is silenced. We determined the genomewide transcriptional program
that is rapidly provoked by HSF1 and HSF2 under acute stress in human cells. Our 
results revealed the molecular mechanisms that maintain cellular homeostasis,
including HSF1-driven induction of polyubiquitin genes, as well as HSF1- and
HSF2-mediated expression patterns of cochaperones, transcriptional regulators,
and signaling molecules. We characterized the genomewide transcriptional response
to stress also in mitotic cells where the chromatin is tightly compacted. We
found a radically limited binding and transactivating capacity of HSF1, leaving
mitotic cells highly susceptible to proteotoxicity. In contrast, HSF2 occupied
hundreds of loci in the mitotic cells and localized to the condensed chromatin
also in meiosis. These results highlight the importance of the cell cycle phase
in transcriptional responses and identify the specific mechanisms for HSF1 and
HSF2 in transcriptional orchestration. Moreover, we propose that HSF2 is an
epigenetic regulator directing transcription throughout cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC3767495
PMID: 23959860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Jan;115(1):168-78. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24645.

HSF1 and Sp1 regulate FUT4 gene expression and cell proliferation in breast
cancer cells.

Yang X(1), Wang J, Liu S, Yan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalian Medical University,
Liaoning Provincial Core Lab of Glycobiology and Glycoengineering, Dalian,
People's Republic of, China.

Lewis Y (LeY) is a carbohydrate tumor-associated antigen. The majority of cancer 
cells derived from epithelial tissues express LeY type difucosylated
oligosaccharides. Fucosyltransferase IV (FUT4) is an essential enzyme that
catalyzes the synthesis of LeY oligosaccharides. In a previous study we reported 
that FUT4 is associated with cell proliferation; however, despite the important
role of FUT4 in cancer proliferation and apoptosis, little is known about the
mechanisms underlying the regulation of FUT4 transcription. In the current study 
we investigated the regulation of FUT4 transcription in human breast cancer. We
compared the regulation of human FUT4 gene transcription in human breast cancer
cells (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) using promoter/luciferase analyses. Using a series
of promoter deletion constructs, we identified a potential regulatory site
located between 0.8 and 1.6 kb of the FUT4 promoter. As shown by EMSA and ChIP
analyses, heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) and Sp1are required for FUT4 promoter
activity. In addition, we explored the role of HSF1 and Sp1 on cell
proliferation, and found that the ERK1/2 MAPK and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways
regulate the expression of FUT4, which play a role in cell proliferation via HSF1
and Sp1. These results suggest that FUT4 is a target gene for HSF1 and Sp1 that
is required for cell cycle progression in breast cancer epithelial cells.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23959823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cancer Cell. 2013 Aug 12;24(2):147-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.07.017.

HSF1 in Translation.

de Billy E(1), Clarke PA, Workman P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Division of Cancer Therapeutics, 
The Institute of Cancer Research, London SM2 5NG, UK.

Comment on
    Science. 2013 Jul 19;341(6143):1238303.

The master regulator of the classical cytoprotective "heat shock" response, heat 
shock factor 1 (HSF1), is increasingly implicated in cancer pathogenesis, but the
mechanisms remain poorly understood. A recent study connects increased protein
translation to activation of HSF1 in malignant cells and demonstrates the
therapeutic benefit of targeting this link.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Nov;47(11):1725-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.07.018. 
Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Pattern of heat shock factor and heat shock protein expression in lymphocytes of 
bipolar patients: increased HSP70-glucocorticoid receptor heterocomplex.

Bei ES(1), Salpeas V, Alevizos B, Anagnostara C, Pappa D, Moutsatsou P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, University of Athens, 75
Mikras Asias Str, Goudi, GR 11527 Athens, Greece.

Bipolar disorder (BD), a stress-related disease, is characterized by altered
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signalling. Stress response includes activation of
heat shock factor (HSF) and subsequent heat shock protein (HSP) synthesis which
regulate GR folding and function. The objective of this study was to investigate 
the possible role of HSFs, HSPs and their interaction with GR in BD. We applied
immunoprecipitation, SDS-PAGE/Western blot analysis and electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay (EMSA) in lymphocytes (whole cell or nuclear extracts) from BD
patients and healthy subjects and determined the HSPs (HSP90 and HSP70), the
heterocomplexes HSP90-GR and HSP70-GR, the HSFs (HSF1 and HSF4) as well as the
HSF-DNA binding. The HSP70-GR heterocomplex was elevated (p < 0.05) in BD
patients vs healthy subjects, and nuclear HSP70 was reduced (p = 0.01) in bipolar
manic patients. Protein levels of HSF1, HSF4, HSP90, HSP90-GR heterocomplex, and 
HSF-DNA binding remained unaltered in BD patients vs healthy subjects. The
corresponding effect sizes (ES) indicated a large ES for HSP70-GR, HSP70, HSF-DNA
binding and HSF4, and a medium ES for HSP90, HSF1 and HSP90-GR between healthy
subjects and bipolar patients. Significant correlations among HSFs, HSPs, GR and 
HSP70-GR heterocomplex were observed in healthy subjects, which were abrogated in
bipolar patients. The higher interaction between GR and HSP70 and the
disturbances in the relations among heat shock response parameters and GR as
observed in our BD patients may provide novel insights into the contribution of
these factors in BD aetiopathogenesis.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23938235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e69115. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069115. Print 2013.

Compound A, a selective glucocorticoid receptor modulator, enhances heat shock
protein Hsp70 gene promoter activation.

Beck IM(1), Drebert ZJ, Hoya-Arias R, Bahar AA, Devos M, Clarisse D, Desmet S,
Bougarne N, Ruttens B, Gossye V, Denecker G, Lievens S, Bracke M, Tavernier J,
Declercq W, Gevaert K, Vanden Berghe W, Haegeman G, De Bosscher K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research (LECR), Department of Radiation
Therapy & Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
Ilse.Beck@Ugent.be

Compound A possesses glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-dependent anti-inflammatory
properties. Just like classical GR ligands, Compound A can repress NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated
gene expression. However, the monomeric Compound A-activated GR is unable to
trigger glucocorticoid response element-regulated gene expression. The heat shock
response potently activates heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), upregulates Hsp70, a
known GR chaperone, and also modulates various aspects of inflammation. We found 
that the selective GR modulator Compound A and heat shock trigger similar
cellular effects in A549 lung epithelial cells. With regard to their
anti-inflammatory mechanism, heat shock and Compound A are both able to reduce
TNF-stimulated I<U+03BA>Ba degradation and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 nuclear translocation. We
established an interaction between Compound A-activated GR and Hsp70, but
remarkably, although the presence of the Hsp70 chaperone as such appears pivotal 
for the Compound A-mediated inflammatory gene repression, subsequent novel Hsp70 
protein synthesis is uncoupled from an observed CpdA-induced Hsp70 mRNA
upregulation and hence obsolete in mediating CpdA's anti-inflammatory effect. The
lack of a Compound A-induced increase in Hsp70 protein levels in A549 cells is
not mediated by a rapid proteasomal degradation of Hsp70 or by a Compound
A-induced general block on translation. Similar to heat shock, Compound A can
upregulate transcription of Hsp70 genes in various cell lines and BALB/c mice.
Interestingly, whereas Compound A-dependent Hsp70 promoter activation is
GR-dependent but HSF1-independent, heat shock-induced Hsp70 expression
alternatively occurs in a GR-independent and HSF1-dependent manner in A549 lung
epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3728325
PMID: 23935933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cell Metab. 2013 Aug 6;18(2):296-302. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.07.004.

DNA methylation analysis in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease suggests distinct
disease-specific and remodeling signatures after bariatric surgery.

Ahrens M(1), Ammerpohl O, von Schönfels W, Kolarova J, Bens S, Itzel T, Teufel A,
Herrmann A, Brosch M, Hinrichsen H, Erhart W, Egberts J, Sipos B, Schreiber S,
Häsler R, Stickel F, Becker T, Krawczak M, Röcken C, Siebert R, Schafmayer C,
Hampe J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Thoracic Surgery, Christian-Albrechts-University
Kiel/University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common chronic liver
disorder in industrialized countries. Liver samples from morbidly obese patients 
(n = 45) with all stages of NAFLD and controls (n = 18) were analyzed by
array-based DNA methylation and mRNA expression profiling. NAFLD-specific
expression and methylation differences were seen for nine genes coding for key
enzymes in intermediate metabolism (including PC, ACLY, and PLCG1) and
insulin/insulin-like signaling (including IGF1, IGFBP2, and PRKCE) and replicated
by bisulfite pyrosequening (independent n = 39). Transcription factor binding
sites at NAFLD-specific CpG sites were >1,000-fold enriched for ZNF274, PGC1A,
and SREBP2. Intraindividual comparison of liver biopsies before and after
bariatric surgery showed NAFLD-associated methylation changes to be partially
reversible. Postbariatric and NAFLD-specific methylation signatures were clearly 
distinct both in gene ontology and transcription factor binding site analyses,
with >400-fold enrichment of NRF1, HSF1, and ESRRA sites. Our findings provide an
example of treatment-induced epigenetic organ remodeling in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23931760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biophys J. 2013 Aug 6;105(3):593-601. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.06.041.

Quantification of biomass and cell motion in human pluripotent stem cell
colonies.

Zangle TA(1), Chun J, Zhang J, Reed J, Teitell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of
Medicine at the University of California at Los Angeles, USA.

Somatic cell reprogramming to pluripotency requires an immediate increase in cell
proliferation and reduction in cell size. It is unknown whether proliferation and
biomass controls are similarly coordinated with early events during the
differentiation of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). This impasse exists because
PSCs grow in tight clusters or colonies, precluding most quantifying approaches. 
Here, we investigate live cell interferometry as an approach to quantify the
biomass and growth of HSF1 human PSC colonies before and during retinoic
acid-induced differentiation. We also provide an approach for measuring the rate 
and coordination of intracolony mass redistribution in HSF1 clusters using live
cell interferometry images. We show that HSF1 cells grow at a consistent,
exponential rate regardless of colony size and display coordinated intracolony
movement that ceases with the onset of differentiation. By contrast, growth and
proliferation rates show a decrease of only ~15% decrease during early
differentiation despite global changes in gene expression and previously reported
changes in energy metabolism. Overall, these results suggest that cell biomass
and proliferation are regulated independent of pluripotency during early
differentiation, which is distinct from what occurs with successful
reprogramming.

Copyright © 2013 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3736662
PMID: 23931307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36(8):1332-40.

Possible involvement of phosphorylated heat-shock factor-1 in changes in heat
shock protein 72 induction in the failing rat heart following myocardial
infarction.

Marunouchi T(1), Murata M, Takagi N, Tanonaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Tokyo University of
Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 14321 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 1920392, Japan.

It is supposed that an increase in the level of heat shock protein 72 (HSP72) in 
the failing heart would be beneficial for reducing the myocardial damage.
However, the induction of HSP72 after an exposure to heat shock is blunted in the
failing rat heart following myocardial infarction. In this study, to clarify the 
possible mechanisms underlying this reduction in the ability for HSP72 induction 
in the failing heart, the possible involvement of heat-shock factor-1 (HSF1), an 
HSP transcription factor, in this reduction was examined. When hemodynamic
parameters of rats with myocardial infarction 8 weeks after coronary artery
ligation were measured, the animals showed the signs of chronic heart failure.
The HSF1 content was increased in the viable myocardium in the failing heart. The
ability to induce cardiac HSP72 was reduced after an exposure to hyperthermia.
The level of HSF1 in the cytosolic fraction from the failing heart with or
without exposure to hyperthermia was increased, whereas that of HSF1 in the
nuclear fraction was reduced. In the failing heart, the level of HSF1 on its
serine 303 (Ser303) residue, which phosphorylation represses HSF1, was increased.
These findings suggest that HSF1 translocation from the cytosol into the nucleus 
was attenuated after an exposure to hyperthermia and that an increase in the
phosphorylation of HSF1 Ser303 was involved in the impairment of heat
shock-induced HSP72 induction in the failing heart following myocardial
infarction.

PMID: 23902977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Hyperthermia. 2013 Aug;29(5):480-90. doi: 10.3109/02656736.2013.821526.

Enhanced sensitivity of colon tumour cells to natural killer cell cytotoxicity
after mild thermal stress is regulated through HSF1-mediated expression of MICA.

Dayanc BE(1), Bansal S, Gure AO, Gollnick SO, Repasky EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Inonu University, Malatya,
Turkey.

PURPOSE: Previously we showed that mild thermal stress increased natural killer
(NK) cell-mediated tumour cytotoxicity and that this could be blocked by
anti-NKG2D or anti-MICA (major histolocompatability complex (MHC) class I related
chain A) antibodies. Here, we investigated the role of the transcription factor
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in thermal regulation of MICA expression in tumour
cells in vitro and in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hyperthermia experiments were conducted in vitro and in
mice using a target temperature of 39.5<U+2009>°C. Apoptotic cells and NK cells in situ 
were visualised by use of the TUNEL assay or expression of NKp46 respectively.
Using Colo205 cells, HSF1 message was blocked utilising siRNA while luciferase
reporter assays were used to measure the activity of the MICA promoter in vitro. 
Cell surface MICA was measured by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Following whole body hyperthermia (WBH), tumour tissues showed an
increase in NK cells and apoptosis. Mild thermal stress resulted in a transient
increase in surface MICA and enhanced NK cytotoxicity of the Colo205 colon cancer
cell line. Silencing (mRNA) HSF1 expression in Colo205 cells prevented the
thermal enhancement of MICA message and surface protein levels, with partial loss
of thermally enhanced NK cytotoxicity. Mutations of the HSF1 binding site on the 
MICA promoter implicated HSF1 in the thermal enhancement of MICA. Some, but not
all, patient-derived colon tumour derived xenografts also exhibited an enhanced
MICA message expression after WBH.
CONCLUSIONS: Up-regulation of MICA expression in Colo205 cells and enhanced
sensitivity to NK cell killing following mild thermal stress is dependent upon
HSF1.

PMCID: PMC3816741
PMID: 23902341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jan;35(1):129-40. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1016-4. Epub 2013 Jul
31.

Chelerythrine induces reactive oxygen species-dependent mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway in a murine T cell lymphoma.

Kumar S(1), Acharya A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Advance Study in Zoology, Faculty of Science, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, 221-005, UP, India.

Chelerythrine is a well-known protein kinase C inhibitor and potential
antiproliferative and antitumor pharmacological agent. Chelerythrine
inhibits/suppresses the HSF1 phosphorylation by inhibiting PKC and blocks the
nuclear migration and subsequent synthesis of hsp70 leading to reduced cell
viability and activation of apoptotic machinery. Chelerythrine is also known to
enhance the production of reactive oxygen intermediate that is strong activator
of apoptosis in high concentration. Therefore, the present study intended to
investigate the role of chelerythrine-induced reactive oxygen intermediate on the
viability and apoptosis of Dalton's lymphoma cells. Enhanced production of
reactive oxygen species in Dalton's lymphoma (DL) cells was observed upon
treatment of chelerythrine only which was seen completely abolished on treatment 
of mitochondrial complex inhibitors rotenone and malonate, and anti-oxidant,
N-acetyl-L-cysteine. Increased number of DL cells undergoing apoptosis, as
observed by fluorescent microscopy and flow cytometry analysis, in chelerythrine 
only-treated group was seen that was significantly inhibited on treatment of
mitochondrial complex inhibitors and anti-oxidants. Staurosporine, on the other
hand, does not lead to enhanced production of reactive oxygen intermediate in DL 
cells.

PMID: 23900672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Nov;18(6):685-701. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0444-9.
Epub 2013 Jul 25.

Do reciprocal interactions between cell stress proteins and cytokines create a
new intra-/extra-cellular signalling nexus?

Henderson B(1), Kaiser F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Diseases, Eastman Dental Institute, University College
London, London, UK.

Cytokine biology began in the 1950s, and by 1988, a large number of cytokines,
with a myriad of biological actions, had been discovered. In 1988, the basis of
the protein chaperoning function of the heat shock, or cell stress, proteins was 
identified, and it was assumed that this was their major activity. However, since
this time, evidence has accumulated to show that cell stress proteins are
secreted by cells and can stimulate cellular cytokine synthesis with the
generation of pro- and/or anti-inflammatory cytokine networks. Cell stress can
also control cytokine synthesis, and cytokines are able to induce, or even
inhibit, the synthesis of selected cell stress proteins and may also promote
their release. How cell stress proteins control the formation of cytokines is not
understood and how cytokines control cell stress protein synthesis depends on the
cellular compartment experiencing stress, with cytoplasmic heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) having a variety of actions on cytokine gene transcription. The
endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response also exhibits a complex set of
behaviours in terms of control of cytokine synthesis. In addition, individual
intracellular cell stress proteins, such as Hsp27 and Hsp90, have major roles in 
controlling cellular responses to cytokines and in controlling cytokine synthesis
in response to exogenous factors. While still confusing, the literature supports 
the hypothesis that cell stress proteins and cytokines may generate complex
intra- and extra-cellular networks, which function in the control of cells to
external and internal stressors and suggests the cell stress response as a key
parameter in cytokine network generation and, as a consequence, in control of
immunity.

PMCID: PMC3789882
PMID: 23884786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 18;8(7):e69509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069509. Print 2013.

Inhibition of inducible heat shock protein-70 (hsp72) enhances bortezomib-induced
cell death in human bladder cancer cells.

Qi W(1), White MC, Choi W, Guo C, Dinney C, McConkey DJ, Siefker-Radtke A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, U. T. M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Houston, Texas, USA.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (Velcade) is a promising new agent for
bladder cancer therapy, but inducible cytoprotective mechanisms may limit its
potential efficacy. We used whole genome mRNA expression profiling to study the
effects of bortezomib on stress-induced gene expression in a panel of human
bladder cancer cell lines. Bortezomib induced strong upregulation of the
inducible HSP70 isoforms HSPA1A and HSPA1B isoforms of Hsp72 in 253J B-V and
SW780 (HSPA1A(high)) cells, but only induced the HSPA1B isoform in UM-UC10 and
UM-UC13 (HSPA1A(low)) cells. Bortezomib stimulated the binding of heat shock
factor-1 (HSF1) to the HSPA1A promoter in 253JB-V but not in UM-UC13 cells.
Methylation-specific PCR revealed that the HSPA1A promoter was methylated in the 
HSPA1A(low) cell lines (UM-UC10 and UM-UC13), and exposure to the chromatin
demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored HSPA1A expression.
Overexpression of Hsp72 promoted bortezomib resistance in the UM-UC10 and UM-UC13
cells, whereas transient knockdown of HSPA1B further sensitized these cells to
bortezomib, and exposure to the chemical HSF1 inhibitor KNK-437 promoted
bortezomib sensitivity in the 253J B-V cells. Finally, shRNA-mediated stable
knockdown of Hsp72 in 253J B-V promoted sensitivity to bortezomib in vitro and in
tumor xenografts in vivo. Together, our results provide proof-of-concept for
using Hsp72 inhibitors to promote bortezomib sensitivity in bladder cancers and
suggest that selective targeting of HSPA1B could produce synthetic lethality in
tumors that display HSPA1A promoter methylation.

PMCID: PMC3715471
PMID: 23874968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Science. 2013 Jul 19;341(6143):1238303. doi: 10.1126/science.1238303.

Tight coordination of protein translation and HSF1 activation supports the
anabolic malignant state.

Santagata S(1), Mendillo ML, Tang YC, Subramanian A, Perley CC, Roche SP, Wong B,
Narayan R, Kwon H, Koeva M, Amon A, Golub TR, Porco JA Jr, Whitesell L, Lindquist
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Jul 19;341(6143):242-3.
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Aug 12;24(2):147-9.

The ribosome is centrally situated to sense metabolic states, but whether its
activity, in turn, coherently rewires transcriptional responses is unknown. Here,
through integrated chemical-genetic analyses, we found that a dominant
transcriptional effect of blocking protein translation in cancer cells was
inactivation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a multifaceted transcriptional
regulator of the heat-shock response and many other cellular processes essential 
for anabolic metabolism, cellular proliferation, and tumorigenesis. These
analyses linked translational flux to the regulation of HSF1 transcriptional
activity and to the modulation of energy metabolism. Targeting this link with
translation initiation inhibitors such as rocaglates deprived cancer cells of
their energy and chaperone armamentarium and selectively impaired the
proliferation of both malignant and premalignant cells with early-stage oncogenic
lesions.

PMCID: PMC3959726
PMID: 23869022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Science. 2013 Jul 19;341(6143):242-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1242359.

Cell biology. Trans-HSF1 express.

Gandin V(1), Topisirovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis-Jewish
General Hospital, and Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montréal,
Quebec, H3A 1A3, Canada.

Comment on
    Science. 2013 Jul 19;341(6143):1238303.

PMID: 23869008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 8;8(7):e67566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067566. Print 2013.

Dynamics of the full length and mutated heat shock factor 1 in human cells.

Herbomel G(1), Kloster-Landsberg M, Folco EG, Col E, Usson Y, Vourc'h C, Delon A,
Souchier C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, University Grenoble 1, IAB CRI U823 team 10, La Tronche, France.

Heat shock factor 1 is the key transcription factor of the heat shock response.
Its function is to protect the cell against the deleterious effects of stress.
Upon stress, HSF1 binds to and transcribes hsp genes and repeated satellite III
(sat III) sequences present at the 9q12 locus. HSF1 binding to pericentric sat
III sequences forms structures known as nuclear stress bodies (nSBs). nSBs
represent a natural amplification of RNA pol II dependent transcription sites.
Dynamics of HSF1 and of deletion mutants were studied in living cells using
multi-confocal Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (mFCS) and Fluorescence
Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP). In this paper, we show that HSF1 dynamics
modifications upon heat shock result from both formation of high molecular weight
complexes and increased HSF1 interactions with chromatin. These interactions
involve both DNA binding with Heat Shock Element (HSE) and sat III sequences and 
a more transient sequence-independent binding likely corresponding to a search
for more specific targets. We find that the trimerization domain is required for 
low affinity interactions with chromatin while the DNA binding domain is required
for site-specific interactions of HSF1 with DNA.

PMCID: PMC3704536
PMID: 23861773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Chem Biodivers. 2013 Jul;10(7):1322-7. doi: 10.1002/cbdv.201200401.

Heat shock factor 1 inducers from the bark of Eucommia ulmoides as cytoprotective
agents.

Nam JW(1), Kim SY, Yoon T, Lee YJ, Kil YS, Lee YS, Seo EK.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Cell Signaling & Drug Discovery Research, College of Pharmacy, 
Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea.

The barks of Eucommia ulmoides (Eucommiae Cortex, Eucommiaceae) have been used as
a traditional medicine in Korea, Japan, and China to treat hypertension,
reinforce the muscles and bones, and recover the damaged liver and kidney
functions. Among these traditional uses, to establish the recovery effects on the
damaged organs on the basis of phytochemistry, the barks of E. ulmoides have been
investigated to afford three known phenolic compounds, coniferaldehyde glucoside 
(1), bartsioside (2), and feretoside (3), which were found in the family
Eucommiaceae for the first time. The compounds 1-3 were evaluated for their
inducible activities on the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and heat shock proteins
(HSPs) 27 and 70, along with four compounds, geniposide (4), geniposidic acid
(5), pinoresinol diglucoside (6), and liriodendrin (7), which were previously
reported from E. ulmoides. Compounds 1-7 increased expression of HSF1 by a factor
of 1.214, 1.144, 1.153, 1.114, 1.159, 1.041, and 1.167 at 3 µM, respectively.
Coniferaldehyde glucoside (1) showed the most effective increase of HSF1 and
induced successive expressions of HSP27 and HSP70 in a dose-dependent manner
without cellular cytotoxicity, suggesting a possible application as a HSP inducer
to act as cytoprotective agent.

Copyright © 2013 Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta AG, Zürich.

PMID: 23847077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 16;288(33):23633-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C113.481945. Epub 2013
Jul 9.

Heat shock response activation exacerbates inclusion body formation in a cellular
model of Huntington disease.

Bersuker K(1), Hipp MS, Calamini B, Morimoto RI, Kopito RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

The cellular heat shock response (HSR) protects cells from toxicity associated
with defective protein folding, and this pathway is widely viewed as a potential 
pharmacological target to treat neurodegenerative diseases linked to protein
aggregation. Here we show that the HSR is not activated by mutant huntingtin
(HTT) even in cells selected for the highest expression levels and for the
presence of inclusion bodies containing aggregated protein. Surprisingly, HSR
activation by HSF1 overexpression or by administration of a small molecule
activator lowers the concentration threshold at which HTT forms inclusion bodies 
in cells expressing aggregation-prone, polyglutamine-expanded fragments of HTT.
These data suggest that the HSR does not mitigate inclusion body formation.

PMCID: PMC3745309
PMID: 23839939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jul 8;14:456. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-456.

Impact of heat shock transcription factor 1 on global gene expression profiles in
cells which induce either cytoprotective or pro-apoptotic response following
hyperthermia.

Kus-Liskiewicz M(1), Polanska J, Korfanty J, Olbryt M, Vydra N, Toma A, Widlak W.

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Elevated temperatures induce activation of the heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) which in somatic cells leads to heat shock proteins
synthesis and cytoprotection. However, in the male germ cells (spermatocytes)
caspase-3 dependent apoptosis is induced upon HSF1 activation and spermatogenic
cells are actively eliminated.
RESULTS: To elucidate a mechanism of such diverse HSF1 activity we carried out
genome-wide transcriptional analysis in control and heat-shocked cells, either
spermatocytes or hepatocytes. Additionally, to identify direct molecular targets 
of active HSF1 we used chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) combined with
promoter microarrays (ChIP on chip). Genes that are differently regulated after
HSF1 binding during hyperthermia in both types of cells have been identified.
Despite HSF1 binding to promoter sequences in both types of cells, strong
up-regulation of Hsps and other genes typically activated by the heat shock was
observed only in hepatocytes. In spermatocytes HSF1 binding correlates with
transcriptional repression on a large scale. HSF1-bound and negatively regulated 
genes encode mainly for proteins required for cell division, involved in RNA
processing and piRNA biogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Observed suppression of the transcription could lead to genomic
instability caused by meiotic recombination disturbances, which in turn might
induce apoptosis of spermatogenic cells. We propose that HSF1-dependent induction
of cell death is caused by the simultaneous repression of many genes required for
spermatogenesis, which guarantees the elimination of cells damaged during heat
shock. Such activity of HSF1 prevents transmission of damaged genetic material to
the next generation.

PMCID: PMC3711851
PMID: 23834426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Amyloid. 2013 Sep;20(3):164-72. doi: 10.3109/13506129.2013.814046. Epub 2013 Jul 
5.

Hsf-1 affects podocyte markers NPHS1, NPHS2 and WT1 in a transgenic mouse model
of TTRVal30Met-related amyloidosis.

Petrakis I(1), Mavroeidi V, Stylianou K, Andronikidi E, Lioudaki E, Perakis K,
Stratigis S, Vardaki E, Zafeiri M, Giannakakis K, Plaitakis A, Amoiridis G,
Saraiva MJ, Daphnis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, University of Crete, Greece. petrakgia@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy is characterized by transthyretin
(TTR) deposition in various tissues, including the kidneys. While deposition
induces organ dysfunction, renal involvement in TTR-related amyloidosis could
manifest from proteinuria to end-stage kidney failure. As proteinuria is
considered result of glomerular filtration barrier injury we investigated whether
TTR deposition affects either glomerular basement membrane (GBM) or podocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, immunoblot and gene expression
studies for nephrin, podocin and WT1 were run on renal tissue from human-TTRV30M 
transgenic mice hemizygous or homozygous for heat shock factor one (Hsf-1).
Transmission electron microscopy was used for evaluation of podocyte foot process
width (PFW) and GBM thickness in Hsf-1 hemizygous mice with or without TTRV30M or
amyloid deposition.
RESULTS: Glomeruli of hsf-1 hemizygous transgenic mice showed lower nephrin and
podocin protein levels but an increased podocyte number when compared to Hsf-1
homozygous transgenic mice. Nephrin, podocin and WT1 gene expression levels were 
unaffected by the Hsf-1 carrier status. TTRV30M deposition was associated with
increased PFW and GBM thickness.
CONCLUSIONS: Under the effect of Hsf-1 hemizygosity, TTRV30M deposition has
deleterious effects on GBM thickness, PFW and slit diaphragm composition, without
affecting nephrin and podocin gene expression.

PMID: 23829269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2013 Sep 1;537(1):21-30. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2013.06.006.
Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Inhibition of C2C12 myotube atrophy by a novel HSP70 inducer, celastrol, via
activation of Akt1 and ERK1/2 pathways.

Gwag T(1), Park K, Kim E, Son C, Park J, Nikawa T, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science and Technology, College of Science and
Technology, Yonsei University, Wonju, Gangwon-Do, Republic of Korea.

Celastrol (CEL) is known as a potent inducer of heat shock protein (HSP) in
non-muscle cells and exhibits cytoprotective function and inhibitory effects on
proteasome and glucocorticoid receptor activities. To investigate an
anti-atrophic effect of CEL on skeletal muscle cells, C2C12 myotubes were treated
with 150 µM dexamethasone (DEX) for 24h and 1.5 µM CEL was added for the last 6h 
during the 24h DEX treatment. Compared to the control, the myotube diameter was
reduced by a factor of 0.30 by DEX, but CEL treatment almost abrogated the
DEX-induced atrophy. CEL treatment also increased expression of HSP72 and
phosphorylation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (p-HSF1) 11-fold and
3.4-fold, respectively, as well as accumulation of p-HSF1 in the nucleus.
Furthermore, CEL treatment elevated activities of Akt1, p70/S6K and ERK1/2 2.0-
to 4.4-fold whereas DEX had no effect on these signaling activities. Inhibition
of Akt1 and ERK1/2 pathways by specific inhibitors confirmed CEL-induced
anti-atrophic effect. Moreover, DEX-mediated downregulation of FoxO3
phosphorylation and upregulation of MuRF1 expression and proteasome activity were
abrogated by CEL treatment. These results demonstrate a novel anti-atrophic
function of CEL in muscle cells via both activation of protein anabolic signals
and suppression of catabolic signaling activities.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Aug 25;376(1-2):156-72. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.06.016.
Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Exposure to chemical cocktails before or after conception--- the effect of timing
on ovarian development.

Bellingham M(1), Amezaga MR, Mandon-Pepin B, Speers CJ, Kyle CE, Evans NP, Sharpe
RM, Cotinot C, Rhind SM, Fowler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Medicine, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of
Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK.

Exposure of female fetuses to environmental chemicals (ECs) during pregnancy
results in a disturbed ovarian adult phenotype. We investigated the influence of 
pre- and/or post-conception exposure to low-level mixtures of ECs on the
structure and function of the fetal ovine ovary. We examined ovarian morphology, 
expression of oocyte and granulosa cell-specific genes and proteome. Female
fetuses were collected at day 110 of gestation, from dams exposed continuously
until, and after mating, by grazing in pastures treated with sewage sludge as a
fertiliser (TT) or in control fields treated with inorganic fertiliser (CC). In
addition, in a cross-over design, fetal ovaries were collected from dams
maintained on sludge pastures up to the time of mating but then transferred to
control pastures (TC) and, reciprocally, those transferred from control to
treated pastures at mating (CT). On examination, the proportion of type 1a
follicles (activating primordial follicles) was significantly lower in animals
from the CT groups compared with CC and TT groups (P<0.05). Of the 23 ovarian
gene transcripts studied, 14 were altered in the ovaries of exposed fetuses (CT, 
TC, and TT) relative to controls, with the largest number of changes observed in 
cross-exposure pattern groups (CT or TC). Continuous EC exposure (TT) produced
fewer transcript alterations and only two genes (INHBA and GSN) presented
differential profiles between CC and TT. Fetal ovarian proteome analysis (2-DE
gels) showed, across all exposure groups, 86 differentially expressed protein
spots compared to controls. Animals in the CT group exhibited the highest number 
(53) while TC and TT presented the same number of affected protein spots (42).
Fetal ovarian proteins with altered expression included MVP (major vault protein)
and several members of the heat-shock family (HSPA4L, HSP90AA1 and HSF1). The
present findings indicate that continuous maternal EC exposure before and during 
gestation, are less deleterious for fetal ovarian development than a change in
maternal EC exposure between pre and post-conception. The pathways by which the
ovary responds to this chemical stress were common in TT, CT, TC exposed
foetuses. In addition to the period of pregnancy, the pre-conception period
appears also as crucial for conditioning long-term effects of EC exposure on
ovarian development and primordial follicle reserve and hence future fertility.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3731555
PMID: 23791816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):89-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.024. Epub 2013 Jun
12.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 attenuates TNFa-induced cardiomyocyte death
through suppression of NF<U+03BA>B pathway.

Wu L(1), Hu C, Huang M, Jiang M, Lu L, Tang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
College, 109 Xueyuan Road, Wenzhou 325035, Zhejiang, China.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), which has been identified as an
endogenous cardioprotective factor, possesses potent anti-inflammatory effects.
However, the underlying mechanisms have not been fully understood yet. In this
study, we investigated the effects of HSF1-regulated RelA, a subunit of NF<U+03BA>B on
cardiomyocyte death. Cultured cardiomyocytes were transfected with HSF1 plasmid
before the treatment of TNFa. Cell death ratio was determined by cell staining.
Additionally, the expression of RelA in the cytoplasm and cytonucleus as well as 
its subcellular location was detected, and the expression of heat shock proteins 
(HSP70 and HSP90) in the cardiomyocytes was also examined. Not only did TNFa
remarkably enhanced cardiac cell death, but also elevated the expressions of
intracellular RelA and elicited its translocation. Overexpression of HSF1
effectively attenuated cell death induced by TNFa. Although HSF1 didn't
significantly inhibit the intracellular activation of RelA induced by TNFa at an 
early stage, HSF1 decreased the levels of RelA and the translocation of RelA in
the cytoplasm and cell nucleus at late stage. Besides, the expression of HSP70
and HSP90 was significantly increased when HSF1 was overexpressed. These results 
suggested that HSF1 attenuated cardiomyocyte death via inhibiting activation of
RelA as well as preventing its translocation from the cytoplasm to the
cytonucleus, which was partially associated with HSP70 and HSP90 up-regulated by 
HSF1 overexpression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23769970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. G3 (Bethesda). 2013 Aug 7;3(8):1315-24. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.006692.

Genetic selection for constitutively trimerized human HSF1 mutants identifies a
role for coiled-coil motifs in DNA binding.

Neef DW(1), Jaeger AM, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) promotes the expression of
stress-responsive genes and is a critical factor for the cellular protective
response to proteotoxic and other stresses. In response to stress, HSF1 undergoes
a transition from a repressed cytoplasmic monomer to a homotrimer, accumulates in
the nucleus, binds DNA, and activates target gene transcription. Although these
steps occur as sequential and highly regulated events, our understanding of the
full details of the HSF1 activation pathway remains incomplete. Here we describe 
a genetic screen in humanized yeast that identifies constitutively trimerized
HSF1 mutants. Surprisingly, constitutively trimerized HSF1 mutants do not bind to
DNA in vivo in the absence of stress and only become DNA binding competent upon
stress exposure, suggesting that an additional level of regulation beyond
trimerization and nuclear localization may be required for HSF1 DNA binding.
Furthermore, we identified a constitutively trimerized and nuclear-localized HSF1
mutant, HSF1 L189P, located in LZ3 of the HSF1 trimerization domain, which in
response to proteotoxic stress is strongly compromised for DNA binding at the
Hsp70 and Hsp25 promoters but readily binds to the interleukin-6 promoter,
suggesting that HSF1 DNA binding is in part regulated in a locus-dependent
manner, perhaps via promoter-specific differences in chromatin architecture.
Furthermore, these results implicate the LZ3 region of the HSF1 trimerization
domain in a function beyond its canonical role in HSF1 trimerization.

PMCID: PMC3737171
PMID: 23733891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013 Oct;23(5):310-22. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2013.05.008.
Epub 2013 May 30.

Regulation of autophagy by stress-responsive transcription factors.

Pietrocola F(1), Izzo V, Niso-Santano M, Vacchelli E, Galluzzi L, Maiuri MC,
Kroemer G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U848, F-94805 Villejuif, France; Institut Gustave Roussy, F-94805
Villejuif, France; Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, 
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, F-75006 Paris, France.

Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved process that promotes the lysosomal
degradation of intracellular components including organelles and portions of the 
cytoplasm. Besides operating as a quality control mechanism in steady-state
conditions, autophagy is upregulated in response to a variety of homeostatic
perturbations. In this setting, autophagy mediates prominent cytoprotective
effects as it sustains energetic homeostasis and contributes to the removal of
cytotoxic stimuli, thus orchestrating a cell-wide, multipronged adaptive response
to stress. In line with the critical role of autophagy in health and disease,
defects in the autophagic machinery as well as in autophagy-regulatory signaling 
pathways have been associated with multiple human pathologies, including
neurodegenerative disorders, autoimmune conditions and cancer. Accumulating
evidence indicates that the autophagic response to stress may proceed in two
phases. Thus, a rapid increase in the autophagic flux, which occurs within
minutes or hours of exposure to stressful conditions and is entirely mediated by 
post-translational protein modifications, is generally followed by a delayed and 
protracted autophagic response that relies on the activation of specific
transcriptional programs. Stress-responsive transcription factors including p53, 
NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT3 have recently been shown to play a major role in the regulation
of both these phases of the autophagic response. Here, we will discuss the
molecular mechanisms whereby autophagy is orchestrated by stress-responsive
transcription factors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23726895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Sep;66(9):758-63. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200287. Epub
2013 May 30.

Correlation between the expression of Id-1 and hyperthermia-associated molecules 
in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhao J(1), Wang S, Liu N, Tang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases in Sichuan University, Sichuan, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of inhibitor of differentiation/DNA
binding (Id-1), phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/protein kinase B pathway proteins
and hyperthermia-associated protein and their association with various
clinicopathological factors in oral squamous cell cancer (OSCC), and explore the 
relationship among them in OSCC.
METHODS: Id-1, phosphorylated protein kinase B (p-Akt), phosphorylated glycogen
synthase kinase 3ß (p-GSK3ß) and phosphorylated heat shock factor 1 (p-HSF1)
expression were assessed immunohistochemically in 76 OSCC.
RESULTS: Id-1 (73.8%), p-Akt (65.8%), p-GSK3ß (60.5%) and p-HSF1 (75%) were found
to be overexpressed in most of the oral cancer samples tested, and the
expressions of them are correlated with advanced clinical stage, metastasis and
recurrence (p<0.01), but there is no apparent relationship with gender, age,
differentiation and habits (p>0.05). Survival curves show that the survival of
patients with high Id-1, p-Akt, p-GSK3ß and p-HSF1 expression was significantly
worse than those with low Id-1, p-Akt, p-GSK3ß and p-HSF1 expression (p=0.000).
Id-1 expression was significantly higher in cases with high expression of p-Akt, 
p-GSK3ß and p-HSF1 than in those with low expression (p=0.002, p=0.003, p=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed that there was a positive correlation between
Id-1 expression and the expression of p-Akt, p-GSK3ß and p-HSF1. The inhibition
of Id-1 expression can improve the efficacy of hyperthermia in OSCC.

PMID: 23723304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Brain Res. 2013 Jun 26;1519:105-11. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.04.059. Epub
2013 May 9.

Increased heat shock transcription factor 1 in the cerebellum reverses the
deficiency of Purkinje cells in Alzheimer's disease.

Jiang YQ(1), Wang XL, Cao XH, Ye ZY, Li L, Cai WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050051, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most debilitating neurodegenerative nerve 
diseases, seriously affecting one's ability to carry out daily activities. AD is 
both progressive and incurable, but molecular studies have begun to shed light on
the mechanisms that underlie it. Immunochemical staining showed that cell bodies 
of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum were significantly reduced in AD rats
compared with normal rats. Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) was found to prevent
polyglutamine aggregation in Huntington's disease and spinocerebellar ataxias
(SCAs) and to relieve symptoms in SCAs and Parkinson's disease. Recently,
AD-related phenotypes were found to be suppressed in HSP70 transgenic rats.
However, the effects of other HSPs and the mechanisms of HSP-triggered changes in
AD are unknown. In this study, we found that expression levels of HSP60, -70, and
-90 were downregulated in the cerebella of rats with AD. Furthermore, heat shock 
factor 1 (HSF1), a key transcription factor for the expression of HSP genes, was 
found to be greatly decreased in the cerebella of AD rats. Even more interesting,
injection of lentivirus vector-HSF1 into the cerebella of AD rats significantly
increased HSF1 and HSP expression levels and induced an increase in the number of
Purkinje cell bodies. Our findings provide novel evidence that low expression of 
HSPs in AD rats is dependent on the low expression of HSF1, and increased
expression of HSF1 contributes to the reversal of cerebellar Purkinje cell
deficiency in AD. Therefore, increasing HSF1 expression is a potential new
strategy for the treatment of AD.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23665061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Aug 15;305(4):C406-13. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00084.2013. Epub 2013 May 1.

Skeletal muscle interleukin-6 regulation in hyperthermia.

Welc SS(1), Judge AR, Clanton TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, College of Health and Human 
Performance, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2013 Aug 15;305(4):C375-6.

We previously reported that IL-6 production is acutely elevated in skeletal
muscles exposed to =41°C, but the regulatory pathways are poorly understood. The 
present study characterizes the heat-induced transcriptional control of IL-6 in
C2C12 muscle fibers. Hyperthermia exposure (42°C for 1 h) induced transcription
from an IL-6 promoter-luciferase reporter plasmid. Heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1), a
principal mediator of the heat shock response, was then tested for its role in
IL-6 regulation. Overexpression of a constitutively active HSF-1 construct
increased basal (37°C) promoter activity, whereas overexpression of a dominant
negative HSF-1 reduced IL-6 promoter activity during basal and hyperthermia
conditions. Since hyperthermia also induces stress-activated protein kinase
(SAPK) signaling, we tested whether mutation of a transcription site downstream
of SAPK, (i.e., activator protein-1, AP-1) influences IL-6 transcription in
hyperthermia. The mutation had no effect on baseline reporter activity but
completely inhibited heat-induced activity. We then tested whether
pharmacologically induced states of protein stress, characteristic of cellular
responses to hyperthermia and known to induce SAPKs and HSF-1, would induce IL-6 
production in the absence of heat. The proteasome was inhibited with MG-132 in
one set of experiments, and the unfolded protein response was stimulated with
dithiothreitol, thapsigargin, tunicamycin, or castanospermine in other
experiments. All treatments stimulated IL-6 protein secretion in the absence of
hyperthermia. These studies demonstrate that IL-6 regulation in hyperthermia is
directly controlled by HSF-1 and AP-1 signaling and that the IL-6 response in
C2C12 myotubes is sensitive to categories of protein stress that reflect
accumulation of damaged or unfolded proteins.

PMID: 23636453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Jul;32(1):3-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1367. Epub 2013 May 1.

Targeting heat shock transcription factor 1 for novel hyperthermia therapy
(review).

Tabuchi Y(1), Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics Research, Life Science Research Center,
University of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan. ytabu@cts.u-toyama.ac.jp

Hyperthermia (HT) has shown promising antitumor effects against various types of 
malignant tumors, and its pleiotropic effects support its combined use with
radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy. However, HT is rendered less effective by the
acquisition of thermoresistance in tumors, which arises through the elevation of 
heat shock proteins (HSPs) or other tumor responses. In mammals, the induction of
HSPs is principally regulated at the transcriptional level by the activation of
heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). This transactivator has been shown to
be abundantly expressed in a wide variety of tumors in humans. In addition, HSF1 
participates in the initiation, proliferation and maintenance of tumors. Of note,
HSF1 silencing has been shown to prevent the progression of tumors and to enhance
their sensitivity to HT. Here, we review the physiological and pathological roles
of HSF1 in cancer cells, and discuss its potential as a therapeutic target for HT
therapy.

PMID: 23636216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Oncotarget. 2013 Jun;4(6):816-29.

Targeting HSF1 sensitizes cancer cells to HSP90 inhibition.

Chen Y(1), Chen J, Loo A, Jaeger S, Bagdasarian L, Yu J, Chung F, Korn J, Ruddy
D, Guo R, McLaughlin ME, Feng F, Zhu P, Stegmeier F, Pagliarini R, Porter D, Zhou
W.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.

The molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) facilitates the appropriate
folding of various oncogenic proteins and is necessary for the survival of some
cancer cells. HSP90 is therefore an attractive drug target, but the efficacy of
HSP90 inhibitor may be limited by HSP90 inhibition induced feedback mechanisms.
Through pooled RNA interference screens, we identified that heat shock factor
1(HSF1) is a sensitizer of HSP90 inhibitor. A striking combinational effect was
observed when HSF1 knockdown plus with HSP90 inhibitors treatment in various
cancer cell lines and tumor mouse models. Interestingly, HSF1 is highly expressed
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patient samples and HCC is sensitive to
combinational treatment, indicating a potential indication for the combinational 
treatment. To understand the mechanism of the combinational effect, we identified
that a HSF1-target gene DEDD2 is involved in attenuating the effect of HSP90
inhibitors. Thus, the transcriptional activities of HSF1 induced by HSP90
inhibitors provide a feedback mechanism of limiting the HSP90 inhibitor's
activity, and targeting HSF1 may provide a new avenue to enhance HSP90 inhibitors
activity in human cancers.

PMCID: PMC3757240
PMID: 23615731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. ACS Chem Biol. 2013 Jul 19;8(7):1460-8. doi: 10.1021/cb400017h. Epub 2013 May 1.

Chemical induction of Hsp70 reduces a-synuclein aggregation in neuroglioma cells.

Kilpatrick K(1), Novoa JA, Hancock T, Guerriero CJ, Wipf P, Brodsky JL, Segatori 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, <U+2225>Bioengineering, and
<U+22A5>Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University , Houston, Texas 77005, United
States.

Misfolding and aggregation of a-synuclein (a-syn) is associated with the
development of a number of neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's
disease (PD). Analyses of post mortem tissues revealed the presence of molecular 
chaperones within a-syn aggregates, suggesting that chaperones play a role in
a-syn misfolding and aggregation. In fact, inhibition of chaperone activity
aggravates a-syn toxicity, and the overexpression of chaperones, particularly
70-kDa heat shock protein (Hsp70), protects against a-syn-induced toxicity. In
this study, we investigated the effect of carbenoxolone (CBX), a glycyrrhizic
acid derivative previously reported to upregulate Hsp70, in human neuroglioma
cells overexpressing a-syn. We report that CBX treatment lowers a-syn aggregation
and prevents a-syn-induced cytotoxicity. We demonstrate further that Hsp70
induction by CBX arises from activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). The Hsp70 
inhibitor MAL3-101 and the Hsp70 enhancer 115-7c led to an increase or decrease
in a-syn aggregation, respectively, in agreement with these findings. In summary,
this study provides a proof-of-principle demonstration that chemical modulation
of the Hsp70 machine is a promising strategy to prevent a-syn aggregation.

PMCID: PMC4532326
PMID: 23594135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochimie. 2013 Jul;95(7):1432-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.03.016. Epub 2013
Apr 12.

Stress-induced transcription of regulator of G protein signaling 2 (RGS2) by heat
shock transcription factor HSF1.

Ota A(1), Sawai M, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa 920-0942, Ishikawa, Japan.

Expression of the RGS2 gene modulates RGS2 activity toward G protein-coupled
signaling in diverse cellular processes. In this study, RGS2 transcription was
induced in HeLa and rat aorta smooth muscle cells by exposure to febrile
temperatures or proteotoxic stress. The promoter region of RGS2 contained a
binding sequence of HSF1, which is an activator of the heat shock protein gene,
and was inducibly bound by stress-activated HSF1. A single nucleotide change
identified in the RGS2 promoter of hypertensive patients abolished HSF1-regulated
expression of RGS2, suggesting that activated HSF1 is involved in blood pressure 
regulation via modulation of RGS2 expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23587726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cell Signal. 2013 Jul;25(7):1635-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.04.001. Epub
2013 Apr 12.

TRAIL regulates collagen production through HSF1-dependent Hsp47 expression in
activated hepatic stellate cells.

Park SJ(1), Sohn HY, Park SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National
Institute of Health, Chungcheongbuk-do 363-951, Korea.

Hsp47 is a collagen-specific molecular chaperone, whose activity has been
implicated in liver fibrosis. In this study, we showed that TRAIL treatment
inhibited Hsp47 expression in dose- and time-dependent manners, subsequently
leading to the decrease of collagen production in activated human hepatic
stellate LX-2 cells. Overexpression of Hsp47 in LX-2 cells acquired resistance
for TRAIL-induced collagen reduction and conversely, siRNA suppression of Hsp47
enhanced the decrease of collagen production due to TRAIL treatment. Moreover, we
found that Hsp47 expression was under the transcriptional control of heat shock
factor (HSF) 1 which is highly located on nucleus in activated human hepatic
stellate LX-2 cells. Treatment of LX-2 cells with TRAIL decreased the active
trimer formation of HSF1, increased the dephosphorylation of HSF1 (Ser(230)), and
enhanced the translocation of HSF1 into cytosol. The accumulated HSF1 in cytosol 
led to downregulation of Hsp47 expression, resulting in the reduction of collagen
production. Consistently, HSF1 silencing by siRNA prevented Hsp47 induction and
subsequent collagen production, whereas overexpression of HSF1 restored the
expression level of Hsp47 as well as collagen production in response to TRAIL
treatment in LX-2 cells. Taken together, our data suggested that TRAIL induced
HSF1 inactivation, consequently leading to the suppression of Hsp47-dependent
collagen production in activated human hepatic stellate cells. Therefore, this
study suggests that TRAIL may be an effective strategy for antifibrotic therapy
in liver fibrosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23587601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 May 1;41(10):5273-89. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt224. Epub 2013 
Apr 12.

Heat shock factor 1 counteracts epigenetic silencing of nuclear transgenes in
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Strenkert D(1), Schmollinger S, Schroda M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg 1,
D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany.

We found previously that the Chlamydomonas HSP70A promoter counteracts
transcriptional silencing of downstream promoters in a transgene setting. To
elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we analyzed chromatin state and transgene
expression in transformants containing HSP70A-RBCS2-ble (AR-ble) constructs
harboring deletions/mutations in the A promoter. We identified histone
modifications at transgenic R promoters indicative for repressive chromatin, i.e.
low levels of histone H3/4 acetylation and H3-lysine 4 trimethylation and high
levels of H3-lysine 9 monomethylation. Transgenic A promoters also harbor lower
levels of active chromatin marks than the native A promoter, but levels were
higher than those at transgenic R promoters. Strikingly, in AR promoter fusions, 
the chromatin state at the A promoter was transferred to R. This effect required 
intact HSE4, HSE1/2 and TATA-box in the A promoter and was mediated by heat shock
factor (HSF1). However, time-course analyses in strains inducibly depleted of
HSF1 revealed that a transcriptionally competent chromatin state alone was not
sufficient for activating the R promoter, but required constitutive HSF1
occupancy at transgenic A. We propose that HSF1 constitutively forms a scaffold
at the transgenic A promoter, presumably containing mediator and TFIID, from
which local chromatin remodeling and polymerase II recruitment to downstream
promoters is realized.

PMCID: PMC3664811
PMID: 23585280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Reprod Domest Anim. 2013 Oct;48(5):858-65. doi: 10.1111/rda.12175. Epub 2013 Apr 
15.

Effect of physiologically relevant heat shock on development, apoptosis and
expression of some genes in buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) embryos produced in vitro.

Yadav A(1), Singh KP, Singh MK, Saini N, Palta P, Manik RS, Singla SK, Upadhyay
RC, Chauhan MS.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Lab, Animal Biotechnology Centre.

For investigating the effects of physiologically relevant heat shock, buffalo
oocytes/embryos were cultured at 38.5°C (control) or were exposed to 39.5°C
(Group II) or 40.5°C (Group III) for 2 h once every day throughout in vitro
maturation (IVM), fertilization (IVF) and culture (IVC). Percentage of oocytes
that developed to 8-cell, 16-cell or blastocyst stage was lower (p < 0.05) and
the number of apoptotic nuclei was higher (p < 0.05) for Group III > Group
II > controls. At both 8-16-cell and blastocyst stages, relative mRNA abundance
of stress-related genes HSP 70.1 and HSP 70.2 and pro-apoptotic genes CASPASE-3, 
BID and BAX was higher (p < 0.05) in Groups III and II than that in controls with
the exception of stress-related gene HSF1. Expression level of anti-apoptotic
genes BCL-XL and MCL-1 was also higher (p < 0.05) in Groups III and II than that 
in controls at both 8-16-cell and blastocyst stages. Among the genes related to
embryonic development, at 8-16-cell stage, the expression level of GDF9 was
higher (p < 0.05) in Group III than that in controls, whereas that of GLUT1, ZAR1
and BMP15 was not significantly different among the three groups. At the
blastocyst stage, relative mRNA abundance of GLUT1 and GDF9 was higher (p < 0.05)
in Group II than that in controls, whereas that of ZAR-1 and BMP15 was not
affected. The results of this study demonstrate that exposure of buffalo oocytes 
and embryos to elevated temperatures for duration of time that is physiologically
relevant severely compromises their developmental competence, increases apoptosis
and affects stress-, apoptosis- and development-related genes.

© 2013 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 23581430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep;1829(9):930-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.03.011. 
Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Evolutionarily conserved domain of heat shock transcription factor negatively
regulates oligomerization and DNA binding.

Ota A(1), Enoki Y, Yamamoto N, Sawai M, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) regulates the expression of genes encoding 
molecular chaperones and stress-responsive proteins. Conversion of HSF from a
monomer to a homotrimer or heterotrimer is essential for its binding to heat
shock elements (HSEs) comprised of inverted repeats of the pentamer nGAAn. Here, 
we constructed various human HSF1 derivatives and analyzed their transcriptional 
activity through the continuously and discontinuously arranged nGAAn units. We
identified a short stretch of amino acids that inhibits the activation ability of
HSF1, especially through discontinuous HSEs. This stretch is conserved in HSFs of
various organisms, interacts with the hydrophobic repeat regions that mediate HSF
oligomerization, and impedes homotrimer formation and DNA binding. This conserved
domain plays an important role in maintaining HSF in an inactive monomeric form.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Apoptosis. 2013 Aug;18(8):980-97. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0844-4.

Vinblastine-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells is mediated by Ras homologous A
protein (Rho A) via mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial-dependent mechanisms.

Selimovic D(1), Badura HE, El-Khattouti A, Soell M, Porzig BB, Spernger A,
Ghanjati F, Santourlidis S, Haikel Y, Hassan M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U 977, Faculty of
Medicine and Dental Faculty, 11 Rue Humann, 67000 Strasbourg, France.

Despite the availability of melanoma treatment at the primary site, the
recurrence of local melanoma can metastasize to any distant organ. Currently, the
available therapies for the treatment of metastatic melanoma are of limited
benefit. Thus, the functional analysis of conventional therapies may help to
improve their efficiency in the treatment of metastatic melanoma. In the present 
study, the exposure of melanoma cells to vinblastine was found to trigger
apoptosis as evidenced by the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, the
release of both cytochrome c and apoptosis inducing factor, activation of
caspase-9 and 3, and cleavage of Poly (ADP-ribose)-Polymerase. Also, vinblastine 
enhances the phosphorylation of Ras homologous protein A, the accumulation of
reactive oxygen species, the release of intracellular Ca(2+), as well as the
activation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1, c-jun-N-terminal kinase, p38,
inhibitor of kappaBa (I<U+03BA>Ba) kinase, and inositol requiring enzyme 1a. In
addition, vinblastine induces the DNA-binding activities of the transcription
factor NF-<U+03BA>B, HSF1, AP-1, and ATF-2, together with the expression of HSP70 and
Bax proteins. Moreover, inhibitory experiments addressed a central role for Rho A
in the regulation of vinblastine-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells via
mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial-dependent mechanisms. In conclusion, the
present study addresses for the first time a central role for Rho A in the
modulation of vinblastine-induced apoptosis of melanoma cells and thereby
provides an insight into the molecular action of vinblastine in melanoma
treatment.

PMID: 23564313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nucleic Acid Ther. 2013 Jun;23(3):238-42. doi: 10.1089/nat.2012.0410. Epub 2013
Apr 3.

A systematic study of the features critical for designing a high avidity
multivalent aptamer.

Zhao X(1), Lis JT, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York, USA.

Macromolecular interactions are central to the regulation and execution of many
key biological processes, and therefore, they are attractive targets for drug
discovery. Previously, we identified an RNA aptamer for the heat shock factor
(HSF1), which is capable of interfering with the binding of HSF1 to its cognate
DNA elements. Here we report the significant enhancement of avidity through
dimerization of this aptamer. In particular, we describe the effect of 2 factors 
in designing a multivalent aptamer: the distance between active subunits and the 
flexibility of the linkage.

PMCID: PMC3660072
PMID: 23550551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jun;29(6):2255-60. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2372. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Quantum dot imaging for HSP70 and HSF-1 kinetics in SCC-25 cells with or without 
leucine deprivation following heat shock.

Chen J(1), Pan J, Zhao J, Qiu X, Zheng J, Wang Z, Huang Y, Chu H.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Stomatological Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510280, PR China.

The aim of this study was to develop a quantum dot-based approach for heat shock 
protein 70 (HSP70) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1) kinetics following heat shock,
and to discover approaches to thermotherapy based on disrupting the effect of
activation of HSF-1 and the accumulation of HSP70 by leucine deprivation. SCC-25 
cells cultured with limiting leucine or normal leucine were stressed at 42°C for 
30 min, and were cultured for 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 h, respectively. The expression
of HSP70 and HSF-1 was observed using confocal laser microscopy and
semi-quantitative analysis was performed by Image-Pro Plus. At 6 h after heating,
HSF-1 in cells cultured with normal leucine was activated and translocated from
the cytosol to the nucleus, and the synthesis of HSP70 reached the maximum value 
and had a tendency to gather in the nucleus. However, in cells cultured with
limiting leucine, HSF-1 activity decreased and accumulation of HSP70 was not
found. Leucine deprivation results in the inactivation of HSF-1 leading to slight
accumulation of HSP70 and no tendency to gather in the nucleus. Thus, HSF-1 may
serve as a novel therapeutic target in the treatment of oral cancer.

PMID: 23546225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Gene. 2013 Jun 15;522(2):184-91. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.090. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

Heavy metal response of the heat shock protein 70 gene is mediated by duplicated 
heat shock elements and heat shock factor 1.

Koizumi S(1), Suzuki K, Yamaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research Planning and Coordination, National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health, 6-21-1, Nagao, Tama-ku, Kawasaki 214-8585, Japan.
koizumi@h.jniosh.go.jp

Heavy metals induce transcription of a number of mammalian genes, but in most
cases the mechanism of induction has not been well characterized. The human heat 
shock protein 70 gene (hsp70) is activated by several heavy metals such as Cd and
Zn, and the heat shock element (HSE) has been proposed to mediate metal response 
by previous studies. However, it was observed that the lack of further upstream
sequences rendered the hsp70 promoter unresponsive to metals. A detailed deletion
analysis of the promoter revealed that the distal HSE-like sequence (dHSE) is
required for heavy metal response. A supershift assay showed that the heat shock 
factor 1 (HSF1) recognized dHSE, as well as the proximal HSE (pHSE). An hsp70
promoter variant with a dHSE mutation that blocks HSF1 binding completely lost
metal response, demonstrating that the HSF1/dHSE interaction is crucial. Another 
promoter variant with a similar pHSE mutation partially lost metal response,
indicating that both HSEs are required for full activity. Knockdown of HSF1
dramatically reduced the metal response of hsp70, demonstrating its essential
role. Furthermore, a reporter gene regulated by the human hsp70 promoter, which
lacked metal response in HSF1-null mouse cells, acquired the response upon
over-expression of a recombinant human HSF1. These results demonstrate that the
duplicated HSEs and HSF1 constitute the mechanism for the heavy metal response of
hsp70, which is distinct from the known metal regulatory system for the
metallothionein genes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Int J Biol Macromol. 2013 Aug;59:105-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2013.03.053.
Epub 2013 Mar 26.

Mechanical stretch changes coronary artery fibroblasts function by upregulating
HSF1 protein expression.

Li J(1), Zhang Y, Cui L, Wang J, Pang X, Lai Y, Yao Y, Liu X, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200120, China. lxb70@hotmail.com

The study is designed to investigate effect of mechanical stretch on the function
of fibroblast cells. Human coronary artery fibroblasts were cultured. They were
divided into two groups: stretch group (stretch for 24h) and no-stretch group
(did not stretch). ELISA analysis was used for detection of collagen secretion.
CCK-8 method was used for detection of cells proliferation. RT-PCR method was
used for detection of MMP, TIMP, IL-6, alpha-SMA, HSF1 and HSP70 mRNA expression.
Western-blotting method was used for detection of HSF1 protein expression.
Results showed that cells proliferation in stretch group was stronger than that
in no-stretch group. Hydroxyproline secretion in stretch group was more than that
in no-stretch group. MMP-9/TIMP, alpha-SMA, IL-6, HSF1 and HSP70 in stretch group
was higher than those in no-stretch group. Western-blotting analysis showed that 
HSF1 protein expression was upregulated in stretch group. It can be concluded
that mechanical stretch changed human coronary artery fibroblasts cells
proliferation, collagen formation, the secretion of inflammatory factor possibly 
by upregulating HSF1 protein expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58641. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058641. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

Non-specific protein modifications by a phytochemical induce heat shock response 
for self-defense.

Ohnishi K(1), Ohkura S, Nakahata E, Ishisaka A, Kawai Y, Terao J, Mori T, Ishii
T, Nakayama T, Kioka N, Matsumoto S, Ikeda Y, Akiyama M, Irie K, Murakami A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Food Science and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Accumulated evidence shows that some phytochemicals provide beneficial effects
for human health. Recently, a number of mechanistic studies have revealed that
direct interactions between phytochemicals and functional proteins play
significant roles in exhibiting their bioactivities. However, their binding
selectivities to biological molecules are considered to be lower due to their
small and simple structures. In this study, we found that zerumbone, a bioactive 
sesquiterpene, binds to numerous proteins with little selectivity. Similar to
heat-denatured proteins, zerumbone-modified proteins were recognized by heat
shock protein 90, a constitutive molecular chaperone, leading to heat shock
factor 1-dependent heat shock protein induction in hepa1c1c7 mouse hepatoma
cells. Furthermore, oral administration of this phytochemical up-regulated heat
shock protein expressions in the livers of Sprague-Dawley rats. Interestingly,
pretreatment with zerumbone conferred a thermoresistant phenotype to hepa1c1c7
cells as well as to the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. It is also important to 
note that several phytochemicals with higher hydrophobicity or electrophilicity, 
including phenethyl isothiocyanate and curcumin, markedly induced heat shock
proteins, whereas most of the tested nutrients did not. These results suggest
that non-specific protein modifications by xenobiotic phytochemicals cause mild
proteostress, thereby inducing heat shock response and leading to potentiation of
protein quality control systems. We considered these bioactivities to be
xenohormesis, an adaptation mechanism against xenobiotic chemical stresses. Heat 
shock response by phytochemicals may be a fundamental mechanism underlying their 
various bioactivities.

PMCID: PMC3594166
PMID: 23536805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:471659. doi: 10.1155/2013/471659.
Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Aqueous Extract of Paeonia lactiflora and Paeoniflorin as Aggregation Reducers
Targeting Chaperones in Cell Models of Spinocerebellar Ataxia 3.

Chang KH(1), Chen WL, Lee LC, Lin CH, Kung PJ, Lin TH, Wu YC, Wu YR, Chen YC,
Lee-Chen GJ, Chen CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University
College of Medicine, Taipei 10507, Taiwan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) types 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, and 17 as well as Huntington's 
disease are a group of neurodegenerative disorders caused by expanded CAG repeats
encoding a long polyglutamine (polyQ) tract in the respective proteins. Evidence 
has shown that the accumulation of intranuclear and cytoplasmic misfolded polyQ
proteins leads to apoptosis and cell death. Thus suppression of aggregate
formation is expected to inhibit a wide range of downstream pathogenic events in 
polyQ diseases. In this study, we established a high-throughput aggregation
screening system using 293 ATXN3/Q75-GFP cells and applied this system to test
the aqueous extract of Paeonia lactiflora (P. lactiflora) and its constituents.
We found that the aggregation can be significantly prohibited by P. lactiflora
and its active compound paeoniflorin. Meanwhile, P. lactiflora and paeoniflorin
upregulated HSF1 and HSP70 chaperones in the same cell models. Both of them
further reduced the aggregation in neuronal differentiated SH-SY5Y ATXN3/Q75-GFP 
cells. Our results demonstrate how P. lactiflora and paeoniflorin are likely to
work on polyQ-aggregation reduction and provide insight into the possible working
mechanism of P. lactiflora in SCA3. We anticipate our paper to be a starting
point for screening more potential herbs for the treatment of SCA3 and other
polyQ diseases.

PMCID: PMC3596917
PMID: 23533486  [PubMed]


355. Brain Behav. 2013 Mar;3(2):114-33. doi: 10.1002/brb3.125. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Brief alcohol exposure alters transcription in astrocytes via the heat shock
pathway.

Pignataro L(1), Varodayan FP, Tannenholz LE, Protiva P, Harrison NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology The College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University 630 West 168th St., New York, NY, 10032.

Astrocytes are critical for maintaining homeostasis in the central nervous system
(CNS), and also participate in the genomic response of the brain to drugs of
abuse, including alcohol. In this study, we investigated ethanol regulation of
gene expression in astrocytes. A microarray screen revealed that a brief exposure
of cortical astrocytes to ethanol increased the expression of a large number of
genes. Among the alcohol-responsive genes (ARGs) are glial-specific immune
response genes, as well as genes involved in the regulation of transcription,
cell proliferation, and differentiation, and genes of the cytoskeleton and
extracellular matrix. Genes involved in metabolism were also upregulated by
alcohol exposure, including genes associated with oxidoreductase activity,
insulin-like growth factor signaling, acetyl-CoA, and lipid metabolism. Previous 
microarray studies performed on ethanol-treated hepatocyte cultures and mouse
liver tissue revealed the induction of almost identical classes of genes to those
identified in our microarray experiments, suggesting that alcohol induces similar
signaling mechanisms in the brain and liver. We found that acute ethanol exposure
activated heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in astrocytes, as demonstrated by the
translocation of this transcription factor to the nucleus and the induction of a 
family of known HSF1-dependent genes, the heat shock proteins (Hsps).
Transfection of a constitutively transcriptionally active Hsf1 construct into
astrocytes induced many of the ARGs identified in our microarray study supporting
the hypothesis that HSF1 transcriptional activity, as part of the heat shock
cascade, may mediate the ethanol induction of these genes. These data indicate
that acute ethanol exposure alters gene expression in astrocytes, in part via the
activation of HSF1 and the heat shock cascade.

PMCID: PMC3607153
PMID: 23533150  [PubMed]


356. Nutr Cancer. 2013;65(3):480-93. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2013.767366.

Targeting heat shock proteins by phenethyl isothiocyanate results in cell-cycle
arrest and apoptosis of human breast cancer cells.

Sarkars R(1), Mukherjee S, Roy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis & Toxicology, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, Kolkata, India.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are chaperones for several client proteins involved in
transcriptional regulation, signal transduction, and cell cycle control. HSPs
(27, 70, and 90) are abundantly expressed in a wide range of cancers and are
transcriptionally regulated by heat shock factor (HSF1). Most of the synthetic
HSP inhibitors exhibit toxicity, therefore, searching for inhibitors with limited
or no toxicity will be of help. The objective of the present study was to
determine the effect of natural isothiocyanate (phenethyl isothiocyanate; PEITC) 
on different HSPs (27, 70, and 90) and HSF1 in 2 breast cancer cell lines, namely
breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 (with wild type p53) and highly metastatic breast
cancer cell MDA-MB-231 (with mutated p53). PEITC significantly inhibited the
expression of HSPs (particularly HSP 90) and HSF1. Molecular consequences due to 
HSP inhibition were downregulation of cell-cycle regulatory proteins like Cyclin 
B1, CDK1, Cdc25C, PLK-1, and upregulation of p21 irrespective of p53 status.
These modulations were accompanied by cell-cycle arrest at G2/M phase and
apoptosis by activation of caspases 3 and 9. PEITC therefore may be regarded as a
potent HSP inhibitor and an antitumor agent in the treatment of breast cancer.

PMID: 23530648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Mar 21;4:e553. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.69.

Decreased vitamin B12 availability induces ER stress through impaired
SIRT1-deacetylation of HSF1.

Ghemrawi R(1), Pooya S, Lorentz S, Gauchotte G, Arnold C, Gueant JL,
Battaglia-Hsu SF.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U954, Nutrition Génétique et Exposition aux Risques Environnementaux,
Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lorraine, Vanduvre les Nancy, France.

Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is a key determinant of S-adenosyl methionine
(SAM)-dependent epigenomic cellular regulations related to
methylation/acetylation and its deficiency produces neurodegenerative disorders
by elusive mechanisms. Sirtuin 1 deacetylase (SIRT1) triggers cell response to
nutritional stress through endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Recently, we have
established a N1E115 dopaminergic cell model by stable expression of a
transcobalamin-oleosin chimera (TO), which impairs cellular availability of
vitamin B12, decreases methionine synthase activity and SAM level, and reduces
cell proliferation. In contrast, oleosin-transcobalamin chimera (OT) does not
modify the phenotype of transfected cells. Presently, the impaired cellular
availability of vitamin B12 in TO cells activated irreversible ER stress
pathways, with increased P-eIF-2a, P-PERK, P-IRE1a, ATF6, ATF4, decreased
chaperon proteins and increased pro-apoptotic markers, CHOP and cleaved caspase
3, through reduced SIRT1 expression and consequently greater acetylation of
heat-shock factor protein 1 (HSF1). Adding either B12, SIRT1, or HSF1 activators 
as well as overexpressing SIRT1 or HSF1 dramatically reduced the activation of ER
stress pathways in TO cells. Conversely, impairing SIRT1 and HSF1 by siRNA,
expressing a dominant negative form of HSF1, or adding a SIRT1 inhibitor led to
B12-dependent ER stress in OT cells. Addition of B12 abolished the activation of 
stress transducers and apoptosis, and increased the expression of protein
chaperons in OT cells subjected to thapsigargin, a strong ER stress stimulator.
AdoX, an inhibitor of methyltransferase activities, produced similar effects than
decreased B12 availability on SIRT1 and ER stress by a mechanism related to
increased expression of hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1). Taken together, these
data show that cellular vitamin B12 has a strong modulating influence on ER
stress in N1E115 dopaminergic cells. The impaired cellular availability in
vitamin B12 induces irreversible ER stress by greater acetylation of HSF1 through
decreased SIRT1 expression, whereas adding vitamin B12 produces protective
effects in cells subjected to ER stress stimulation.

PMCID: PMC3615730
PMID: 23519122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Cells. 2013 Mar;35(3):210-8. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-2258-0. Epub 2013 Feb
18.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae KNU5377 stress response during high-temperature ethanol 
fermentation.

Kim IS(1), Kim YS, Kim H, Jin I, Yoon HS.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Bio-resource Research Center, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Korea.

Fuel ethanol production is far more costly to produce than fossil fuels. There
are a number of approaches to cost-effective fuel ethanol production from
biomass. We characterized stress response of thermotolerant Saccharomyces
cerevisiae KNU5377 during glucose-based batch fermentation at high temperature
(40°C). S. cerevisiae KNU5377 (KNU5377) transcription factors (Hsf1, Msn2/4, and 
Yap1), metabolic enzymes (hexokinase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and alcohol
dehydrogenase), antioxidant enzymes (thioredoxin 3, thioredoxin reductase, and
porin), and molecular chaperones and its cofactors (Hsp104, Hsp82, Hsp60, Hsp42, 
Hsp30, Hsp26, Cpr1, Sti1, and Zpr1) are upregulated during fermentation, in
comparison to S. cerevisiae S288C (S288C). Expression of
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase increased significantly in KNU5377
cells. In addition, cellular hydroperoxide and protein oxidation, particularly
lipid peroxidation of triosephosphate isomerase, was lower in KNU5377 than in
S288C. Thus, KNU5377 activates various cell rescue proteins through transcription
activators, improving tolerance and increasing alcohol yield by rapidly
responding to fermentation stress through redox homeostasis and proteostasis.

PMCID: PMC3887908
PMID: 23512334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Aug;61:18-25. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.03.009.
Epub 2013 Mar 17.

Regulatory role of NADPH oxidase in glycated LDL-induced upregulation of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and heat shock factor-1 in mouse embryo
fibroblasts and diabetic mice.

Zhao R(1), Le K(2), Moghadasian MH(2), Shen GX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada MB
R3E 3P4. (2)Department of Human Nutritional Sciences, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Canada MB R3E 3P4. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada MB R3E 3P4. Electronic address: gshen@ms.umanitoba.ca.

Cardiovascular disease is the predominant cause of death in diabetic patients.
Fibroblasts are one of the major types of cells in the heart or vascular wall.
Increased levels of glycated low-density lipoprotein (glyLDL) were detected in
diabetic patients. Previous studies in our group demonstrated that oxidized LDL
increased the amounts of NADPH oxidase (NOX), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1), and heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) in fibroblasts. This study examined the
expression of NOX, PAI-1, and HSF1 in glyLDL-treated wild-type or HSF1-deficient 
mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) and in leptin receptor-knockout (db/db) diabetic 
mice. Treatment with physiologically relevant levels of glyLDL increased
superoxide and H2O2 release and the levels of NOX4 and p22phox (an essential
component of multiple NOX complexes) in wild-type or HSF1-deficient MEFs. The
levels of HSF1 and PAI-1 were increased by glyLDL in wild-type MEFs, but not in
HSF1-deficient MEFs. Diphenyleneiodonium (a nonspecific NOX inhibitor) or small
interfering RNA for p22phox prevented glyLDL-induced increases in the levels of
NOX4, HSF1, or PAI-1 in MEFs. The amounts of NOX4, HSF1, and PAI-1 were elevated 
in hearts of db/db diabetic mice compared to wild-type mice. The results suggest 
that glyLDL increased the abundance of NOX4 or p22phox via an HSF1-independent
pathway, but that of PAI-1 via an HSF1-dependent manner. NOX4 plays a crucial
role in glyLDL-induced expression of HSF1 and PAI-1 in mouse fibroblasts.
Increased expression of NOX4, HSF1, and PAI-1 was detected in cardiovascular
tissue of diabetic mice.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23511120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochem J. 2013 Jun 1;452(2):321-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130098.

Heat-shock factor 1 both positively and negatively affects cellular clonogenic
growth depending on p53 status.

Nguyen CH(1), Lang BJ, Chai RC, Vieusseux JL, Kouspou MM, Price JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

HSF1 (heat-shock factor 1) is the master regulator of the heat-shock response;
however, it is also activated by cancer-associated stresses and supports cellular
transformation and cancer progression. We examined the role of HSF1 in relation
to cancer cell clonogenicity, an important attribute of cancer cells. Ectopic
expression or HSF1 knockdown demonstrated that HSF1 positively regulated cancer
cell clonogenic growth. Furthermore, knockdown of mutant p53 indicated that HSF1 
actions were mediated via a mutant p53-dependent mechanism. To examine this
relationship more specifically, we ectopically co-expressed mutant p53(R273H) and
HSF1 in the human mammary epithelial cell line MCF10A. Surprisingly, within this 
cellular context, HSF1 inhibited clonogenicity. However, upon specific knockdown 
of endogenous wild-type p53, leaving mutant p53(R273H) expression intact, HSF1
was observed to greatly enhance clonogenic growth of the cells, indicating that
HSF1 suppressed clonogenicity via wild-type p53. To confirm this we ectopically
expressed HSF1 in non-transformed and H-Ras(V12)-transformed MCF10A cells. As
expected, HSF1 significantly reduced clonogenicity, altering wild-type p53 target
gene expression levels consistent with a role of HSF1 increasing wild-type p53
activity. In support of this finding, knockdown of wild-type p53 negated the
inhibitory effects of HSF1 expression. We thus show that HSF1 can affect
clonogenic growth in a p53 context-dependent manner, and can act via both mutant 
and wild-type p53 to bring about divergent effects upon clonogenicity. These
findings have important implications for our understanding of HSF1's divergent
roles in cancer cell growth and survival as well as its disparate effect on
mutant and wild-type p53.

PMID: 23510323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2013 Apr 1;23(7):1935-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2013.01.089. 
Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Recent developments in targeting protein misfolding diseases.

Denny RA(1), Gavrin LK, Saiah E.

Author information: 
(1)BioTherapeutics Chemistry, Pfizer Worldwide Medicinal Chemistry, 200
CambridgePark Drive, Cambridge, MA 02140, USA.

Protein misfolding is an emerging field that crosses multiple therapeutic areas
and causes many serious diseases. As the biological pathways of protein
misfolding become more clearly elucidated, small molecule approaches in this
arena are gaining increased attention. This manuscript will survey current small 
molecules from the literature that are known to modulate misfolding,
stabilization or proteostasis. Specifically, the following targets and approaches
will be discussed: CFTR, glucocerebrosidase, modulation of toxic oligomers, serum
amyloid P (SAP) sections and HSF1 activators.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23454013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):12197-213. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.449553. Epub
2013 Feb 27.

Mediator recruitment to heat shock genes requires dual Hsf1 activation domains
and mediator tail subunits Med15 and Med16.

Kim S(1), Gross DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130-3932, USA.

The evolutionarily conserved Mediator complex is central to the regulation of
gene transcription in eukaryotes because it serves as a physical and functional
interface between upstream regulators and the Pol II transcriptional machinery.
Nonetheless, its role appears to be context-dependent, and the detailed mechanism
by which it governs the expression of most genes remains unknown. Here we
investigate Mediator involvement in HSP (heat shock protein) gene regulation in
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We find that in response to thermal upshift, 
subunits representative of each of the four Mediator modules (Head, Middle, Tail,
and Kinase) are rapidly, robustly, and selectively recruited to the promoter
regions of HSP genes. Their residence is transient, returning to near-background 
levels within 90 min. Hsf1 (heat shock factor 1) plays a central role in
recruiting Mediator, as indicated by the fact that truncation of either its N- or
C-terminal activation domain significantly reduces Mediator occupancy, whereas
removal of both activation domains abolishes it. Likewise, ablation of either of 
two Mediator Tail subunits, Med15 or Med16, reduces Mediator recruitment to HSP
promoters, whereas deletion of both abolishes it. Accompanying the loss of
Mediator, recruitment of RNA polymerase II is substantially diminished.
Interestingly, Mediator antagonizes Hsf1 occupancy of non-induced promoters yet
facilitates enhanced Hsf1 association with activated ones. Collectively, our
observations indicate that Hsf1, via its dual activation domains, recruits
holo-Mediator to HSP promoters in response to acute heat stress through
cooperative physical and/or functional interactions with the Tail module.

PMCID: PMC3636903
PMID: 23447536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56085. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056085. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Unraveling complex interplay between heat shock factor 1 and 2 splicing isoforms.

Lecomte S(1), Reverdy L, Le Quément C, Le Masson F, Amon A, Le Goff P, Michel D, 
Christians E, Le Dréan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription, Environment and Cancer group, Institut de Recherche sur la
Santé, l'Environnement et le Travail, Inserm U1085, Université de Rennes 1,
Rennes, France.

Chaperone synthesis in response to proteotoxic stress is dependent on a family of
transcription factors named heat shock factors (HSFs). The two main factors in
this family, HSF1 and HSF2, are co-expressed in numerous tissues where they can
interact and form heterotrimers in response to proteasome inhibition. HSF1 and
HSF2 exhibit two alternative splicing isoforms, called a and ß, which contribute 
to additional complexity in HSF transcriptional regulation, but remain poorly
examined in the literature. In this work, we studied the transcriptional activity
of HSF1 and HSF2 splicing isoforms transfected into immortalized Mouse Embryonic 
Fibroblasts (iMEFs) deleted for both Hsf1 and Hsf2, under normal conditions and
after proteasome inhibition. We found that HSF1a is significantly more active
than the ß isoform after exposure to the proteasome inhibitor MG132. Furthermore,
we clearly established that, while HSF2 had no transcriptional activity by
itself, short ß isoform of HSF2 exerts a negative role on HSF1ß-dependent
transactivation. To further assess the impact of HSF2ß inhibition on HSF1
activity, we developed a mathematical modelling approach which revealed that the 
balance between each HSF isoform in the cell regulated the strength of the
transcriptional response. Moreover, we found that cellular stress such as
proteasome inhibition could regulate the splicing of Hsf2 mRNA. All together, our
results suggest that relative amounts of each HSF1 and HSF2 isoforms
quantitatively determine the cellular level of the proteotoxic stress response.

PMCID: PMC3572029
PMID: 23418516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biochimie. 2013 Jun;95(6):1245-51. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.01.017. Epub 2013
Feb 8.

Activation of the antioxidant response in methionine deprived human cells results
in an HSF1-independent increase in HSPA1A mRNA levels.

Hensen SM(1), Heldens L, van Enckevort CM, van Genesen ST, Pruijn GJ, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, P.O. Box
9101, NL-6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In cells starved for leucine, lysine or glutamine heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is
inactivated and the level of the transcripts of the HSF1 target genes HSPA1A
(Hsp70) and DNAJB1 (Hsp40) drops. We show here that in HEK293 cells deprived of
methionine HSF1 was similarly inactivated but that the level of HSPA1A and DNAJB1
mRNA increased. This increase was also seen in cells expressing a dominant
negative HSF1 mutant (HSF379 or HSF1-K80Q), confirming that the increase is HSF1 
independent. The antioxidant N-acetylcysteine completely inhibited the increase
in HSPA1A and DNAJB1 mRNA levels upon methionine starvation, indicating that this
increase is a response to oxidative stress resulting from a lack of methionine.
Cells starved for methionine contained higher levels of c-Fos and FosB mRNA, but 
knockdown of these transcription factors had no effect on the HSPA1A or DNAJB1
mRNA level. Knockdown of NRF2 mRNA resulted in the inhibition of the increase in 
the HSPA1A mRNA, but not the DNAJB1 mRNA, level in methionine starved cells. We
conclude that methionine deprivation results in both the amino acid deprivation
response and an antioxidant response mediated at least in part by NRF2. This
antioxidant response includes an HSF1 independent increase in the levels of
HSPA1A and DNAJB1 mRNA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23395854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cell Cycle. 2013 Mar 1;12(5):826-36. doi: 10.4161/cc.23723. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Ras-induced ROS upregulation affecting cell proliferation is connected with cell 
type-specific alterations of HSF1/SESN3/p21Cip1/WAF1 pathways.

Zamkova M(1), Khromova N, Kopnin BP, Kopnin P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Russian Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Moscow,
Russia.

Oncogenes of the RAS family regulate many of the cell's activities, including
proliferation, survival and differentiation. Activating mutations in these genes 
are common events for many types of cancer. One of the contradictory points
concerning the biological significance of Ras activation is its dual effect (pro-
or anti-proliferative) on cell reproduction. One of mechanisms by which Ras
proteins influence cell growth is a regulation of intracellular level of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), second messengers affecting variety of cellular processes
including cell proliferation. Recently it was shown that repression of SESN1 and 
SESN3 genes, whose protein products control regeneration of peroxiredoxins, can
play a critical role in Ras-induced ROS upregulation. In the present study we
have found that Ras-induced repression of SESN3 expression and ROS upregulation
is mediated via the modifications of transcriptional activity of HSF1.
Interestingly, mutant Ras overexpression altered the activity of HSF1 in opposite
directions in different cell contexts, in particular in human normal fibroblasts 
and HaCaT immortalized keratinocytes, but these opposite changes caused similar
repression of SESN3 expression followed by elevation of ROS content and
inhibition of cell proliferation in corresponding cell types. The inhibitory
effect on cell proliferation was mediated by upregulation of p21(Cip1/WAF1).
Thus, HSF1/SESN3/ROS/p21(Cip1/WAF1)-mediated deceleration of cell growth may
contribute to cell defense systems protecting the organism from excessive
proliferation of cells that overexpress activated Ras oncoproteins.

PMCID: PMC3610730
PMID: 23388456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 29;288(13):9165-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.422071. Epub 2013
Feb 5.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) controls chemoresistance and autophagy through
transcriptional regulation of autophagy-related protein 7 (ATG7).

Desai S(1), Liu Z, Yao J, Patel N, Chen J, Wu Y, Ahn EE, Fodstad O, Tan M.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a master regulator of heat shock responses, plays an 
important role in tumorigenesis. In this study we demonstrated that HSF1 is
required for chemotherapeutic agent-induced cytoprotective autophagy through
transcriptional up-regulation of autophagy-related gene ATG7. Interestingly, this
is independent of the HSF1 heat shock response function. Treatment of cancer
cells with the FDA-approved chemotherapeutic agent carboplatin induced autophagy 
and growth inhibition, which were significantly increased upon knockdown of HSF1.
Mechanistic studies revealed that HSF1 regulates autophagy by directly binding to
ATG7 promoter and transcriptionally up-regulating its expression. Significantly, 
breast cancer patient sample study revealed that a higher ATG7 expression level
is associated with poor patient survival. This novel finding was further
confirmed by analysis of two independent patient databases, demonstrating a
prognostic value of ATG7. Furthermore, a strong positive correlation was observed
between levels of HSF1 and ATG7 in triple-negative breast cancer patient samples,
thus validating our in vitro findings. This is the first study identifying a
critical role for HSF1 in controlling cytoprotective autophagy through regulation
of ATG7, which is distinct from the HSF1 function in the heat shock response.
This is also the first study demonstrating a prognostic value of ATG7 in breast
cancer patients. These findings strongly argue that combining chemotherapeutic
agents with autophagy inhibition by repressing HSF1/ATG7 axis represents a
promising strategy for future cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3610989
PMID: 23386620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1405. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2417.

Heat shock factor-1 influences pathological lesion distribution of
polyglutamine-induced neurodegeneration.

Kondo N(1), Katsuno M, Adachi H, Minamiyama M, Doi H, Matsumoto S, Miyazaki Y,
Iida M, Tohnai G, Nakatsuji H, Ishigaki S, Fujioka Y, Watanabe H, Tanaka F, Nakai
A, Sobue G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya
466-8550, Japan.

A crucial feature of adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases is accumulation of
abnormal protein in specific brain regions, although the mechanism underlying
this pathological selectivity remains unclear. Heat shock factor-1 is a
transcriptional regulator of heat shock proteins, molecular chaperones that
abrogate neurodegeneration by refolding and solubilizing pathogenic proteins.
Here we show that heat shock factor-1 expression levels are associated with the
accumulation of pathogenic androgen receptor in spinal and bulbar muscular
atrophy, a polyglutamine-induced neurodegenerative disease. In heterozygous heat 
shock factor-1-knockout spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy mice, abnormal
androgen receptor accumulates in the cerebral visual cortex, liver and pituitary,
which are not affected in their genetically unmodified counterparts. The
depletion of heat shock factor-1 also expands the distribution of pathogenic
androgen receptor accumulation in other neuronal regions. Furthermore,
lentiviral-mediated delivery of heat shock factor-1 into the brain of spinal and 
bulbar muscular atrophy mice topically suppresses the pathogenic androgen
receptor accumulation and neuronal atrophy. These results suggest that heat shock
factor-1 influences the pathological lesion selectivity in spinal and bulbar
muscular atrophy.

PMID: 23360996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Fungal Genet Biol. 2013 Apr;53:42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2012.12.002. Epub 2013
Jan 26.

Disruption of heat shock factor 1 reduces the formation of conidia and
thermotolerance in the mycoparasitic fungus Coniothyrium minitans.

Hamid MI(1), Zeng F, Cheng J, Jiang D, Fu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, Hubei Province, PR China.

Coniothyrium minitans is a bio-control agent of Sclerotinia spp., and has the
ability to produce abundant conidia to infect the host fungi. Mediation of heat
shock factors (HSFs) is required to adapt to the acute temperatures, and to
regulate the expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) to function as molecular
chaperones to assist in development, protein folding and stability. A heat shock 
factor 1 (HSF1) gene was identified from a T-DNA insertion mutant that lost the
ability to form conidia in liquid culture as well as on solid media. Null mutants
lacking CmHSF1 were constructed by gene disruption strategy. Mutants lacking
CmHSF1 had reduced in conidial production and displayed decreased tolerance to
heat and other abiotic stresses as compared to the wild type parent.
Over-expression strains could recover faster from heat and abiotic stresses such 
as, ethanol, oxidative or osmotic stresses with or without heat shock. In
over-expression strains, conidial germination was increased, and parasitic
ability on sclerotia of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum was enhanced by 0.42-5.92%
compared to the wild type strain. Increased expression levels in wild strain ZS-1
were observed when the fungus was grown at 37°C or 45°C with other abiotic
stresses. CmHSF1 plays an important role in conidial production, conidial
germination, and tolerance against heat and other abiotic stresses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23357354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cancer Cell. 2013 Feb 11;23(2):228-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.12.007. Epub 2013 
Jan 23.

Englerin A stimulates PKC<U+03B8> to inhibit insulin signaling and to simultaneously
activate HSF1: pharmacologically induced synthetic lethality.

Sourbier C(1), Scroggins BT, Ratnayake R, Prince TL, Lee S, Lee MJ, Nagy PL, Lee 
YH, Trepel JB, Beutler JA, Linehan WM, Neckers L.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The natural product englerin A (EA) binds to and activates protein kinase C-<U+03B8>
(PKC<U+03B8>). EA-dependent activation of PKC<U+03B8> induces an insulin-resistant phenotype,
limiting the access of tumor cells to glucose. At the same time, EA causes
PKC<U+03B8>-mediated phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factor heat
shock factor 1, an inducer of glucose dependence. By promoting glucose addiction,
while simultaneously starving cells of glucose, EA proves to be synthetically
lethal to highly glycolytic tumors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3574184
PMID: 23352416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054364. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

The SIRT1 modulators AROS and DBC1 regulate HSF1 activity and the heat shock
response.

Raynes R(1), Pombier KM, Nguyen K, Brunquell J, Mendez JE, Westerheide SD.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of
Arts and Sciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

The heat shock response, the cellular response to protein damaging stress, is
critical in maintaining proteostasis. The heat shock response is regulated by the
transcription factor HSF1, which is activated upon heat shock and other stresses 
to induce the expression of molecular chaperones. SIRT1 has previously been shown
to activate HSF1 by deacetylating it, leading to increased DNA binding ability.
We have investigated how the heat shock response may be controlled by factors
influencing SIRT1 activity. We found that heat shock results in an increase in
the cellular NAD(+)/NADH ratio and an increase in recruitment of SIRT1 to the
hsp70 promoter. Furthermore, we found that the SIRT1 modulators AROS and DBC1
have an impact on hsp70 transcription, HSF1 acetylation status, and HSF1
recruitment to the hsp70 promoter. Therefore, AROS and DBC1 are now two new
targets available for therapeutic regulation of the heat shock response.

PMCID: PMC3548779
PMID: 23349863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 8;288(10):7158-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.436758. Epub 2013 
Jan 23.

Ca2+/S100 proteins act as upstream regulators of the chaperone-associated
ubiquitin ligase CHIP (C terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein).

Shimamoto S(1), Kubota Y, Yamaguchi F, Tokumitsu H, Kobayashi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Signal Transduction Sciences, Kagawa University Faculty of
Medicine, 1750-1 Ikenobe, Miki-cho, Kita-gun, Kagawa, Japan.

The U-box E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP (C terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein)
binds Hsp90 and/or Hsp70 via its tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR), facilitating
ubiquitination of the chaperone-bound client proteins. Mechanisms that regulate
the activity of CHIP are, at present, poorly understood. We previously reported
that Ca(2+)/S100 proteins directly associate with the TPR proteins, such as
Hsp70/Hsp90-organizing protein (Hop), kinesin light chain, Tom70, FKBP52, CyP40, 
and protein phosphatase 5 (PP5), leading to the dissociation of the interactions 
of the TPR proteins with their target proteins. Therefore, we have hypothesized
that Ca(2+)/S100 proteins can interact with CHIP and regulate its function. GST
pulldown assays indicated that Ca(2+)/S100A2 and S100P bind to the TPR domain and
lead to interference with the interactions of CHIP with Hsp70, Hsp90, HSF1, and
Smad1. In vitro ubiquitination assays indicated that Ca(2+)/S100A2 and S100P are 
efficient and specific inhibitors of CHIP-mediated ubiquitination of Hsp70,
Hsp90, HSF1, and Smad1. Overexpression of S100A2 and S100P suppressed
CHIP-chaperone complex-dependent mutant p53 ubiquitination and degradation in
Hep3B cells. The association of the S100 proteins with CHIP provides a
Ca(2+)-dependent regulatory mechanism for the ubiquitination and degradation of
intracellular proteins by the CHIP-proteasome pathway.

PMCID: PMC3591625
PMID: 23344957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Pharmacology. 2013;91(1-2):104-11. doi: 10.1159/000345930. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Glutamine protects intestinal barrier function of colon epithelial cells from
ethanol by modulating Hsp70 expression.

Akagi R(1), Ohno M, Matsubara K, Fujimoto M, Nakai A, Inouye S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Yasuda Women's University,
Hiroshima, Japan. akagi@yasuda-u.ac.jp

In this study, we investigated the protective effect of glutamine on barrier
dysfunction induced by ethanol, by using human epithelial colorectal
adenocarcinoma cells (Caco-2). Our results show that addition of glutamine to
culture medium significantly improved the disruption of integrity caused by
ethanol, which was associated with increased expression of heat shock protein 70 
(Hsp70). Ethanol exposure moderately activates heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), which 
was characterized by increased DNA-binding activity and phosphorylation status of
HSF1. Remarkably, glutamine treatment enhanced ethanol-mediated expression of
Hsp70 and activation of HSF1. Up-regulation of Hsp70 by pretreatment with heat
stress also promoted recovery from the ethanol-induced barrier dysfunction. Taken
together, these observations indicate that glutamine protects the intestinal
barrier function in Caco-2 cells, in part by modulating HSF1-mediated Hsp70
expression.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23328693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mucosal Immunol. 2013 Sep;6(5):960-71. doi: 10.1038/mi.2012.134. Epub 2013 Jan
16.

Inhibition of N-terminal ATPase on HSP90 attenuates colitis through enhanced Treg
function.

Collins CB(1), Aherne CM, Yeckes A, Pound K, Eltzschig HK, Jedlicka P, de Zoeten 
EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, USA.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory condition thought to
reflect a failure of the enteral immune system to adequately regulate itself.
Inflammatory stress drives upregulation of heat-shock proteins (HSPs), including 
the pro-inflammatory chaperone, HSP90. This protein sequesters the transcription 
factor, heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) in the cytoplasm preventing transcription of a
number of anti-inflammatory proteins. We hypothesized that inhibition of HSP90
would exert an anti-inflammatory effect and thereby attenuate intestinal
inflammation in murine models of IBD. Inhibition of HSP90 with
17-allylaminogeldanamycin (17-AAG) reduced inflammation in acute dextran sodium
sulfate and chronic CD45RB(High) colitis models coinciding with increased
interleukin (IL)-10 production in the colon. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) from mice
treated with 17-AAG demonstrated significantly greater suppressive capacity in
vitro abolished in HSF1-/- or IL-10-/- cells. Finally, Tregs treated with 17-AAG 
exhibited increased nuclear localization of HSF1 with resultant upregulation of
HSF1 response genes, including HSP70, HSP90 and IL-10.

PMCID: PMC3748235
PMID: 23321985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Jul;18(4):455-73. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0400-0.
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

A delayed antioxidant response in heat-stressed cells expressing a non-DNA
binding HSF1 mutant.

Hensen SM(1), Heldens L, van Genesen ST, Pruijn GJ, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

To assess the consequences of inactivation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) during
aging, we analyzed the effect of HSF1 K80Q, a mutant unable to bind DNA, and of
dnHSF1, a mutant lacking the activation domain, on the transcriptome of cells 6
and 24 h after heat shock. The primary response to heat shock (6 h recovery), of 
which 30 % was HSF1-dependent, had decayed 24 h after heat shock in control cells
but was extended in HSF1 K80Q and dnHSF1 cells. Comparison with literature data
showed that even the HSF1 dependent primary stress response is largely cell
specific. HSF1 K80Q, but not HSF1 siRNA-treated, cells showed a delayed stress
response: an increase in transcript levels of HSF1 target genes 24 h after heat
stress. Knockdown of NRF2, but not of ATF4, c-Fos or FosB, inhibited this delayed
stress response. EEF1D_L siRNA inhibited both the delayed and the extended
primary stress responses, but had off target effects. In control cells an
antioxidant response (ARE binding, HMOX1 mRNA levels) was detected 6 h after heat
shock; in HSF1 K80Q cells this response was delayed to 24 h and the ARE complex
had a different mobility. Inactivation of HSF1 thus affects the timing and nature
of the antioxidant response and NRF2 can activate at least some HSF1 target genes
in the absence of HSF1 activity.

PMCID: PMC3682012
PMID: 23321918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Autoimmune Dis. 2012;2012:836519. doi: 10.1155/2012/836519. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Impact of exercise and metabolic disorders on heat shock proteins and vascular
inflammation.

Noble EG(1), Shen GX.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.

Heat shock proteins (Hsp) play critical roles in the body's self-defense under a 
variety of stresses, including heat shock, oxidative stress, radiation, and
wounds, through the regulation of folding and functions of relevant cellular
proteins. Exercise increases the levels of Hsp through elevated temperature,
hormones, calcium fluxes, reactive oxygen species (ROS), or mechanical
deformation of tissues. Isotonic contractions and endurance- type activities tend
to increase Hsp60 and Hsp70. Eccentric muscle contractions lead to
phosphorylation and translocation of Hsp25/27. Exercise-induced transient
increases of Hsp inhibit the generation of inflammatory mediators and vascular
inflammation. Metabolic disorders (hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia) are associated
with type 1 diabetes (an autoimmune disease), type 2 diabetes (the common type of
diabetes usually associated with obesity), and atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease. Metabolic disorders activate HSF/Hsp pathway, which was associated with 
oxidative stress, increased generation of inflammatory mediators, vascular
inflammation, and cell injury. Knock down of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) reduced
the activation of key inflammatory mediators in vascular cells. Accumulating
lines of evidence suggest that the activation of HSF/Hsp induced by exercise or
metabolic disorders may play a dual role in inflammation. The benefits of
exercise on inflammation and metabolism depend on the type, intensity, and
duration of physical activity.

PMCID: PMC3533452
PMID: 23304460  [PubMed]


376. PLoS Pathog. 2012 Dec;8(12):e1003069. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003069. Epub
2012 Dec 27.

Hsp90 orchestrates transcriptional regulation by Hsf1 and cell wall remodelling
by MAPK signalling during thermal adaptation in a pathogenic yeast.

Leach MD(1), Budge S, Walker L, Munro C, Cowen LE, Brown AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
michelle.leach@abdn.ac.uk

Thermal adaptation is essential in all organisms. In yeasts, the heat shock
response is commanded by the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1. Here we have
integrated unbiased genetic screens with directed molecular dissection to
demonstrate that multiple signalling cascades contribute to thermal adaptation in
the pathogenic yeast Candida albicans. We show that the molecular chaperone heat 
shock protein 90 (Hsp90) interacts with and down-regulates Hsf1 thereby
modulating short term thermal adaptation. In the longer term, thermal adaptation 
depends on key MAP kinase signalling pathways that are associated with cell wall 
remodelling: the Hog1, Mkc1 and Cek1 pathways. We demonstrate that these pathways
are differentially activated and display cross talk during heat shock. As a
result ambient temperature significantly affects the resistance of C. albicans
cells to cell wall stresses (Calcofluor White and Congo Red), but not osmotic
stress (NaCl). We also show that the inactivation of MAP kinase signalling
disrupts this cross talk between thermal and cell wall adaptation. Critically,
Hsp90 coordinates this cross talk. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of
Hsp90 disrupts the Hsf1-Hsp90 regulatory circuit thereby disturbing HSP gene
regulation and reducing the resistance of C. albicans to proteotoxic stresses.
Hsp90 depletion also affects cell wall biogenesis by impairing the activation of 
its client proteins Mkc1 and Hog1, as well as Cek1, which we implicate as a new
Hsp90 client in this study. Therefore Hsp90 modulates the short term
Hsf1-mediated activation of the classic heat shock response, coordinating this
response with long term thermal adaptation via Mkc1- Hog1- and Cek1-mediated cell
wall remodelling.

PMCID: PMC3531498
PMID: 23300438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Huntingtons Dis. 2012;1(1):33-45.

Poly-glutamine expanded huntingtin dramatically alters the genome wide binding of
HSF1.

Riva L(1), Koeva M, Yildirim F, Pirhaji L, Dinesh D, Mazor T, Duennwald ML,
Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
77 Mass Ave., Cambridge, MA, USA.

In Huntington's disease (HD), polyglutamine expansions in the huntingtin (Htt)
protein cause subtle changes in cellular functions that, over-time, lead to
neurodegeneration and death. Studies have indicated that activation of the heat
shock response can reduce many of the effects of mutant Htt in disease models,
suggesting that the heat shock response is impaired in the disease. To understand
the basis for this impairment, we have used genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to
examine the effects of mutant Htt on the master regulator of the heat shock
response, HSF1. We find that, under normal conditions, HSF1 function is highly
similar in cells carrying either wild-type or mutant Htt. However, polyQ-expanded
Htt severely blunts the HSF1-mediated stress response. Surprisingly, we find that
the HSF1 targets most affected upon stress are not directly associated with
proteostasis, but with cytoskeletal binding, focal adhesion and GTPase activity. 
Our data raise the intriguing hypothesis that the accumulated damage from
life-long impairment in these stress responses may contribute significantly to
the etiology of Huntington's disease.

PMCID: PMC3537492
PMID: 23293686  [PubMed]


378. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 May;18(3):377-87. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0386-7.
Epub 2012 Dec 23.

Cell-type-dependent access of HSF1 and HSF4 to aB-crystallin promoter during heat
shock.

Jing Z(1), Gangalum RK, Lee JZ, Mock D, Bhat SP.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Brain
Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 May;18(3):389-90.

Epithelial cells and fibroblasts both express heat shock transcription factors,
HSF1 and HSF4, yet they respond to heat shock differentially. For example, while 
HSP70 is induced in both cell types, the small heat shock protein, aB-crystallin 
gene (CRYAB) that contains a canonical heat shock promoter, is only induced in
fibroblasts. A canonical heat shock promoter contains three or more inverted
repeats of the pentanucleotide 5'-nGAAn-3' that make the heat shock element. It
is known that, in vitro, promoter architecture (the order and spacing of these
repeats) impacts the interaction of various heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs) with the heat shock promoter, but in vivo relevance of these binding
preferences so far as the expression is concerned is poorly understood. In this
report, we first establish cell-type-dependent differential expression of CRYAB
in four established cell lines and then working with adult human retinal pigment 
epithelial cells and NIH3T3 fibroblasts and employing chromatin
immunoprecipitation, attempt to relate expression to promoter occupancy by HSF1
and HSF4. We show that HSF4 occupies only CRYAB and not HSP70 promoter in
epithelial cells, while HSF1 occupies only HSP70 promoter in both cell types, and
cryab promoter, only in heat shocked fibroblasts; HSF4, on the other hand, is
never seen on these two promoters in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. This comparative
analysis with CRYAB and HSP70 demonstrates that differential heat shock response 
is controlled by cell-type-dependent access of HSFs (HSF1 and HSF4) to specific
promoters, independent of the promoter architecture.

PMCID: PMC3631099
PMID: 23264262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 18;430(3):1109-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.029. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) inhibitors activate the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) 
stress response pathway and improve glucose regulation in diabetic mice.

Lee JH(1), Gao J, Kosinski PA, Elliman SJ, Hughes TE, Gromada J, Kemp DM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolism Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The cytoprotective stress response factor HSF1 regulates the transcription of the
chaperone HSP70, which exhibits anti-inflammatory effects and improves insulin
sensitivity. We tested the therapeutic potential of this pathway in rodent models
of diabetes using pharmacological tools. Activation of the HSF1 pathway was
achieved using potent inhibitors of the upstream regulatory protein, HSP90.
Treatment with AUY922, a selective HSP90 inhibitor led to robust inhibition of
JNK1 phosphorylation, cytoprotection and improved insulin signaling in cells,
consistent with effects observed with HSP70 treatment. Chronic dosing with HSP90 
inhibitors reversed hyperglycemia in the diabetic db/db mouse model, and improved
insulin sensitivity in the diet-induced obese mouse model of insulin resistance, 
further supporting the concept that the HSF1 pathway is a potentially viable
anti-diabetes target.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23261432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Br J Haematol. 2013 Feb;160(4):465-76. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12164. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

The heat shock transcription factor 1 as a potential new therapeutic target in
multiple myeloma.

Heimberger T(1), Andrulis M, Riedel S, Stühmer T, Schraud H, Beilhack A, Bumm T, 
Bogen B, Einsele H, Bargou RC, Chatterjee M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Comprehensive Cancer Centre Mainfranken,
University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

The heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) has recently been reported to
promote malignant transformation and growth. Here we provide experimental
evidence for a role of HSF1 in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma (MM).
Immunohistochemical analyses revealed that HSF1 was overexpressed in half of the 
investigated MM samples, including virtually all cases with extramedullary
manifestations or anaplastic morphology. HSF1 function was inhibited either by
siRNA-mediated knockdown or pharmacologically through treatment with triptolide. 
Both approaches caused depletion of HSF1, lowered the constitutively high
expression of a multitude of protective HSPs (such as HSP90, HSP70, HSP40 and
HSP27), induced apoptosis in human MM cells in vitro, and strongly reduced MM
tumour growth in vivo. Furthermore, we observed that treatment-induced
upregulation of HSPs after proteasome or HSP90 inhibition was critically
dependent on HSF1. Importantly, the apoptotic effects of the HSP90 inhibitor
NVP-AUY922 or the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib were strongly enhanced in
combination with triptolide, suggesting a salvage role of HSF1-dependent HSP
induction in response to drug treatment. Collectively, our data indicate that
inhibition of HSF1 affects multiple protective HSPs and might therefore represent
a therapeutic strategy - in particular in combination with proteasome or HSP90
inhibitors.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23252346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Int J Legal Med. 2013 Jul;127(4):783-90. doi: 10.1007/s00414-012-0806-3. Epub
2012 Dec 18.

Estimates of exposure to cold before death from immunohistochemical expression
patterns of HSP70 in glomerular podocytes.

Sakurada M(1), Asano M, Takahashi M, Kuse A, Morichika M, Nakagawa K, Kondo T,
Ueno Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Legal Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan. makorin0819@maia.eonet.ne.jp

Environmental factors such as outside temperature at the time of death are very
important for forensic diagnoses and police investigations. In particular, death 
in a cold environment is associated with factors of forensic interest, including 
hypothermia, drowning in cold water, or postmortem body movement by a suspect.
Hypothermia raises a special problem because of the difficulty of evaluation
during autopsy. We describe here a unique method of estimating antemortem
environmental temperature, involving the immunohistochemical analysis of HSP70
expression patterns in glomerular podocytes. Using this method, we found that
HSP70 was present in glomerular podocytes at autopsy and that HSP70 was highly
expressed, mainly in the nucleus of podocytes, in deaths associated with exposure
to cold. Interestingly, this expression pattern was specific to death in a cold
environment, including hypothermia and drowning in cold water. Analysis of the
pattern of HSP70 expression in glomeruli may therefore be very useful in forensic
diagnosis, for determining whether the antemortem environmental temperature was
low. Moreover, immunohistochemical and real-time PCR assays of the molecular
mechanism of HSP70 and HSF1 expression in glomeruli following exposure to cold
indicated that HSP70 was rapidly translocated to the nucleus of podocytes
following exposure to cold, but without new protein synthesis.

PMID: 23247372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Mar;375(1-2):59-67. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1528-z. Epub
2012 Dec 6.

Heat shock transcription factor-1 suppresses apoptotic cell death and ROS
generation in 3-nitropropionic acid-stimulated striatal cells.

Choi YJ(1), Om JY, Kim NH, Chang JE, Park JH, Kim JY, Lee HJ, Kim SS, Chun W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Kangwon National University, 
Hyoja-2, Chunchon, Kangwon 200-701, South Korea.

Striatal neuronal cell death is one of the pathological features of Huntington's 
disease (HD). Overexpression of some heat shock proteins (HSPs) has been reported
to suppress the aggregate formation of mutant huntingtin and concurrent cell
death. Heat shock transcription factor-1 (HSF 1), a major transcription factor of
HSPs, has also been reported to be increased in HD models. However, the exact
role of HSF 1 in the pathogenesis of HD has not been clearly elucidated.
3-Nitropropionic acid (3NP), an irreversible inhibitor of the mitochondrial
complex II, induces selective damage to the striatum in animals and produces
clinical features of HD. To investigate roles of HSF 1 on 3NP-induced oxidative
stress, HSF 1 was transiently overexpressed in striatal cells. Expression of HSF 
1 significantly attenuated 3NP-induced apoptotic striatal cell death and resulted
in increased expression of HSP 70. Furthermore, expression of HSF 1 significantly
attenuated 3NP-induced intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation.
Taken together, the present study clearly demonstrates that HSF 1 attenuates
3NP-induced apoptotic striatal cell death and ROS generation, possibly through
HSP70 expression, suggesting that HSF 1 might be a valuable therapeutic target in
the treatment of HD.

PMID: 23225230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biol Open. 2012 Feb 15;1(2):75-81. doi: 10.1242/bio.2011036. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Expression of hsp70, hsp90 and hsf1 in the reef coral Acropora digitifera under
prospective acidified conditions over the next several decades.

Nakamura M(1), Morita M, Kurihara H, Mitarai S.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biophysics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology , Okinawa 
904-0412 , Japan.

Ocean acidification is an ongoing threat for marine organisms due to the
increasing atmospheric CO(2) concentration. Seawater acidification has a serious 
impact on physiologic processes in marine organisms at all life stages. On the
other hand, potential tolerance to external pH changes has been reported in coral
larvae. Information about the possible mechanisms underlying such tolerance
responses, however, is scarce. In the present study, we examined the effects of
acidified seawater on the larvae of Acropora digitifera at the molecular level.
We targeted two heat shock proteins, Hsp70 and Hsp90, and a heat shock
transcription factor, Hsf1, because of their importance in stress responses and
in early life developmental stages. Coral larvae were maintained under the
ambient and elevated CO(2) conditions that are expected to occur within next 100 
years, and then we evaluated the expression of hsps and hsf1 by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Expression levels of these molecules
significantly differed among target genes, but they did not change significantly 
between CO(2) conditions. These findings indicate that the expression of hsps is 
not changed due to external pH changes, and suggest that tolerance to acidified
seawater in coral larvae may not be related to hsp expression.

PMCID: PMC3507200
PMID: 23213399  [PubMed]


384. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 25;288(4):2756-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.427336. Epub 2012 
Dec 4.

Toll-like receptor agonists and febrile range hyperthermia synergize to induce
heat shock protein 70 expression and extracellular release.

Gupta A(1), Cooper ZA, Tulapurkar ME, Potla R, Maity T, Hasday JD, Singh IS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

Heat shock protein (Hsp) 70 expression can be stimulated by febrile range
temperature (FRT). Hsp70 has been shown to be elevated in serum of patients with 
sepsis, and when released from cells, extracellular Hsp70 exerts endotoxin-like
effects through Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) receptors. Circulating TLR agonists
and fever both persist for the first several days of sepsis, and each can
activate Hsp70 expression; however, the effect of combined exposure to FRT and
TLR agonists on Hsp70 expression is unknown. We found that concurrent exposure to
FRT (39.5 °C) and agonists for TLR4 (LPS), TLR2 (Pam3Cys), or TLR3 (poly(IC))
synergized to increase Hsp70 expression and extracellular release in RAW264.7
macrophages. The increase in Hsp70 expression was associated with activation of
p38 and ERK MAP kinases, phosphorylation of histone H3, and increased recruitment
of HSF1 to the Hsp70 promoter. Pretreatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB283580 
but not the ERK pathway inhibitor UO126 significantly reduced Hsp70 gene
modification and Hsp70 expression in RAW cells co-exposed to LPS and FRT. In mice
challenged with intratracheal LPS and then exposed to febrile range hyperthermia 
(core temperature, ~39.5 °C), Hsp70 levels in lung tissue and in cell-free lung
lavage were increased compared with mice exposed to either hyperthermia or LPS
alone. We propose a model of how enhanced Hsp70 expression and extracellular
release in patients concurrently exposed to fever and TLR agonists may contribute
to the pathogenesis of sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3554941
PMID: 23212905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Apr;97(8):3559-68. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4596-9. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Heat shock response improves heterologous protein secretion in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.

Hou J(1), Osterlund T, Liu Z, Petranovic D, Nielsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Department of Chemical
and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Kemivägen 10,
41296 Göteborg, Sweden.

The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a widely used platform for the production
of heterologous proteins of medical or industrial interest. However, heterologous
protein productivity is often low due to limitations of the host strain. Heat
shock response (HSR) is an inducible, global, cellular stress response, which
facilitates the cell recovery from many forms of stress, e.g., heat stress. In S.
cerevisiae, HSR is regulated mainly by the transcription factor heat shock factor
(Hsf1p) and many of its targets are genes coding for molecular chaperones that
promote protein folding and prevent the accumulation of mis-folded or aggregated 
proteins. In this work, we over-expressed a mutant HSF1 gene HSF1-R206S which can
constitutively activate HSR, so the heat shock response was induced at different 
levels, and we studied the impact of HSR on heterologous protein secretion. We
found that moderate and high level over-expression of HSF1-R206S increased
heterologous a-amylase yield 25 and 70 % when glucose was fully consumed, and 37 
and 62 % at the end of the ethanol phase, respectively. Moderate and high level
over-expression also improved endogenous invertase yield 118 and 94 %,
respectively. However, human insulin precursor was only improved slightly and
this only by high level over-expression of HSF1-R206S, supporting our previous
findings that the production of this protein in S. cerevisiae is not limited by
secretion. Our results provide an effective strategy to improve protein secretion
and demonstrated an approach that can induce ER and cytosolic chaperones
simultaneously.

PMID: 23208612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):1634-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.379362. Epub 2012 
Nov 28.

Forkhead box M1 is regulated by heat shock factor 1 and promotes glioma cells
survival under heat shock stress.

Dai B(1), Gong A, Jing Z, Aldape KD, Kang SH, Sawaya R, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a key transcription factor regulating multiple
aspects of cell biology. Prior studies have shown that FoxM1 is overexpressed in 
a variety of human tumors, including brain tumor, and plays a critical role in
cancer development and progression. In this study we found that FoxM1 was
up-regulated by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) under heat shock stress condition in
multiple cell lines. Knockdown of HSF1 with HSF1 siRNA or inhibition of HSF1 with
a HSF1 inhibitor abrogated heat shock-induced expression of FoxM1. Genetic
deletion of HSF1 in mouse embryo fibroblast cells also abolished heat shock
stress-induced FoxM1 expression. Moreover, we showed that HSF1 directly bound to 
FoxM1 promoter and increased FoxM1 promoter activity. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that FoxM1 was required for the G(2)-M phase progression through
regulating Cdc2, Cdc20, and Cdc25B under a mild heat shock stress but enhanced
cell survival under lethal heat shock stress condition. Finally, in human
glioblastoma specimens, FoxM1 overexpression correlated with elevated HSF1
expression. Our results indicate that FoxM1 is regulated by HSF1 and is critical 
for HSF1-mediated heat shock response. We demonstrated a novel mechanism of
stress resistance controlled by HSF1 and a new HSF-FoxM1 connection that mediates
cellular thermotolerance.

PMCID: PMC3548473
PMID: 23192351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Apr;47(2):699-710. doi: 10.1007/s12035-012-8371-9. Epub 2012 
Nov 23.

Expression of taurine transporter (TauT) is modulated by heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) in motor neurons of ALS.

Jung MK(1), Kim KY, Lee NY, Kang YS, Hwang YJ, Kim Y, Sung JJ, McKee A, Kowall N,
Lee J, Ryu H.

Author information: 
(1)WCU Neurocytomics Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-799, South Korea.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurological disorder
characterized by progressive paralysis caused by the degeneration of motor
neurons throughout the central nervous system. Mutations of the free radical
scavenging enzyme Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) are a cause of familial
ALS. In the present study, we demonstrated an age-dependent increase in taurine
transporter (TauT) immunoreactivity in spinal cord motor neurons of ALS
transgenic mice (mutant SOD1 (G93A)) and a similar increase in TauT in spinal
motor neurons of patients with ALS. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
verified that heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) preferentially occupies the HSF1 binding
element in the promoter of TauT under oxidative stress conditions. Knockdown of
HSF1 by small interfering RNA reduced the transcriptional activity of TauT. Using
[(3)H] taurine, we confirmed that an elevated expression of TauT directly
contributes to increased taurine uptake in ALS motor neurons. In addition, we
showed that taurine plays an antioxidant role and may prevent motor neuron loss
due to oxidative stress in ALS. Our findings suggest that HSF1-induced TauT
expression partially protects motor neurons by compensating for constitutive
oxidative stress, which is thought to be a key mechanism contributing to the
pathogenesis of ALS. Taken together, our results suggest that TauT is a novel
pathological marker for stressed motor neurons in ALS and that modulation of TauT
and taurine may slow neuronal degeneration in ALS.

PMID: 23180277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Tumour Biol. 2013 Feb;34(1):577-85. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0585-y. Epub 2012 Nov
22.

Apoptin selectively induces the apoptosis of tumor cells by suppressing the
transcription of HSP70.

Yuan L(1), Zhang L, Dong X, Zhao H, Li S, Han D, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harbin Medical University,
Daqing Campus, Daqing, 163319, China.

Apoptin is a nonstructural viral protein encoded by VP3 gene of chicken anemia
virus, which could specially induce apoptosis of tumor cells. However, the
mechanism of apoptin-induced apoptosis in tumor cells without any side effects in
normal cells has not yet been well characterized. This study aimed to investigate
the molecular mechanism underlying the selective antitumor effects of apoptin.
HepG2 cells were treated with apoptin or transfected with apoptin expression
vector. Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) expression was examined by Western blot.
The binding of apoptin to HSP70 promoter was detected by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and luciferase assay. The results
showed that apoptin inhibited HSP70 expression in HepG2 cells and apoptin-induced
apoptosis of HepG2 cells was dependent on the expression level of HSP70.
Furthermore, apoptin promoted HSF1 trimer depolymerization and inhibited
HSF1-mediated HSP70 transcription. In addition, apoptin competed with HSF1 to
bind heat shock element in HSP70 promoter, leading to reduced HSP70
transcription. Both these mechanisms contribute to the suppression of HSP70
transcription and expression. Our findings provide the first evidence that
apoptin induces tumor cell apoptosis by specifically downregulating the
expression of HSP70, which helps explain the specific antitumor effects of
apoptin.

PMID: 23179398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cell. 2012 Nov 21;151(5):1042-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.10.044.

A ribosome-bound quality control complex triggers degradation of nascent peptides
and signals translation stress.

Brandman O(1), Stewart-Ornstein J, Wong D, Larson A, Williams CC, Li GW, Zhou S, 
King D, Shen PS, Weibezahn J, Dunn JG, Rouskin S, Inada T, Frost A, Weissman JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;14(1):1.

The conserved transcriptional regulator heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) is a key
sensor of proteotoxic and other stress in the eukaryotic cytosol. We surveyed
Hsf1 activity in a genome-wide loss-of-function library in Saccaromyces
cerevisiae as well as ~78,000 double mutants and found Hsf1 activity to be
modulated by highly diverse stresses. These included disruption of a
ribosome-bound complex we named the Ribosome Quality Control Complex (RQC)
comprising the Ltn1 E3 ubiquitin ligase, two highly conserved but poorly
characterized proteins (Tae2 and Rqc1), and Cdc48 and its cofactors. Electron
microscopy and biochemical analyses revealed that the RQC forms a stable complex 
with 60S ribosomal subunits containing stalled polypeptides and triggers their
degradation. A negative feedback loop regulates the RQC, and Hsf1 senses an
RQC-mediated translation-stress signal distinctly from other stresses. Our work
reveals the range of stresses Hsf1 monitors and elucidates a conserved
cotranslational protein quality control mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3534965
PMID: 23178123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Sci Rep. 2012;2:878. doi: 10.1038/srep00878. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Regulation of autophagy by nucleoporin Tpr.

Funasaka T(1), Tsuka E, Wong RW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Biology, Faculty
of Natural Systems, Institute of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University ,
Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

The nuclear pore complex (NPC) consists of a conserved set of ~30 different
proteins, termed nucleoporins, and serves as a gateway for the exchange of
materials between the cytoplasm and nucleus. Tpr (translocated promoter region)
is a component of NPC that presumably localizes at intranuclear filaments. Here, 
we show that Tpr knockdown caused a severe reduction in the number of nuclear
pores. Furthermore, our electron microscopy studies indicated a significant
reduction in the number of inner nuclear filaments. In addition, Tpr siRNA
treatment impaired cell growth and proliferation compared to control
siRNA-treated cells. In Tpr-depleted cells, the levels of p53 and p21 proteins
were enhanced. Surprisingly, Tpr depletion increased p53 nuclear accumulation and
facilitated autophagy. Our study demonstrates for the first time that Tpr plays a
role in autophagy through controlling HSP70 and HSF1 mRNA export, p53 trafficking
with karyopherin CRM1, and potentially through direct transcriptional regulation 
of autophagy factors.

PMCID: PMC3501823
PMID: 23170199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Theriogenology. 2013 Jan 15;79(2):351-7. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.10.003. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Effects of heat stress on development, quality and survival of Bos indicus and
Bos taurus embryos produced in vitro.

Silva CF(1), Sartorelli ES, Castilho AC, Satrapa RA, Puelker RZ, Razza EM,
Ticianelli JS, Eduardo HP, Loureiro B, Barros CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Bioscience, University of São Paulo
State (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.

Heat stress is an important cause of poor development and low survival rates in
bovine embryos. Experiments were conducted to test the hypothesis that Bos
indicus embryos are more resistant to heat stress than are Bos taurus embryos. In
experiment 1, Nelore and Jersey embryos from oocyte pick-up-derived oocytes were 
submitted to heat stress (96 hours post-insemination, 41 °C, 6 hours),
developmental ratios were assessed at Day 7 (Day 0 = day of fertilization), and
blastocysts were frozen for RNA extraction. Experiment 2 evaluated expression of 
COX2, CDX2, HSF1, and PLAC8 in previously frozen blastocysts. In experiment 3,
Nellore and Angus embryos from oocyte pick-up-derived oocytes were submitted to
heat stress (96 hours post-insemination, 41 °C, 12 hours) and transferred to
recipients on Day 7. In experiment 4, embryos developed as in experiment 3 were
fixed for Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling labeling
and total cell counting. In experiment 1, heat stress decreased the percentage of
Jersey oocytes that became blastocysts, but had no effect on Nellore embryos
(34.6%, 25.0%, 39.5%, and 33.0% for Jersey control, Jersey heat-stressed, Nellore
control, and Nellore heat-stressed oocytes, respectively; P < 0.05). In
experiment 2, heat stress decreased (P < 0.05) expression of CDX2 and PLAC8, with
higher expression of these genes in Nellore embryos than in Jersey embryos. Heat 
stress also decreased (P < 0.05) expression of COX2 in Jersey embryos, but had no
effect on Nellore embryos. Expression of HSF1 was decreased (P < 0.05) by heat
stress in both breeds, with a greater effect in Nellore embryos. In experiment 3,
heat stress tended (P = 0.1) to decrease the percentage of pregnancies among cows
(Day 30 to 35) that received Angus embryos. In experiment 4, heat stress
increased (P < 0.05) the percentage of apoptotic blastomeres, but had no
breed-specific effects. In addition, Nellore embryos had fewer (P < 0.05)
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling- positive
blastomeres than did Angus embryos. We concluded that the detrimental effects of 
heat stress were dependent upon embryo breed and were more evident in Bos taurus 
embryos than in Bos indicus embryos.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23154141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):236-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.124. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Atypical heat shock response and acquisition of thermotolerance in P388D1 cells.

Oommen D(1), Giricz Z, Srinivas UK, Samali A.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, School of Natural Sciences, National University of 
Ireland, Galway, Ireland. oommen1978@gmail.com

Reports of atypical heat shock response in some tumour cell lines emphasize the
possibilities of alternate stress response mechanisms. We demonstrate here that
P388D1, a mouse macrophage tumour cell line, failed to induce heat shock proteins
(HSPs) in response to either heat stress (42 °C, 1h) or to heavy metal stress
induced by arsenic trioxide (5-20 µM). Heat shock transcriptional factor 1 (HSF1)
that mediates transcriptional up regulation of HSPs during stress was found to be
deficient in transactivation despite its binding to the promoter region of HSP
genes. Interestingly, cells exhibited thermotolerance in the absence of induced
HSPs. However, the tolerance was abrogated in cells treated with cycloheximide
(250 ng/ml) suggested that thermotolerance was dependent on de novo protein
synthesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23142227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Invest New Drugs. 2013 Jun;31(3):545-57. doi: 10.1007/s10637-012-9888-5. Epub
2012 Nov 6.

Cytotoxicity of withaferin A in glioblastomas involves induction of an oxidative 
stress-mediated heat shock response while altering Akt/mTOR and MAPK signaling
pathways.

Grogan PT(1), Sleder KD, Samadi AK, Zhang H, Timmermann BN, Cohen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas, KS 66160, USA.

Withaferin A (WA), a steroidal lactone derived from the plant Vassobia
breviflora, has been reported to have anti-proliferative, pro-apoptotic, and
anti-angiogenic properties against cancer growth. In this study, we identified
several key underlying mechanisms of anticancer action of WA in glioblastoma
cells. WA was found to inhibit proliferation by inducing a dose-dependent G2/M
cell cycle arrest and promoting cell death through both intrinsic and extrinsic
apoptotic pathways. This was accompanied by an inhibitory shift in the Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway which included diminished expression and/or phosphorylation of 
Akt, mTOR, p70 S6K, and p85 S6K with increased activation of AMPKa and the tumor 
suppressor tuberin/TSC2. Alterations in proteins of the MAPK pathway and cell
surface receptors like EGFR, Her2/ErbB2, and c-Met were also observed. WA induced
an N-acetyl-L-cysteine-repressible enhancement in cellular oxidative
potential/stress with subsequent induction of a heat shock stress response
primarily through HSP70, HSP32, and HSP27 upregulation and HSF1 downregulation.
Taken together, we suggest that WA may represent a promising chemotherapeutic
candidate in glioblastoma therapy warranting further translational evaluation.

PMCID: PMC3677827
PMID: 23129310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35(11):1881-4.

Role of intracellular defense factors against methylmercury toxicity.

Hwang GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Biochemical Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Miyagi, Japan. gwhwang@m.tohoku.ac.jp

Methylmercury (MeHg) is a causative agent of Minamata disease and an
environmental pollutant that comprises a large portion of organically occurring
mercury. Many aspects of the biological defense mechanisms against MeHg toxicity 
remain unclear. Recently, nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), heat shock
factor protein 1 (Hsf1), and hydrogen sulfide were identified as intracellular
defense factors against MeHg toxicity. These findings suggest that novel
biological defense mechanisms against MeHg toxicity exist in the living organism.
In addition, the expression of downstream genes that mediate activation of the
transcription factors Nrf2 and Hsf1 was markedly induced by MeHg treatment,
suggesting that this action is involved in the reduction of MeHg toxicity. On the
other hand, when the gaseous form of hydrogen sulfide (H(2)S) binds directly to
MeHg, bismethylmercury sulfide (MeHg-S-HgMe) as a low toxicity metabolite is
formed. This suggests the involvement of the gaseous form of H(2)S in the
reduction of MeHg toxicity. In this topic, we summarize the roles of factors
involved in novel biological defense mechanisms against MeHg toxicity.

PMID: 23123460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Neurochem. 2013 Mar;124(6):880-93. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12080. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Over-expression of heat shock factor 1 phenocopies the effect of chronic
inhibition of TOR by rapamycin and is sufficient to ameliorate Alzheimer's-like
deficits in mice modeling the disease.

Pierce A(1), Podlutskaya N, Halloran JJ, Hussong SA, Lin PY, Burbank R, Hart MJ, 
Galvan V.

Author information: 
(1)The Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78245, USA.

Rapamycin, an inhibitor of target-of-rapamycin, extends lifespan in mice,
possibly by delaying aging. We recently showed that rapamycin halts the
progression of Alzheimer's (AD)-like deficits, reduces amyloid-beta (Aß) and
induces autophagy in the human amyloid precursor protein (PDAPP) mouse model. To 
delineate the mechanisms by which chronic rapamycin delays AD we determined
proteomic signatures in brains of control- and rapamycin-treated PDAPP mice.
Proteins with reported chaperone-like activity were overrepresented among
proteins up-regulated in rapamycin-fed PDAPP mice and the master regulator of the
heat-shock response, heat-shock factor 1, was activated. This was accompanied by 
the up-regulation of classical chaperones/heat shock proteins (HSPs) in brains of
rapamycin-fed PDAPP mice. The abundance of most HSP mRNAs except for alpha
B-crystallin, however, was unchanged, and the cap-dependent translation inhibitor
4E-BP was active, suggesting that increased expression of HSPs and proteins with 
chaperone activity may result from preferential translation of pre-existing mRNAs
as a consequence of inhibition of cap-dependent translation. The effects of
rapamycin on the reduction of Aß, up-regulation of chaperones, and amelioration
of AD-like cognitive deficits were recapitulated by transgenic over-expression of
heat-shock factor 1 in PDAPP mice. These results suggest that, in addition to
inducing autophagy, rapamycin preserves proteostasis by increasing chaperones. We
propose that the failure of proteostasis associated with aging may be a key event
enabling AD, and that chronic inhibition of target-of-rapamycin may delay AD by
maintaining proteostasis in brain. Read the Editorial Highlight for this article 
on doi: 10.1111/jnc.12098.

© 2012 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 23121022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cell Signal. 2013 Jan;25(1):308-18. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.10.004. Epub 2012
Oct 15.

Bortezomib/proteasome inhibitor triggers both apoptosis and autophagy-dependent
pathways in melanoma cells.

Selimovic D(1), Porzig BB, El-Khattouti A, Badura HE, Ahmad M, Ghanjati F,
Santourlidis S, Haikel Y, Hassan M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U 977, France.

Erratum in
    Cell Signal. 2015 Mar;27(3):727.
    Cell Signal. 2015 May;27(5):1019-1020.

Generally, both endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and mitochondrial dysregulation
are a potential therapeutic target of anticancer agents including bortezomib. The
treatment of melanoma cells with bortezomib was found to induce apoptosis
together with the upregulation of Noxa, Mcl-1, and HSP70 proteins, and the
cleavage of LC3 and autophagic formation. Also, bortezomib induced ER-stress as
evidenced by the increase of intracellular Ca(2+) release. In addition,
bortezomib enhanced the phosphorylation of inositol-requiring transmembrane
kinase and endonuclease 1a (IRE1a), apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), 
c-jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38, and the activation of the transcription
factors AP-1, ATF-2, Ets-1, and HSF1. Bortezomib-induced mitochondrial
dysregulation was associated with the accumulation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), the release of both apoptosis inducing factor (AIF) and cytochrome c, the 
activation of caspase-9 and caspase-3, and cleavage of Poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP). The pretreatment of melanoma cells with the inhibitor of
caspase-3 (Ac-DEVD-CHO) was found to block bortezomib-induced apoptosis that
subsequently led to the increase of autophagic formation. In contrast, the
inhibition of ASK1 abrogated bortezomib-induced autophagic formation and
increased apoptosis induction. Furthermore, the inhibition of JNK, of HSP70 also 
increased apoptosis induction without influence of bortezomib-induced autophagic 
formation. Based on the inhibitory experiments, the treatment with bortezomib
triggers the activation of both ER-stress-associated pathways, namely
IRE1a-ASK1-p38-ATF-2/ets-1-Mcl-1, and IRE1a-ASK1-JNK-AP-1/HSF1-HSP70 as well as
mitochondrial dysregulation-associated pathways, namely
ROS-ASK1-JNK-AP-1/HSF1-HS70, and AIF-caspase-3-PARP and Cyt.c, and
caspase-9-caspase-3-PARP. Taken together, our data demonstrates for the first
time the molecular mechanisms, whereby bortezomib triggers both apoptosis and
autophagic formation in melanoma cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23079083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Brain Res. 2012 Dec 7;1488:123-31. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Oct 11.

Expression of heat shock transcription factor 1 and its downstream target protein
T-cell death associated gene 51 in the spinal cord of a mouse model of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Mimoto T(1), Morimoto N, Miyazaki K, Kurata T, Sato K, Ikeda Y, Abe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Science, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) modulates the expression of the cell
survival heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) and the cell death T-cell death associated
gene 51 (TDAG51) in response to heat shock and various other cell stressors. We
previously reported an increase in HSP70 in glial cells of the spinal anterior
horn. Here we examined the temporal and spatial changes of HSF1 and TDAG51
expression over the course of motor neuron degeneration in the spinal cord of a
mouse model of ALS (G93A-SOD1 Tg mice). The number of glial-like cells expressing
HSF1 increased in G93A-SOD1 Tg mice at both early symptomatic (14 weeks) and end 
stages of disease (18 weeks), while the number of spinal neurons expressing HSF1 
decreased. The total level of HSF1 in the anterior lumbar spinal cord was
significantly decreased in G93A-SOD1 Tg mice at the end stage of disease. In
contrast to HSF1, the level of TDAG51 in the anterior lumbar spinal cord was
significantly increased in G93A-SOD1 Tg mice at the end stage of disease.
Moreover, TDAG51 progressively increased in glial-like cells in the anterior
lumbar spinal cord of G93A-SOD1 Tg mice from the early symptomatic stage, while
decreasing in spinal neurons. Taken together, our results suggest that the
balance between the cell survival and death signals mediated by HSP70 and TDAG51,
respectively, may be disturbed by the altered expression of HSF1 during the
progression of disease in this ALS model.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 23;287(48):40400-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.410712. Epub
2012 Oct 10.

Glutamine-mediated dual regulation of heat shock transcription factor-1
activation and expression.

Xue H(1), Slavov D, Wischmeyer PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Hongyu.Xue@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: Regulation of transcriptional activity of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) 
is widely thought to be the main point of control for heat shock protein (Hsp)
expression.
RESULTS: Glutamine increases Hsf1 gene transcription in a C/EBPß-dependent manner
and up-regulates HSF1 activity.
CONCLUSION: Glutamine is an activator for both HSF1 expression and
transactivation.
SIGNIFICANCE: Glutamine-induced HSF1 expression provides a novel mechanistic
frame for HSF1-Hsp axis regulation. Heat shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1) is
the master regulator for cytoprotective heat shock protein (Hsp) expression. It
is widely thought that HSF1 expression is non-inducible, and thus the key control
point of Hsp expression is regulation of the transactivation activity of HSF1.
How HSF1 expression is regulated remains unknown. Herein we demonstrate that
glutamine (Gln), a preferred fuel substrate for the gut, enhanced Hsp expression 
both in rat colonic epithelium in vivo and in cultured non-transformed young
adult mouse colonic epithelial cells. This was associated with up-regulation of
the transactivation activity of HSF1 via increased HSF1 trimerization, nuclear
localization, DNA binding, and relative abundance of activating phosphorylation
at Ser-230 of HSF1. More intriguingly, Gln enhanced HSF1 protein and mRNA
expression and Hsf1 gene promoter activity. Within the -281/-200 region of the
Hsf1 promoter, deletion of the putative CCAAT enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP)
binding site abolished the HSF1 response to Gln. C/EBPß was further shown to bind
to this 82-bp sequence both in vitro and in vivo. Gln availability strikingly
altered the ratio of C/EBPß inhibitory and active isoforms, i.e. liver-enriched
inhibitory protein and liver-enriched activating protein. Liver-enriched
inhibitory protein and liver-enriched activating protein were further shown to be
an independent repressor and activator, respectively, for Hsf1 gene
transcription, and the relative abundance of these two C/EBPß isoforms was
demonstrated to determine Hsf1 transcription. We show for the first time that Gln
not only enhances the transactivation of HSF1 but also induces Hsf1 expression by
activating its transcription in a C/EBPß-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3504755
PMID: 23055521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Cell. 2012 Nov 9;48(3):459-70. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.08.026. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

The p23 molecular chaperone and GCN5 acetylase jointly modulate protein-DNA
dynamics and open chromatin status.

Zelin E(1), Zhang Y, Toogun OA, Zhong S, Freeman BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

Cellular processes function through multistep pathways that are reliant on the
controlled association and disassociation of sequential protein complexes. While 
dynamic action is critical to propagate and terminate work, the mechanisms used
to disassemble biological structures are not fully understood. Here we show that 
the p23 molecular chaperone initiates disassembly of protein-DNA complexes and
that the GCN5 acetyltransferase prolongs the dissociated state through lysine
acetylation. By modulating the DNA-bound state, we found that the conserved and
essential joint activities of p23 and GCN5 impacted transcription factor
activation potential and response time to an environmental cue. Notably, p23 and 
GCN5 were required to maintain open chromatin regions along the genome,
indicating that dynamic protein behavior is a critical feature of various
DNA-associated events. Our data support a model in which p23 and GCN5 regulate
diverse multistep pathways by controlling the longevity of protein-DNA complexes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3496002
PMID: 23022381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Biol Reprod. 2012 Nov 16;87(5):119. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.104018. Print
2012 Nov.

Characterization of the constitutive pig ovary heat shock chaperone machinery and
its response to acute thermal stress or to seasonal variations.

Pennarossa G(1), Maffei S, Rahman MM, Berruti G, Brevini TA, Gandolfi F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Embryology, Department of Health, Animal Science and 
Food Safety, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Reduced oocyte competence causes the lower fertility reported in domestic sows
during the warm months of the year. Somatic cells express heat shock proteins
(HSPs) to protect themselves from damage caused by thermal stress. HSPs are
classified as molecular chaperones and control the correct folding of newly
synthesized or damaged proteins. The present work performed a comprehensive
survey of the different components of the heat shock chaperone machinery in the
pig ovary, which included the HSP40, HSP70, HSP90, and HSP110 families, as well
as heat shock factors (HSF) 1 and 2. Pig ovarian follicles constitutively
expressed different members of these families; therefore, we examined their
ability to respond to heat stress. In order to take into account the role of the 
complex follicular architecture, whole pig ovaries were exposed to 41.5°C for 1
h. This exposure significantly disrupted oocyte maturation and determined the
upregulation of the HSP70, HSP40, HSPH1, HSPA4, HSPA4L, HSF1, and HFS2 genes,
whereas expression levels of HSP90A and HSP90B, as well as those of genes
unrelated to heat stress were not altered. Unexpectedly HSP and HSF expression
levels changed only in oocytes but not in cumulus cells. Cumulus-oocyte complexes
isolated from ovaries collected in summer showed the same pattern as those
collected in winter. We conclude that the HSP chaperone machinery is
constitutively fully operational in the pig ovary. However, following thermal
stimuli or seasonal variations, cumulus cell HS-related gene expression remains
unchanged, and only oocytes activate a response, suggesting why this mechanism is
insufficient to preserve their competence both in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 23018186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Sep 28;12:174. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-174.

Transcriptomic analysis of grape (Vitis vinifera L.) leaves during and after
recovery from heat stress.

Liu GT(1), Wang JF, Cramer G, Dai ZW, Duan W, Xu HG, Wu BH, Fan PG, Wang LJ, Li
SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, P,R, of
China.

BACKGROUND: Grapes are a major fruit crop around the world. Heat stress can
significantly reduce grape yield and quality. Changes at the molecular level in
response to heat stress and subsequent recovery are poorly understood. To
elucidate the effect of heat stress and subsequent recovery on expression of
genes by grape leaves representing the classic heat stress response and
thermotolerance mechanisms, transcript abundance of grape (Vitis vinifera L.)
leaves was quantified using the Affymetrix Grape Genome oligonucleotide
microarray (15,700 transcripts), followed by quantitative Real-Time PCR
validation for some transcript profiles.
RESULTS: We found that about 8% of the total probe sets were responsive to heat
stress and/or to subsequent recovery in grape leaves. The heat stress and
recovery responses were characterized by different transcriptional changes. The
number of heat stress-regulated genes was almost twice the number of
recovery-regulated genes. The responsive genes identified in this study belong to
a large number of important traits and biological pathways, including cell rescue
(i.e., antioxidant enzymes), protein fate (i.e., HSPs), primary and secondary
metabolism, transcription factors, signal transduction, and development. We have 
identified some common genes and heat shock factors (HSFs) that were modulated
differentially by heat stress and recovery. Most HSP genes were upregulated by
heat stress but were downregulated by the recovery. On the other hand, some
specific HSP genes or HSFs were uniquely responsive to heat stress or recovery.
CONCLUSION: The effect of heat stress and recovery on grape appears to be
associated with multiple processes and mechanisms including stress-related genes,
transcription factors, and metabolism. Heat stress and recovery elicited common
up- or downregulated genes as well as unique sets of responsive genes. Moreover, 
some genes were regulated in opposite directions by heat stress and recovery. The
results indicated HSPs, especially small HSPs, antioxidant enzymes (i.e.,
ascorbate peroxidase), and galactinol synthase may be important to
thermotolerance of grape. HSF30 may be a key regulator for heat stress and
recovery, while HSF7 and HSF1 may only be specific to recovery. The
identification of heat stress or recovery responsive genes in this study provides
novel insights into the molecular basis for heat tolerance in grape leaves.

PMCID: PMC3497578
PMID: 23016701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 Mar;18(2):215-22. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0375-x.
Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Tissue-specific upregulation of HSP72 in mice following short-term administration
of alcohol.

Islam A(1), Abraham P, Hapner CD, Deuster PA, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Military and Emergency Medicine, Uniformed Services University
of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Oxidative stress and cellular injury have been implicated in induction of HSP72
by alcohol. We investigated the association between HSP72 induction and oxidative
stress in mouse tissues following short-term administration of high doses of
alcohol and caffeine alone or in combination. Adult male C57BL/6J mice were
gavaged with vehicle, alcohol (~1.7 g/kg/day), caffeine (~44 mg/kg/day), or
alcohol plus caffeine once daily for ten consecutive days. Upon completion of the
treatments, tissues were collected for structural and biochemical analyses.
Alcohol alone caused mild to moderate lesions in heart, liver, and gastrocnemius 
muscle. Similar structural changes were observed following administration of
alcohol and caffeine combined. Alcohol administration also led to decreased
glutathione levels in all three tissues and reduced plasma superoxide dismutase
capacity. In contrast, alcohol and caffeine in combination reduced glutathione
levels only in liver and gastrocnemius muscle and had no effect on plasma
superoxide dismutase. Significant elevations in HSP72 protein and mRNA and in
HSF1 protein levels were noted only in liver by alcohol alone or in combination
with caffeine. No significant changes in morphology and HSP72 were detected in
any tissues tested following administration of caffeine alone. These results
suggest that a redox mechanism is involved in the structural impairment caused by
short-term high-dose alcohol. Oxidative tissue injury by alcohol may not be
associated with tissue HSP72 induction. Induction of HSP72 in liver by alcohol is
mediated at both the transcriptional and translational levels.

PMCID: PMC3581633
PMID: 23011927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Brain Res. 2012 Nov 5;1483:112-7. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.09.022. Epub 2012 
Sep 19.

Resveratrol upregulated heat shock proteins and extended the survival of
G93A-SOD1 mice.

Han S(1), Choi JR, Soon Shin K, Kang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sejong University, 98 Gunja-dong,
Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-747, Korea.

In the present study, we investigated whether resveratrol, a SIRT1 activator, can
suppress the motor neuron degeneration in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Chronic intraperitoneal injection of resveratrol delayed the
disease onset and extended survival of the transgenic mice overexpressing
G93A-SOD1. The number of surviving motor neurons increased in the
resveratrol-injected G93A mice. Importantly, the levels of Hsp25 and Hsp70 were
elevated while the level of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) acetylation decreased in
the spinal cords of the resveratrol-injected G93A mice. Our data suggest that
resveratrol may protect motor neurons from the mutant SOD1-induced neurotoxicity 
by promoting SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of HSF1 and subsequent upregulation of 
Hsps.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Biophys J. 2012 Sep 19;103(6):1110-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2012.07.041.

Cellular response to heat shock studied by multiconfocal fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy.

Kloster-Landsberg M(1), Herbomel G, Wang I, Derouard J, Vourc'h C, Usson Y,
Souchier C, Delon A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Grenoble I/Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire de Physique, Grenoble, France.

Heat shock triggers a transient and ubiquitous response, the function of which is
to protect cells against stress-induced damage. The heat-shock response is
controlled by a key transcription factor known as heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). We 
have developed a multiconfocal fluorescence correlation spectroscopy setup to
measure the dynamics of HSF1 during the course of the heat-shock response. The
system combines a spatial light modulator, to address several points of interest,
and an electron-multiplying charge-coupled camera for fast multiconfocal
recording of the photon streams. Autocorrelation curves with a temporal
resolution of 14 µs were analyzed before and after heat shock on eGFP and
HSF1-eGFP-expressing cells. Evaluation of the dynamic parameters of a
diffusion-and-binding model showed a slower HSF1 diffusion after heat shock. It
is also observed that the dissociation rate decreases after heat shock, whereas
the association rate is not affected. In addition, thanks to the multiconfocal
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy system, up to five spots could be
simultaneously located in each cell nucleus. This made it possible to quantify
the intracellular variability of the diffusion constant of HSF1, which is higher 
than that of inert eGFP molecules and increases after heat shock. This finding is
consistent with the fact that heat-shock response is associated with an increase 
of HSF1 interactions with DNA and cannot be explained even partially by
heat-induced modifications of nuclear organization.

Copyright © 2012 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3446677
PMID: 22995483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Oct;10(10):693-704. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro2875.

Fungal Hsp90: a biological transistor that tunes cellular outputs to thermal
inputs.

Leach MD(1), Klipp E, Cowen LE, Brown AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is an essential, abundant and ubiquitous eukaryotic
chaperone that has crucial roles in protein folding and modulates the activities 
of key regulators. The fungal Hsp90 interactome, which includes numerous client
proteins such as receptors, protein kinases and transcription factors, displays a
surprisingly high degree of plasticity that depends on environmental conditions. 
Furthermore, although fungal Hsp90 levels increase following environmental
challenges, Hsp90 activity is tightly controlled via post-translational
regulation and an autoregulatory loop involving heat shock transcription factor 1
(Hsf1). In this Review, we discuss the roles and regulation of fungal Hsp90. We
propose that Hsp90 acts as a biological transistor that modulates the activity of
fungal signalling networks in response to environmental cues via this Hsf1-Hsp90 
autoregulatory loop.

PMCID: PMC3660702
PMID: 22976491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 12;427(1):80-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.006. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Sulphoraphane, a naturally occurring isothiocyanate induces apoptosis in breast
cancer cells by targeting heat shock proteins.

Sarkar R(1), Mukherjee S, Biswas J, Roy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis & Toxicology, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, 37, SP Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700 026, India.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are involved in protein folding, aggregation,
transport and/or stabilization by acting as a molecular chaperone, leading to
inhibition of apoptosis by both caspase dependent and/or independent pathways.
HSPs are overexpressed in a wide range of human cancers and are implicated in
tumor cell proliferation, differentiation, invasion and metastasis. HSPs
particularly 27, 70, 90 and the transcription factor heat shock factor1 (HSF1)
play key roles in the etiology of breast cancer and can be considered as
potential therapeutic target. The present study was designed to investigate the
role of sulphoraphane, a natural isothiocyanate on HSPs (27, 70, 90) and HSF1 in 
two different breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells expressing wild
type and mutated p53 respectively, vis-à-vis in normal breast epithelial cell
line MCF-12F. It was furthermore investigated whether modulation of HSPs and HSF1
could induce apoptosis in these cells by altering the expressions of p53, p21 and
some apoptotic proteins like Bcl-2, Bax, Bid, Bad, Apaf-1 and AIF. Sulphoraphane 
was found to down-regulate the expressions of HSP70, 90 and HSF1, though the
effect on HSP27 was not pronounced. Consequences of HSP inhibition was
upregulation of p21 irrespective of p53 status. Bax, Bad, Apaf-1, AIF were
upregulated followed by down-regulation of Bcl-2 and this effect was prominent in
MCF-7 than in MDA-MB-231. However, very little change in the expression of Bid
was observed. Alteration in Bcl-2 Bax ratio resulted in the release of cytochrome
c from mitochondria and activation of caspases 3 and 9 which are in agreement
with apoptotic index values. Sulphoraphane therefore can be regarded as a potent 
inducer of apoptosis due to HSP modulation in breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22975350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044785. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Aggregation of polyQ proteins is increased upon yeast aging and affected by Sir2 
and Hsf1: novel quantitative biochemical and microscopic assays.

Cohen A(1), Ross L, Nachman I, Bar-Nun S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George S Wise Faculty of
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Aging-related neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and
Huntington's diseases, are characterized by accumulation of protein aggregates in
distinct neuronal cells that eventually die. In Huntington's disease, the protein
huntingtin forms aggregates, and the age of disease onset is inversely correlated
to the length of the protein's poly-glutamine tract. Using quantitative assays to
estimate microscopically and capture biochemically protein aggregates, here we
study in Saccharomyces cerevisiae aging-related aggregation of GFP-tagged,
huntingtin-derived proteins with different polyQ lengths. We find that the short 
25Q protein never aggregates whereas the long 103Q version always aggregates.
However, the mid-size 47Q protein is soluble in young logarithmically growing
yeast but aggregates as the yeast cells enter the stationary phase and age,
allowing us to plot an "aggregation timeline". This aging-dependent aggregation
was associated with increased cytotoxicity. We also show that two aging-related
genes, SIR2 and HSF1, affect aggregation of the polyQ proteins. In <U+0394>sir2 strain
the aging-dependent aggregation of the 47Q protein is aggravated, while
overexpression of the transcription factor Hsf1 attenuates aggregation. Thus, the
mid-size 47Q protein and our quantitative aggregation assays provide valuable
tools to unravel the roles of genes and environmental conditions that affect
aging-related aggregation.

PMCID: PMC3435303
PMID: 22970306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oncotarget. 2012 Aug;3(8):741-3.

Shock about heat shock in cancer.

de Billy E, Travers J, Workman P.

The transcription factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of
the heat shock response. It is crucial for cell homeostasis and implicated in
aging, neurodegenerative disease and cancer. Although induction by HSF1 of the
expression of molecular chaperones and other regulators of protein quality
control, both folding and degradation, is well established, the precise and
detailed transcriptional network that HSF1 regulates in cancer is poorly
understood. An important new study identifies an HSF1-regulated transcriptional
program in highly malignant cells that is surprisingly distinct from the
traditional heat shock response. The results have significant implications for
our molecular understanding of cancer and the development of new therapies.

PMCID: PMC3478452
PMID: 22964629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Dec;47(6):824-33. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0105OC. 
Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Hyperthermia promotes and prevents respiratory epithelial apoptosis through
distinct mechanisms.

Nagarsekar A(1), Tulapurkar ME, Singh IS, Atamas SP, Shah NG, Hasday JD.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Hyperthermia has been shown to confer cytoprotection and to augment apoptosis in 
different experimental models. We analyzed the mechanisms of both effects in the 
same mouse lung epithelial (MLE) cell line (MLE15). Exposing MLE15 cells to heat 
shock (HS; 42°C, 2 h) or febrile-range hyperthermia (39.5°C) concurrent with
activation of the death receptors, TNF receptor 1 or Fas, greatly accelerated
apoptosis, which was detectable within 30 minutes and was associated with
accelerated activation of caspase-2, -8, and -10, and the proapoptotic protein,
Bcl2-interacting domain (Bid). Caspase-3 activation and cell death were partially
blocked by inhibitors targeting all three initiator caspases. Cells expressing
the I<U+03BA>B superrepessor were more susceptible than wild-type cells to TNF-a-induced
apoptosis at 37°C, but HS and febrile-range hyperthermia still increased
apoptosis in these cells. Delaying HS for 3 hours after TNF-a treatment abrogated
its proapoptotic effect in wild-type cells, but not in I<U+03BA>B
superrepressor-expression cells, suggesting that TNF-a stimulates delayed
resistance to the proapoptotic effects of HS through an NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
mechanism. Pre-exposure to 2-hour HS beginning 6 to16 hours before TNF-a
treatment or Fas activation reduced apoptosis in MLE15 cells. The antiapoptotic
effects of HS pretreatment were reduced in TNF-a-treated embryonic fibroblasts
from heat shock factor-1 (HSF1)-deficient mice, but the proapoptotic effects of
concurrent HS were preserved. Thus, depending on the temperature and timing
relative to death receptor activation, hyperthermia can exert pro- and
antiapoptotic effects through distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3547099
PMID: 22962066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2013;25(4):600-8. doi: 10.1071/RD11282.

Morphology, sex ratio and gene expression of day 14 in vivo and in vitro bovine
embryos.

Machado GM(1), Ferreira AR, Guardieiro MM, Bastos MR, Carvalho JO, Lucci CM,
Diesel TO, Sartori R, Rumpf R, Franco MM, Dode MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, Embrapa Genetic Resources and
Biotechnology, Parque Estação Biológica, Av. W5 Norte final, Caixa Postal 02372, 
Brasília, DF 70770-917, Brazil.

The present study was designed to compare Day 14 bovine embryos that were
produced entirely in vitro using the post-hatching development (PHD) system with 
in vivo-derived embryos without or with transient PHD culture from Day 7 to Day
14. Embryos on Day 14 were used for sex determination and gene expression
analysis of PLAC8, KRT8, CD9, SLC2A1, SLC2A3, PGK1, HSF1, MNSOD, HSP70 and IFNT
using real-time quantitative (q) polymerase chain reaction (PCR). First, Day 7 in
vivo- and in vitro-produced embryos were subjected to the PHD system. A higher
rate of survival was observed for in vitro embryos on Day 14. Comparing Day 14
embryos produced completely in vivo or completely in vitro revealed that the mean
size of the former group was greater than that of the latter (10.29±1.83 vs
2.68±0.33mm, respectively). Expression of the HSP70 and SLC2A1 genes was down-
and upregulated, respectively, in the in vitro embryos. The present study shows
that in vitro embryos cultured in the PHD system are smaller than in vivo embryos
and that of the 10 genes analysed, only two were differentially expressed between
the two groups. These findings indicate that, owing to the poor survival rate,
the PHD system is not reliable for evaluation of in vitro embryo quality.

PMID: 22958400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Jan;131(1):225-33. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs264. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Delayed temporal increase of hepatic Hsp70 in ApoE knockout mice after prenatal
arsenic exposure.

Ngalame NN(1), Micciche AF, Feil ME, States JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Louisville, Louisville,
Kentucky 40202, USA.

Prenatal arsenic exposure accelerates atherosclerosis in ApoE(-/-) mice by
unknown mechanism. Arsenic is a hepatotoxicant, and liver disease increases
atherosclerosis risk. Prenatal arsenic exposure may predispose to liver disease
by priming for susceptibility to other environmental insults. Earlier microarray 
analyses showed prenatal arsenic exposure increased Hsc70 (HspA8) and Hsp70
(HspA1a) mRNAs in livers of 10-week-old mice. We determined effects of prenatal
arsenic exposure on hepatic Hsp70 and Hsc70 expression by Western blot and on DNA
methylation by methyl acceptance assay during prenatal and postnatal development.
Pregnant ApoE(-/-) mice were given drinking water containing 85 mg/l NaAsO(2) (49
ppm arsenic) from gestation day (GD) 8 to 18. Hsp70 and Hsc70 expression and DNA 
methylation were determined in GD18 fetuses and 3-, 10-, and 24-week-old mice.
Hsc70 expression was unchanged at all ages. Hsp70 induction was observed at 3 and
10 weeks, but was unchanged in GD18 fetuses and 24-week livers of mice. Global
DNA methylation increased with age; arsenic had no effects. Bisulfite sequencing 
of DNA from livers of 10-week-old mice showed Hsp70 promoter region methylation
was unchanged, but methylation was increased within the transcribed region. Hsf1 
and Nrf2 nuclear translocation were investigated as potential mechanisms of Hsp70
induction and found unaltered. Putative binding sites were identified in HSP70
for in utero arsenic exposure-suppressed microRNAs suggesting a possible
mechanism. Thus, prenatal arsenic exposure causes delayed temporal hepatic Hsp70 
induction, suggesting a transient state of stress in livers which can predispose 
the mice to developing liver disease.

PMCID: PMC3537124
PMID: 22956628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Genome Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1668-79. doi: 10.1101/gr.127761.111.

A highly integrated and complex PPARGC1A transcription factor binding network in 
HepG2 cells.

Charos AE(1), Reed BD, Raha D, Szekely AM, Weissman SM, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

PPARGC1A is a transcriptional coactivator that binds to and coactivates a variety
of transcription factors (TFs) to regulate the expression of target genes.
PPARGC1A plays a pivotal role in regulating energy metabolism and has been
implicated in several human diseases, most notably type II diabetes. Previous
studies have focused on the interplay between PPARGC1A and individual TFs, but
little is known about how PPARGC1A combines with all of its partners across the
genome to regulate transcriptional dynamics. In this study, we describe a core
PPARGC1A transcriptional regulatory network operating in HepG2 cells treated with
forskolin. We first mapped the genome-wide binding sites of PPARGC1A using
chromatin-IP followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) and uncovered
overrepresented DNA sequence motifs corresponding to known and novel PPARGC1A
network partners. We then profiled six of these site-specific TF partners using
ChIP-seq and examined their network connectivity and combinatorial binding
patterns with PPARGC1A. Our analysis revealed extensive overlap of targets
including a novel link between PPARGC1A and HSF1, a TF regulating the conserved
heat shock response pathway that is misregulated in diabetes. Importantly, we
found that different combinations of TFs bound to distinct functional sets of
genes, thereby helping to reveal the combinatorial regulatory code for metabolic 
and other cellular processes. In addition, the different TFs often bound near the
promoters and coding regions of each other's genes suggesting an intricate
network of interdependent regulation. Overall, our study provides an important
framework for understanding the systems-level control of metabolic gene
expression in humans.

PMCID: PMC3431484
PMID: 22955979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3742-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI62727. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Loss of tumor suppressor NF1 activates HSF1 to promote carcinogenesis.

Dai C(1), Santagata S, Tang Z, Shi J, Cao J, Kwon H, Bronson RT, Whitesell L,
Lindquist S.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
USA. Chengkai.Dai@jax.org

Intrinsic stress response pathways are frequently mobilized within tumor cells.
The mediators of these adaptive mechanisms and how they contribute to
carcinogenesis remain poorly understood. A striking example is heat shock factor 
1 (HSF1), master transcriptional regulator of the heat shock response.
Surprisingly, we found that loss of the tumor suppressor gene neurofibromatosis
type 1 (Nf1) increased HSF1 levels and triggered its activation in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts. As a consequence, Nf1-/- cells acquired tolerance to
proteotoxic stress. This activation of HSF1 depended on dysregulated MAPK
signaling. HSF1, in turn, supported MAPK signaling. In mice, Hsf1 deficiency
impeded NF1-associated carcinogenesis by attenuating oncogenic RAS/MAPK
signaling. In cell lines from human malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors
(MPNSTs) driven by NF1 loss, HSF1 was overexpressed and activated, which was
required for tumor cell viability. In surgical resections of human MPNSTs, HSF1
was overexpressed, translocated to the nucleus, and phosphorylated. These
findings reveal a surprising biological consequence of NF1 deficiency: activation
of HSF1 and ensuing addiction to this master regulator of the heat shock
response. The loss of NF1 function engages an evolutionarily conserved cellular
survival mechanism that ultimately impairs survival of the whole organism by
facilitating carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3461912
PMID: 22945628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Cell. 2012 Oct 26;48(2):182-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.07.026. Epub 2012 
Aug 30.

RPA assists HSF1 access to nucleosomal DNA by recruiting histone chaperone FACT.

Fujimoto M(1), Takaki E, Takii R, Tan K, Prakasam R, Hayashida N, Iemura S,
Natsume T, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Transcription factor access to regulatory elements is prevented by the
nucleosome. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a winged helix transcription factor
that plays roles in control and stressed conditions by gaining access to target
elements, but mechanisms of HSF1 access are not well known in mammalian cells.
Here, we show the physical interaction between the wing motif of human HSF1 and
replication protein A (RPA), which is involved in DNA metabolism. Depletion of
RPA1 abolishes HSF1 access to the promoter of HSP70 in unstressed condition and
delays its rapid activation in response to heat shock. The HSF1-RPA complex leads
to preloading of RNA polymerase II and opens the chromatin structure by
recruiting a histone chaperone, FACT. Furthermore, this interaction is required
for melanoma cell proliferation. These results provide a mechanism of
constitutive HSF1 access to nucleosomal DNA, which is important for both basal
and inducible gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22940245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Oct 3;527(1):40-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.08.019. Epub
2012 Aug 17.

Exposure of Wistar rats to 24-h psycho-social stress alters gene expression in
the inferior colliculus.

Mazurek B(1), Haupt H, Klapp BF, Szczepek AJ, Olze H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology,
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Charité Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
birgit.mazurek@charite.de

Recently, we have demonstrated that the exposure of Wistar rats to psycho-social 
stress results in a transient auditory hypersensitivity. Here, to learn more
about modifications occurring in auditory brainstem, we have analyzed gene
expression pattern in inferior colliculus using quantitative RT-PCR. As targets, 
we have chosen genes associated with: neural activity (FBJ osteosarcoma viral
oncogene, cFos), hypoxia (nitric oxide synthase inducible, iNos; superoxide
dismutase 2, Sod2), neuroprotection (nerve growth factor beta, Ngfb; heat shock
factor 1, Hsf1; heat shock protein 70, Hsp70) and inflammation (tumor necrosis
factor alpha, Tnfa; tumor necrosis factor alpha receptor, Tnfar; substance P, Sp;
cyclooxygenase 2, Cox2). We found that the expression of all genes was modified
following stress, as compared to the controls. Immediately after stress, the
number of transcripts encoding iNos, Sod2, Hsf1, Ngfb, Tnfa, Tnfar and Sp was
significantly increased, suggesting possible modulation during exposure to
stressor. Interestingly, we found that expression of Hsf1 and Ngfb at this
particular time was left-right asymmetrical: there were more transcripts of both 
genes found in the left colliculi, as compared to the right colliculi. Three
hours post-stress, iNos, Hsf1, Tnfa and Tnfar were still upregulated, Sod2, Ngfb 
and Sp went back to baseline and Cox2 was upregulated. Six hours post-stress,
cFos mRNA became downregulated. The number of Hsp70 mRNA increased 24h
post-stress. Except for the reduced number of cFos transcripts, expression of all
other genes tested reached the baseline seven days post-stress. Presented results
corroborate the concept of auditory system responding to the psycho-social
stress. Post-stress changes in the IC gene expression could likely indicate shift
from allostasis to homeostasis in the auditory brainstem.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22922217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jan;87(1):19-48. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0918-z. Epub 2012 Aug
11.

Heat shock proteins and heat shock factor 1 in carcinogenesis and tumor
development: an update.

Ciocca DR(1), Arrigo AP, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biology of Cuyo,
Scientific and Technological Center, CONICET, 5500 Mendoza, Argentina.
dciocca@mendoza-conicet.gob.ar

Comment in
    Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jan;87(1):1-2.

Heat shock proteins (HSP) are a subset of the molecular chaperones, best known
for their rapid and abundant induction by stress. HSP genes are activated at the 
transcriptional level by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). During the
progression of many types of cancer, this heat shock transcriptional regulon
becomes co-opted by mechanisms that are currently unclear, although evidently
triggered in the emerging tumor cell. Concerted activation of HSF1 and the
accumulation of HSPs then participate in many of the traits that permit the
malignant phenotype. Thus, cancers of many histologies exhibit activated HSF1 and
increased HSP levels that may help to deter tumor suppression and evade therapy
in the clinic. We review here the extensive work that has been carried out and is
still in progress aimed at (1) understanding the oncogenic mechanisms by which
HSP genes are switched on, (2) determining the roles of HSF1/HSP in malignant
transformation and (3) discovering approaches to therapy based on disrupting the 
influence of the HSF1-controlled transcriptome in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3905791
PMID: 22885793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cell. 2012 Aug 3;150(3):549-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.031.

HSF1 drives a transcriptional program distinct from heat shock to support highly 
malignant human cancers.

Mendillo ML(1), Santagata S, Koeva M, Bell GW, Hu R, Tamimi RM, Fraenkel E, Ince 
TA, Whitesell L, Lindquist S.

Author information: 
(1)The Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Heat-Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), master regulator of the heat-shock response,
facilitates malignant transformation, cancer cell survival, and proliferation in 
model systems. The common assumption is that these effects are mediated through
regulation of heat-shock protein (HSP) expression. However, the transcriptional
network that HSF1 coordinates directly in malignancy and its relationship to the 
heat-shock response have never been defined. By comparing cells with high and low
malignant potential alongside their nontransformed counterparts, we identify an
HSF1-regulated transcriptional program specific to highly malignant cells and
distinct from heat shock. Cancer-specific genes in this program support oncogenic
processes: cell-cycle regulation, signaling, metabolism, adhesion and
translation. HSP genes are integral to this program, however, many are uniquely
regulated in malignancy. This HSF1 cancer program is active in breast, colon and 
lung tumors isolated directly from human patients and is strongly associated with
metastasis and death. Thus, HSF1 rewires the transcriptome in tumorigenesis, with
prognostic and therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3438889
PMID: 22863008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 12;287(42):35646-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.377481. Epub
2012 Jul 30.

Heat shock factor Hsf1 cooperates with ErbB2 (Her2/Neu) protein to promote
mammary tumorigenesis and metastasis.

Xi C(1), Hu Y, Buckhaults P, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Cancer
Center, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

ErbB2/Neu oncogene is overexpressed in 25% of invasive/metastatic breast cancers.
We have found that deletion of heat shock factor Hsf1 in mice overexpressing
ErbB2/Neu significantly reduces mammary tumorigenesis and metastasis.
Hsf1(+/-)ErbB2/Neu(+) tumors exhibit reduced cellular proliferative and invasive 
properties associated with reduced activated ERK1/2 and reduced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Hsf1(+/+)Neu(+) mammary epithelial cells
exposed to TGFß show high levels of ERK1/2 activity and EMT; this is associated
with reduced expression of E-cadherin and increased expression of Slug and
vimentin, a mesenchymal marker. In contrast, Hsf1(-/-)Neu(+) or Hsf1(+/+)Neu(+)
cells do not exhibit activated ERK1/2 and show reduced EMT in the presence of
TGFß. The ineffective activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK1/2 signaling pathway in
cells with reduced levels of HSF1 is due to the low levels of HSP90 in complex
with RAF1 that are required for RAF1 stability and maturation. These results
indicate a powerful inhibitory effect conferred by HSF1 downstream target genes
in the inhibition of ErbB2-induced breast cancers in the absence of the Hsf1
gene.

PMCID: PMC3471706
PMID: 22847003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Genome Res. 2012 Dec;22(12):2409-17. doi: 10.1101/gr.139378.112. Epub 2012 Jul
20.

Noise-mean relationship in mutated promoters.

Hornung G(1), Bar-Ziv R, Rosin D, Tokuriki N, Tawfik DS, Oren M, Barkai N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Gene expression depends on the frequency of transcription events (burst
frequency) and on the number of mRNA molecules made per event (burst size). Both 
processes are encoded in promoter sequence, yet their dependence on mutations is 
poorly understood. Theory suggests that burst size and frequency can be
distinguished by monitoring the stochastic variation (noise) in gene expression: 
Increasing burst size will increase mean expression without changing noise, while
increasing burst frequency will increase mean expression and decrease noise. To
reveal principles by which promoter sequence regulates burst size and frequency, 
we randomly mutated 22 yeast promoters chosen to span a range of expression and
noise levels, generating libraries of hundreds of sequence variants. In each
library, mean expression (m) and noise (coefficient of variation, <U+03B7>) varied
together, defining a scaling curve: <U+03B7>(2) = b/m + <U+03B7>(ext)(2). This relation is
expected if sequence mutations modulate burst frequency primarily. The estimated 
burst size (b) differed between promoters, being higher in promoter containing a 
TATA box and lacking a nucleosome-free region. The rare variants that
significantly decreased b were explained by mutations in TATA, or by an insertion
of an out-of-frame translation start site. The decrease in burst size due to
mutations in TATA was promoter-dependent, but independent of other mutations.
These TATA box mutations also modulated the responsiveness of gene expression to 
changing conditions. Our results suggest that burst size is a promoter-specific
property that is relatively robust to sequence mutations but is strongly
dependent on the interaction between the TATA box and promoter nucleosomes.

PMCID: PMC3514670
PMID: 22820945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;30(2):450-7. doi: 10.1159/000339038. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Cellular heat acclimation regulates cell growth, cell morphology,
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, and expression of aquaporins in
mouse fibroblast cells.

Sugimoto N(1), Shido O, Matsuzaki K, Ohno-Shosaku T, Hitomi Y, Tanaka M, Sawaki
T, Fujita Y, Kawanami T, Masaki Y, Okazaki T, Nakamura H, Koizumi S, Yachie A,
Umehara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ichikawa, Japan. ns@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The heat shock response has been extensively studied by a number of investigators
to understand the molecular mechanism underlying the cellular response to severe 
heat stress (higher than 42°C). But, body or tissue temperature increases by only
a few degrees Celsius during physiological events. Therefore, the physiological
cellular response to mild heat stress rather than severe heat stress is likely to
be more important. Repeated exposure to hyperthermia for consecutive 5 days
induces heat acclimation which is an adaptive physiological process in humans and
animals. However, thus far, the effect of continuous exposure to heat stress on
cells has not been fully evaluated. In this study, we investigated an adaptive
physiological process that is induced in culture cells by continuous exposure to 
mild heat stress for 5 days. Exposure to heat activated p38-mitogen-activated
protein kinase; inhibited cell growth without apoptosis; and increased the levels
of HSPs and HSF-1 in mouse fibroblast cells. Interestingly, exposure to heat
regulated the expression of aquaporins and induced morphological change. In a
physiological sense, these results suggested that continuous exposure to mild
heat stress for 5 days, in which heat acclimation is attained in humans and
animals, might induce molecular adaptation to heat in cells.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22814242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Sep;23(17):3290-8. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-06-0447. Epub 2012
Jul 18.

The yeast Hsp70 Ssa1 is a sensor for activation of the heat shock response by
thiol-reactive compounds.

Wang Y(1), Gibney PA, West JD, Morano KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Medical
School at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The heat shock transcription factor HSF1 governs the response to heat shock,
oxidative stresses, and xenobiotics through unknown mechanisms. We demonstrate
that diverse thiol-reactive molecules potently activate budding yeast Hsf1. Hsf1 
activation by thiol-reactive compounds is not consistent with the stresses of
misfolding of cytoplasmic proteins or cytotoxicity. Instead, we demonstrate that 
the Hsp70 chaperone Ssa1, which represses Hsf1 in the absence of stress, is
hypersensitive to modification by a thiol-reactive probe. Strikingly, mutation of
two conserved cysteine residues to serine in Ssa1 rendered cells insensitive to
Hsf1 activation and subsequently induced thermotolerance by thiol-reactive
compounds, but not by heat shock. Conversely, substitution with the sulfinic acid
mimic aspartic acid resulted in constitutive Hsf1 activation. Cysteine 303,
located within the nucleotide-binding domain, was found to be modified in vivo by
a model organic electrophile, demonstrating that Ssa1 is a direct target for
thiol-reactive molecules through adduct formation. These findings demonstrate
that Hsp70 is a proximal sensor for Hsf1-mediated cytoprotection and can
discriminate between two distinct environmental stressors.

PMCID: PMC3469052
PMID: 22809627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Curr Mol Med. 2012 Nov 1;12(9):1102-7.

HSF1, a versatile factor in tumorogenesis.

Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu

HSF1 is an essential factor in the acute response to proteotoxic stress, in which
it causes rapid transcription of heat shock protein (HSP) genes in order to
permit survival of cells and restoration of global protein quality. In addition
to this property however, HSF1 is chronically activated or overexpressed in a
wide range of cancers and is essential for multiple pathways of malignant
transformation. Studies in recent years indicate a remarkable pleiotropy in the
properties of HSF1 in cancer. HSF1 functions as a transcription factor for HSP
genes, reminiscent of its role in the stress response, and the resultant
elevation in HSP levels leads to a reduction in programmed cell death and
senescence and permits overexpression of mutated oncogenic protein clients
required to fuel tumor growth. In addition HSF1 plays a role as a signal
modulator, stimulating kinase activity, regulating energy metabolism and
permitting the development of polyploidy in cancer cells. HSF1 can also function 
as an inhibitor of transcription and in cooperation with NuRD family factors can 
repress genes that oppose metastasis. Inhibitors of HSF1 are undergoing selection
and future studies may see the testing of HSF1 as a target in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4075975
PMID: 22804234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Nov;17(6):743-55. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0347-1.
Epub 2012 Jul 14.

Heat shock factor 1 is inactivated by amino acid deprivation.

Hensen SM(1), Heldens L, van Enckevort CM, van Genesen ST, Pruijn GJ, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

Mammalian cells respond to a lack of amino acids by activating a transcriptional 
program with the transcription factor ATF4 as one of the main actors. When cells 
are faced with cytoplasmic proteotoxic stress, a quite different transcriptional 
response is mounted, the heat shock response, which is mediated by HSF1. Here, we
show that amino acid deprivation results in the inactivation of HSF1. In amino
acid deprived cells, active HSF1 loses its DNA binding activity as demonstrated
by EMSA and ChIP. A sharp decrease in the transcript level of HSF1 target genes
such as HSPA1A (Hsp70), DNAJB1 (Hsp40), and HSP90AA1 is also seen. HSPA1A mRNA,
but not DNAJB1 mRNA, was also destabilized. In cells cultured with limiting
leucine, HSF1 activity also declined. Lack of amino acids thus could lead to a
lower chaperoning capacity and cellular frailty. We show that the nutrient
sensing response unit of the ASNS gene contains an HSF1 binding site, but we
could not detect binding of HSF1 to this site in vivo. Expression of either an
HSF1 mutant lacking the activation domain (HSF379) or an HSF1 mutant unable to
bind DNA (K80Q) had only a minor effect on the transcript levels of amino acid
deprivation responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC3468675
PMID: 22797943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Nov;17(6):765-78. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0349-z.
Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Heat stress induces epithelial plasticity and cell migration independent of heat 
shock factor 1.

Lang BJ(1), Nguyen L, Nguyen HC, Vieusseux JL, Chai RC, Christophi C, Fifis T,
Kouspou MM, Price JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.

Current cancer therapies including cytotoxic chemotherapy, radiation and
hyperthermic therapy induce acute proteotoxic stress in tumour cells. A major
challenge to cancer therapeutic efficacy is the recurrence of therapy-resistant
tumours and how to overcome their emergence. The current study examines the
concept that tumour cell exposure to acute proteotoxic stress results in the
acquisition of a more advanced and aggressive cancer cell phenotype.
Specifically, we determined whether heat stress resulted in an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and/or the enhancement of cell
migration, components of an advanced and therapeutically resistant cancer
phenotype. We identified that heat stress enhanced cell migration in both the
lung A549, and breast MDA-MB-468 human adenocarcinoma cell lines, with A549 cells
also undergoing a partial EMT. Moreover, in an in vivo model of thermally ablated
liver metastases of the mouse colorectal MoCR cell line, immunohistological
analysis of classical EMT markers demonstrated a shift to a more mesenchymal
phenotype in the surviving tumour fraction, further demonstrating that thermal
stress can induce epithelial plasticity. To identify a mechanism by which thermal
stress modulates epithelial plasticity, we examined whether the major
transcriptional regulator of the heat shock response, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1),
was a required component. Knockdown of HSF1 in the A549 model did not prevent the
associated morphological changes or enhanced migratory profile of heat stressed
cells. Therefore, this study provides evidence that heat stress significantly
impacts upon cancer cell epithelial plasticity and the migratory phenotype
independent of HSF1. These findings further our understanding of novel biological
downstream effects of heat stress and their potential independence from the
classical heat shock pathway.

PMCID: PMC3468677
PMID: 22791010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39679. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039679. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

mTOR is essential for the proteotoxic stress response, HSF1 activation and heat
shock protein synthesis.

Chou SD(1), Prince T, Gong J, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The target of rapamycin (TOR) is a high molecular weight protein kinase that
regulates many processes in cells in response to mitogens and variations in
nutrient availability. Here we have shown that mTOR in human tissue culture cells
plays a key role in responses to proteotoxic stress and that reduction in mTOR
levels by RNA interference leads to increase sensitivity to heat shock. This
effect was accompanied by a drastic reduction in ability to synthesize heat shock
proteins (HSP), including Hsp70, Hsp90 and Hsp110. As HSP transcription is
regulated by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), we examined whether mTOR
could directly phosphorylate this factor. Indeed, we determined that mTOR could
directly phosphorylate HSF1 on serine 326, a key residue in transcriptional
activation. HSF1 was phosphorylated on S326 immediately after heat shock and was 
triggered by other cell stressors including proteasome inhibitors and sodium
arsenite. Null mutation of S326 to alanine led to loss of ability to activate an 
HSF1-regulated promoter-reporter construct, indicating a direct role for mTOR and
S326 in transcriptional regulation of HSP genes during stress. As mTOR is known
to exist in at least two intracellular complexes, mTORC1 and mTOR2 we examined
which complex might interact with HSF1. Indeed mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin
prevented HSF1-S326 phosphorylation, suggesting that this complex is involved in 
HSF1 regulation in stress. Our experiments therefore suggest a key role for
mTORC1 in transcriptional responses to proteotoxic stress.

PMCID: PMC3387249
PMID: 22768106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Oct;92(4):851-7. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0212060. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Severe multiple organ injury in HSF1 knockout mice induced by lipopolysaccharide 
is associated with an increase in neutrophil infiltration and surface expression 
of adhesion molecules.

Chen S(1), Zuo X, Yang M, Lu H, Wang N, Wang K, Tu Z, Chen G, Liu M, Liu K, Xiao 
X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Changsha, Hunan,
Peoples Republic of China.

We have reported previously that HSF1 is essential in protection against the
lethal systemic inflammation induced by LPS. However, the mechanism by which HSF1
protects against LPS-induced systemic inflammation remains unknown. In this
study, HSF1(-/-) mice were subjected to endotoxemia by a bolus injection of LPS
(10 mg/kg, i.p.). The serum levels of LDH, BUN, and transaminase (ALT and AST)
were measured. PMN infiltration in lung, liver, and kidney tissues after
endotoxemia was observed with immunohistochemistry. Comparing with the WT
control, LPS administration induced more severe multiple organ dysfunction and
lower survival rates in the HSF1(-/-) mice. Moreover, PMN infiltration into
lungs, liver, and kidneys in HSF1(-/-) mice was more than that in the WT mice.
The augmented tissue PMN infiltration in HSF1(-/-) mice was associated with their
enhanced adhesive properties to endothelium in vivo. In addition, HSF1(-/-)
caused greater surface expression of PSGL-1 and CD11b on the PMN surface after
LPS treatment. These findings suggested that HSF1 alleviated LPS-induced multiple
organ injury in mice by suppressing the surface expression of adhesion molecules 
on PMNs and subsequent infiltration of PMNs in tissues.

PMID: 22753951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;72(17):4551-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3600. Epub
2012 Jun 29.

HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG selectively eradicates lymphoma stem cells.

Newman B(1), Liu Y, Lee HF, Sun D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Medical Center, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI48109, USA.

Cancer stem cells (CSC; also called tumor-initiating cells) comprise tumor cell
subpopulations that preserve the properties of quiescence, self-renewal, and
differentiation of normal stem cells. In addition, CSCs are therapeutically
important because of their key contributions toward drug resistance. The
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor HIF1a is critical for CSC maintenance in
mouse lymphoma. In this study, we showed that low concentrations of the HSP90
inhibitor 17-AAG eliminate lymphoma CSCs in vitro and in vivo by disrupting the
transcriptional function of HIF1a, a client protein of HSP90. 17-AAG
preferentially induced apoptosis and eliminated the colony formation capacity of 
mouse lymphoma CSCs and human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) CSCs. However, low
concentrations of 17-AAG failed to eliminate highly proliferative lymphoma and
AML cells (non-CSCs), in which the AKT-GSK3 signaling pathway is constitutively
active. The heat shock transcription factor HSF1 is highly expressed in non-CSCs,
but it was weakly expressed in lymphoma CSCs. However, siRNA-mediated attenuation
of HSF1 abrogated the colony formation ability of both lymphoma and AML CSCs.
This study supports the use of 17-AAG as a CSC targeting agent and, in addition, 
shows that HSF1 is an important target for elimination of both CSCs and non-CSCs 
in cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3443561
PMID: 22751135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jul 30;586(16):2535-41. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.06.023. Epub 
2012 Jun 27.

Roles of 17-AAG-induced molecular chaperones and Rma1 E3 ubiquitin ligase in
folding and degradation of Pendrin.

Lee K(1), Hong TJ, Hahn JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 1
Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-744, Republic of Korea.

Pendrin is a transmembrane chloride/anion exchanger highly expressed in thyroid, 
kidney, and inner ear. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-retention of improperly folded 
Pendrin mutants is considered as the major cause for Pendred syndrome. However,
the folding and degradation mechanisms of Pendrin are poorly understood. Here, we
report that treatment of 17-AAG, an Hsp90 inhibitor, facilitates the folding of
Pendrin through heat shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1)-dependent induction of
molecular chaperones. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Rma1, an E3 ubiquitin
ligase localized in the ER membrane, is involved in Pendrin degradation.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;44(10):1593-612. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.06.012. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Transcriptional regulation of small HSP-HSF1 and beyond.

de Thonel A(1), Le Mouël A, Mezger V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U866, Dijon, France.

The members of the small heat shock protein (sHSP) family are molecular
chaperones that play major roles in development, stress responses, and diseases, 
and have been envisioned as targets for therapy, particularly in cancer. The
molecular mechanisms that regulate their transcription, in normal, stress, or
pathological conditions, are characterized by extreme complexity and subtlety.
Although historically linked to the heat shock transcription factors (HSFs), the 
stress-induced or developmental expression of the diverse members, including
HSPB1/Hsp27/Hsp25, aA-crystallin/HSPB4, and aB-crystallin/HSPB5, relies on the
combinatory effects of many transcription factors. Coupled with remarkably
different cis-element architectures in the sHsp regulatory regions, they confer
to each member its developmental expression or stress-inducibility. For example, 
multiple regulatory pathways coordinate the spatio-temporal expression of mouse
aA-, aB-crystallin, and Hsp25 genes during lens development, through the action
of master genes, like the large Maf family proteins and Pax6, but also HSF4. The 
inducibility of Hsp27 and aB-crystallin transcription by various stresses is
exerted by HSF-dependent mechanisms, by which concomitant induction of Hsp27 and 
aB-crystallin expression is observed. In contrast, HSF-independent pathways can
lead to aB-crystallin expression, but not to Hsp27 induction. Not surprisingly,
deregulation of the expression of sHSP is associated with various pathologies,
including cancer, neurodegenerative, or cardiac diseases. However, many questions
remain to be addressed, and further elucidation of the developmental mechanisms
of sHsp gene transcription might help to unravel the tissue- and stage-specific
functions of this fascinating class of proteins, which might prove to be crucial 
for future therapeutic strategies. This article is part of a Directed Issue
entitled: Small HSPs in physiology and pathology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Aug;5(8):1025-35. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0529. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Targeting FACT complex suppresses mammary tumorigenesis in Her2/neu transgenic
mice.

Koman IE(1), Commane M, Paszkiewicz G, Hoonjan B, Pal S, Safina A, Toshkov I,
Purmal AA, Wang D, Liu S, Morrison C, Gudkov AV, Gurova KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and
Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY, 14263, USA.

Development of safe and effective tumor-preventive treatments for high-risk
patient populations and therapies for early-stage cancer remains a critical need 
in oncology. We have recently discovered compound with anticancer activity,
Curaxin-137, which modulates several important signaling pathways involved in
even the very early stages of cancer. In tumor cells, Curaxin-137 inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B-
and HSF1-dependent transcription (prosurvival pathways) and activates p53 (a
proapoptotic pathway) without inducing DNA damage. These effects result from
chromatin trapping and inhibition of activity of the FACT (facilitates chromatin 
transcription) complex by Curaxin-137. FACT has not been previously implicated in
cancer, but we found that its subunits are overexpressed in breast cancer. On the
basis of this background, we tested whether Curaxin-137 could suppress
tumorigenesis in MMTV-neu transgenic mice, which spontaneously develop mammary
carcinoma due to steroid receptor-regulated expression of the Her2
proto-oncogene. We found that chronic administration of Curaxin-137 in a
preventive regimen to MMTV-neu mice did not cause any detectable changes in
normal organs and tissues, yet inhibited tumor onset, delayed tumor progression, 
and prolonged survival of mice in a dose-dependent manner. Curaxin-137 induced
changes in FACT, altered NF-<U+03BA>B localization, and activated p53 in tumor cells as 
expected from its defined mechanism of action. These results support further
investigation of Curaxin-137 as a potential preventive and/or early-stage
therapeutic agent for breast cancer.

PMID: 22689915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2012 Dec;64(3):187-95. doi: 10.1007/s12013-012-9371-0.

Effect of HSP70 and 90 in modulation of JNK, ERK expression in preeclamptic
placental endothelial cell.

Padmini E(1), Uthra V, Lavanya S.

Author information: 
(1)P.G. Department of Biochemistry, Bharathi Women's College, Affiliated to
University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India. ntrfbwc@gmail.com

Preeclampsia is a disease of worldwide significance with increasing maternal
mortality rate of 20-80 %. Though apoptosis is a normal constituent during
pregnancy, there seems to be an altered balance between proliferation and
apoptosis of endothelial cell in preeclampsia leading to a placental
dysregulation resulting in premature delivery. Molecular chaperones like HSP70
and 90 play a significant role in control of preeclamptic progression and protect
the developing fetus. This is governed by alterations in expression of HSF1,
HIF1a a nuclear transcription factor and signaling molecule like ERK, JNK1/2, and
Bcl-2. Endothelial cell from normotensive and preeclamptic placenta were analyzed
for variation in viability and expression of signaling molecules. A significant
decrease in viability of endothelial cell (p < 0.05) was noted in preeclamptic
samples when compared to normotensive samples. The results indicate that there
was an increase in, HSP70 and 90 (p < 0.01), HSF1 (p < 0.01), HIF1a (p < 0.05),
ERK (p < 0.05), JNK1/2 (p < 0.05), and Bcl-2 (p < 0.05). Though there is a
significant change in the viability of endothelial cell, the live fetal delivery 
is not predominantly affected during preeclampsia. The interplay between these
signaling molecules which alter the apoptotic pathway to sustain endothelial cell
viability is discussed.

PMID: 22689214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2012 Sep;17(3):446-58. doi: 10.2478/s11658-012-0021-8. Epub
2012 Jun 5.

Alterations of the Hsp70/Hsp90 chaperone and the HOP/CHIP co-chaperone system in 
cancer.

Ruckova E(1), Muller P, Nenutil R, Vojtesek B.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Centre for Applied Molecular Oncology, Masaryk Memorial Cancer
Institute, Zluty kopec 7, Brno, 656 53, Czech Republic.

Activation of the Hsp90 chaperone system is a characteristic of cancer cells. The
regulation of chaperone activities involves their interaction with cochaperones; 
therefore we investigated the expression of Hsp70 and Hsp90 and their specific
co-chaperones HOP and CHIP in cancer cell lines and primary cancers. Inhibition
of Hsp90 by 17AAG increased the levels of Hsp70, Hsp90 and HOP but not CHIP mRNA 
in cancer cells. These changes are linked to activation of the HSF1 transcription
factor and we show that the HOP promoter contains HSF1 binding sites, and that
HSF1 binding to the HOP promoter is increased following 17AAG. The lack of
alteration in the co-chaperone CHIP is explained by a lack of HSF response
elements in the CHIP promoter. Non-proliferating cells expressed higher levels of
CHIP and lower HOP, Hsp70 and Hsp90 levels compared to proliferating cells.
Decreased expression of CHIP in proliferating cancer cells is in keeping with its
proposed tumor suppressor properties, while over-expression of HOP in
proliferating cells may contribute to excessive Hsp90 activity and stabilization 
of client proteins in tumors. In a panel of colorectal cancer samples, increased 
expression of Hsp70 and an increased ratio of HOP to CHIP were found, and were
associated with decreased median survival. These data indicate that multiple
changes occur in the chaperone/co-chaperone system in cancer that impact patient 
survival. It is likely that the ability to identify individual alterations to
this system will be beneficial for treatment strategy decisions, particularly
those that employ chaperone inhibitors.

PMID: 22669480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37934. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037934. Epub 2012 May 24.

Heat shock factor 1 contributes to ischemia-induced angiogenesis by regulating
the mobilization and recruitment of bone marrow stem/progenitor cells.

Kubo M(1), Li TS, Kurazumi H, Takemoto Y, Ohshima M, Yamamoto Y, Nishimoto A,
Mikamo A, Fujimoto M, Nakai A, Hamano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Clinical Science, Yamaguchi University Graduate
School of Medicine, Ube, Yamaguchi, Japan.

Bone marrow (BM)-derived stem/progenitor cells play an important role in
ischemia-induced angiogenesis in cardiovascular diseases. Heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) is known to be induced in response to hypoxia and ischemia. We examined
whether HSF1 contributes to ischemia-induced angiogenesis through the
mobilization and recruitment of BM-derived stem/progenitor cells using
HSF1-knockout (KO) mice. After the induction of ischemia, blood flow and
microvessel density in the ischemic hindlimb were significantly lower in the
HSF1-KO mice than in the wild-type (WT) mice. The mobilization of BM-derived
Sca-1- and c-kit-positive cells in peripheral blood after ischemia was
significantly lower in the HSF1-KO mice than in the WT mice. BM stem/progenitor
cells from HSF1-KO mice showed a significant decrease in their recruitment to
ischemic tissue and in migration, adhesion, and survival when compared with WT
mice. Blood flow recovery in the ischemic hindlimb significantly decreased in WT 
mice receiving BM reconstitution with donor cells from HSF1-KO mice. Conversely, 
blood flow recovery in the ischemic hindlimb significantly increased in HSF1-KO
mice receiving BM reconstitution with donor cells from WT mice. These findings
suggest that HSF1 contributes to ischemia-induced angiogenesis by regulating the 
mobilization and recruitment of BM-derived stem/progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC3360019
PMID: 22655083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37929. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037929. Epub 2012 May 23.

Impaired heat shock response in cells expressing full-length
polyglutamine-expanded huntingtin.

Chafekar SM(1), Duennwald ML.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Biology Program, Boston Biomedical Research Institute, Watertown,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

The molecular mechanisms by which polyglutamine (polyQ)-expanded huntingtin (Htt)
causes neurodegeneration in Huntington's disease (HD) remain unclear. The
malfunction of cellular proteostasis has been suggested as central in HD
pathogenesis and also as a target of therapeutic interventions for the treatment 
of HD. We present results that offer a previously unexplored perspective
regarding impaired proteostasis in HD. We find that, under non-stress conditions,
the proteostatic capacity of cells expressing full length polyQ-expanded Htt is
adequate. Yet, under stress conditions, the presence of polyQ-expanded Htt
impairs the heat shock response, a key component of cellular proteostasis. This
impaired heat shock response results in a reduced capacity to withstand the
damage caused by cellular stress. We demonstrate that in cells expressing
polyQ-expanded Htt the levels of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) are
reduced, and, as a consequence, these cells have an impaired a heat shock
response. Also, we found reduced HSF1 and HSP70 levels in the striata of HD
knock-in mice when compared to wild-type mice. Our results suggests that full
length, non-aggregated polyQ-expanded Htt blocks the effective induction of the
heat shock response under stress conditions and may thus trigger the accumulation
of cellular damage during the course of HD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3359295
PMID: 22649566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Transl Med. 2012 May 21;10:101. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-101.

Enhanced antitumoral efficacy and immune response following conditionally
replicative adenovirus containing constitutive HSF1 delivery to rodent tumors.

Fan R(1), Wang C, Wang Y, Ren P, Gan P, Ji H, Xia Z, Hu S, Zeng Q, Huang W, Jiang
Y, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medicine of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Western
Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008,
China.

BACKGROUND: Oncolytic adenoviruses are promising as anticancer agents but have
limited clinical responses. Our previous study showed that heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) overexpression could increase the anti-tumor
efficacy of E1B55kD deleted oncolytic adenovirus through increasing the viral
burst. Due to the important roles of heat shock proteins (HSPs) in eliciting
innate and adaptive immunity, we reasoned that besides increasing the viral
burst, HSF1 may also play a role in increasing tumor specific immune response.
METHODS: In the present study, intra-dermal murine models of melanoma (B16) and
colorectal carcinoma (CT26) were treated with E1B55kD deleted oncolytic
adenovirus Adel55 or Adel55 incorporated with cHSF1, HSF1i, HSP70, or HSP90 by
intra-tumoral injection. Tumors were surgically excised 72 h post injection and
animals were analyzed for tumor resistance and survival rate.
RESULTS: Approximately 95% of animals in the Adel55-cHSF1 treated group showed
sustained resistance upon re-challenge with autologous tumor cells, but not in
PBS, Adel55, or Adel55-HSF1i treated groups. Only 50-65% animals in the
Adel55-HSP70 and Adel55-HSP90 treated group showed tumor resistance. Tumor
resistance was associated with development of tumor type specific cellular immune
responses. Adel55-cHSF1 treatment also showed higher efficacy in diminishing
progression of the secondary tumor focus than Adel55-HSP70 or Adel55-HSP90
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Besides by increasing its burst in tumor cells, cHSF1 could also
augment the potential of E1B55kD deleted oncolytic adenovirus by increasing the
tumor-specific immune response, which is beneficial to prevent tumor recurrence. 
cHSF1 is a better gene for neoadjuvant immunotherapy than other heat shock
protein genes.

PMCID: PMC3419635
PMID: 22613625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e35252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035252. Epub 2012 May 7.

Polymorphism rs4919510:C>G in mature sequence of human microRNA-608 contributes
to the risk of HER2-positive breast cancer but not other subtypes.

Huang AJ(1), Yu KD, Li J, Fan L, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Cancer Center and Cancer Institute, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: A few polymorphisms are located in the mature microRNA sequences.
Such polymorphisms could directly affect the binding of microRNA to hundreds of
target mRNAs. It remains unknown whether rs4919510:C>G located in the mature
miR-608 alters breast cancer susceptibility.
METHODS: The association of rs4919510:C>G with risk and pathologic features of
breast cancer were investigated in two independent case-control studies, the
first set including 1,138 sporadic breast cancer patients (including 927 invasive
ductal carcinoma patients, 777 of them with known subtypes: 496 luminal-like, 133
HER2-positive, and 148 triple-negative) and 1,434 community-based controls, and
the second set including 294 familial/early-onset breast cancer patients and 500 
hospital-based cancer-free controls. Odds ratios (ORs) were estimated by logistic
regression. Predicted targets of miR-608 and complementary sequences containing
rs4919510:C>G were surveyed to reveal potential pathological mechanism.
RESULTS: In the first set, although rs4919510:C>G was unrelated to breast cancer 
in general patients, variant genotypes (CG/GG) were specifically associated with 
increased risk of HER2-positive subtype (Adjusted OR = 1.97, 95% CI, 1.34-2.90 in
the recessive model). Variant G-allele was the risk allele with OR of 1.62 (95%
CI, 1.23-2.15). Patients carrying GG-genotype also had larger HER2-positive
tumors (P for Kruskal-Wallis test = 0.006). The relationship between
rs4919510:C>G and risk of HER2-positive subgroup was validated in the second set 
(Bonferroni corrected P = 0.06). The adjusted combined OR (total 164
HER2-positive cases) in the recessive model was 1.97 (95% CI, 1.43-2.72) for GG
genotype (corrected P = 1.1 × 10(-4)). Bioinformatic analysis indicated that,
HSF1, which is required for HER2-induced tumorigenesis, might be a target of
miR-608. The minimum free-energy of ancestral-miR-608 (C-allele) binding to HSF1 
is -35.9 kcal/mol, while that of variant-form (G-allele) is -31.5 kcal/mol,
indicating a lower affinity of variant-miR-608 to HSF1 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: rs4919510:C>G in mature miR-608 may influence HER2-positive breast
cancer risk and tumor proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3346742
PMID: 22586447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Izv Akad Nauk Ser Biol. 2012 Jan-Feb;(1):27-34.

[Parallelism and paradoxes on viability and the life span of two loss-of-function
mutations: heat shock protein transcriptional regulator hsf(1) and l(2)gl tumor
suppressor in D. melanogaster].

[Article in Russian]

Vaisman NIa, Evgen'ev MB, Golubovskii MD.

In this study we analyzed how a dosage decrease in mono- and diheterozygotes on
both lethal alleles of the lgl-gene and hsfheat shock regulator influences
viability and life span at optimal and high temperature 29 degrees C conditions. 
We found that hsf(1) (1 dosage of active hsf-factor) heterozygote animals had
significantly increased viability (up to 30-39%) in case of its development from 
egg to imago under the stress of 29 degrees C. However, this stress-protective
effect of a decreased dosage of HSF1 was suppressed in diheterozygotes, while the
dosage of tumor suppressor lgl was simultaneously decreased. Under stress
temperature conditions, a decrease in dosage of one of the alleles also increased
the average life span and delayed aging, especially in the case of maternal
inheritance of each of the loss-of-function mutations. In diheterozygotes the
average life span had intermediate meanings. However, in diheterozygote males
under stress conditions the positive longevity effect of hsf was suppressed in
the presence of the lgl-mutation. Paradoxically, that decrease of expression of
each of the studied vital genes provided a positive effect on both viability and 
life span under stress conditions. However, a simultaneous dosage decrease of two
loss-of-function alleles in diheterozygotes resulted in disbalanced effects on
the organism level. The received data indicate interaction between HSF1 and LGL
gene products during ontogenesis and stress-defending processes.

PMID: 22567869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Inflammation. 2012 Aug;35(4):1558-66. doi: 10.1007/s10753-012-9471-4.

HSF1 is a transcriptional activator of IL-10 gene expression in RAW264.7
macrophages.

Zhang H(1), Zhang L, Yu F, Liu Y, Liang Q, Deng G, Chen G, Liu M, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, People's Republic of
China.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is an important transactivator of the
heat shock genes. Recent studies have shown that HSF1 acts as a repressor of
non-heat shock genes to protect against endotoxemia. In this study, we found that
heat shock treatment and HSF1 over-expression augmented the induction of
interleukin (IL)-10 mRNA. Computational analysis of the mouse IL-10 promoter
region showed that three potential heat shock elements (HSEs) were located at
mouse IL-10 gene promoter, among which only the -387/-360 probe formed a complex 
with HSF1. The lack of binding of the other two HSEs to HSF1 suggested the
critical role of the flanking sequences in the binding specificity of HSE to
HSF1. Moreover, we showed that HSF1 overexpression transactivated mouse IL-10
gene promoter and this transcriptional activation was inhibited by the mutation
of HSE in the -387/-360 region of IL-10 gene promoter using luciferase reporter
assay. These findings indicate that HSF1 is a transcriptional activator of
anti-inflammatory mediator IL-10 gene in RAW264.7 macrophages.

PMID: 22549481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Sep;17(5):623-37. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0337-3.
Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Zebrafish HSF4: a novel protein that shares features of both HSF1 and HSF4 of
mammals.

Swan CL(1), Evans TG, Sylvain N, Krone PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Heat-shock proteins (hsps) have important roles in the development of the eye
lens. We previously demonstrated that knockdown of hsp70 gene expression using
morpholino antisense technology resulted in an altered lens phenotype in
zebrafish embryos. A less severe phenotype was seen with knockdown of heat-shock 
factor 1 (HSF1), suggesting that, while it likely plays a role in hsp70
regulation during lens formation, other regulatory factors are also involved.
Heat-shock factor 4 plays an important role in mammalian lens development, and an
expressed sequence tag encoding zebrafish HSF4 has been identified. The deduced
amino acid sequence shares structural similarities with mammalian HSF4 including 
the lack of an HR-C domain. However, the HR-C domain is absent due to a severe
C-terminal truncation within zebrafish HSF4 (zHSF4) relative to the mammalian
protein. Surprisingly, the amino acid composition of the zHSF4 DNA binding domain
shares a greater degree of identity with HSF1 proteins than it does with
mammalian HSF4 proteins. Consistent with this, the binding affinity of in vitro
synthesized zHSF4 for discontinuous heat-shock response element sequences is more
limited, similar to what has been previously observed for HSF1 proteins. Hsf4
mRNA is expressed in zebrafish adult eye tissue but is only observed in
developing embryonic tissue at 60 h post-fertilization or later. This, together
with the lack of an observable phenotype following morpholino-based antisense
knockdown of hsf4, suggests that zHSF4 is unlikely to play a role in regulating
early embryonic lens development.

PMCID: PMC3535164
PMID: 22528049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Cells. 2012 May;33(5):465-70. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-2246-9. Epub 2012 Apr
17.

Functional HSF1 requires aromatic-participant interactions in protecting mouse
embryonic fibroblasts against apoptosis via G2 cell cycle arrest.

Chang Z(1), Lu M, Park SM, Park HK, Kang HS, Pak Y, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemistry Institute of Functional Materials, Pusan
National University, Busan 609-735, Korea.

The present study highlighted the aromatic-participant interactions in in vivo
trimerization of HSF1 and got an insight into the process of HSF1 protecting
against apoptosis. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), mutations of mouse HSF1
(W37A, Y60A and F104A) resulted in a loss of trimerization activity, impaired
binding of the heat shock element (HSE) and lack of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70)
expression after a heat shock. Under UV irradiation, wild-type mouse HSF1
protected the MEFs from UV-induced apoptosis, but none of the mutants offered
protection. We found that normal expression of HSF1 was essential to the cell
arrest in G2 phase, assisting with the cell cycle checkpoint. The cells that lack
normal HSF1 failed to arrest in the G2 phase, resulting in the process of cell
apoptosis. We conclude that the treatment with UV or heat shock stresses appears 
to induce the approach of HSF1 monomers directly via aromatic-participant
interactions, followed by the formation of a HSF1 trimer. HSF1 protects the MEFs 
from the stresses through the expression of HSPs and a G2 cell cycle arrest.

PMCID: PMC3887730
PMID: 22526392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Future Oncol. 2012 Apr;8(4):399-401. doi: 10.2217/fon.12.21.

Elevated levels of HSF1 indicate a poor prognosis in breast cancer.

Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular & Cellular Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 8;108(45):18378-83.

HSF1 is the transcriptional activator of heat shock protein genes in both cell
stress and cancer. The studies of Santagata et al. clearly establish that HSF1
levels are increased in the nuclei of mammary cancer cells, both at the in situ
and invasive stages, and that these levels are closely correlated with increased 
mortality. HSF1 levels were elevated in estrogen receptor-positive cells, as well
as HER2-expressing and triple-negative breast cancer cells, and higher levels of 
nuclear HSF1 were associated with a poor prognosis. These studies establish a
clear role for HSF1 in human mammary carcinoma and suggest the potential for
targeting HSF1 in breast cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3905789
PMID: 22515443  [PubMed]


442. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 17;14(2):R62.

Amplification and high-level expression of heat shock protein 90 marks aggressive
phenotypes of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 negative breast cancer.

Cheng Q(1), Chang JT, Geradts J, Neckers LM, Haystead T, Spector NL, Lyerly HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Box 2606, 203 Research 
Drive, Durham, NC 27710, USA. q.cheng@duke.edu

INTRODUCTION: Although human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive
or estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancers are treated with clinically
validated anti-HER2 or anti-estrogen therapies, intrinsic and acquired resistance
to these therapies appears in a substantial proportion of breast cancer patients 
and new therapies are needed. Identification of additional molecular factors,
especially those characterized by aggressive behavior and poor prognosis, could
prioritize interventional opportunities to improve the diagnosis and treatment of
breast cancer.
METHODS: We compiled a collection of 4,010 breast tumor gene expression data
derived from 23 datasets that have been posted on the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. We
performed a genome-scale survival analysis using Cox-regression survival
analyses, and validated using Kaplan-Meier Estimates survival and Cox
Proportional-Hazards Regression survival analyses. We conducted a genome-scale
analysis of chromosome alteration using 481 breast cancer samples obtained from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), from which combined expression and copy number
data were available. We assessed the correlation between somatic copy number
alterations and gene expression using analysis of variance (ANOVA).
RESULTS: Increased expression of each of the heat shock protein (HSP) 90
isoforms, as well as HSP transcriptional factor 1 (HSF1), was correlated with
poor prognosis in different subtypes of breast cancer. High-level expression of
HSP90AA1 and HSP90AB1, two cytoplasmic HSP90 isoforms, was driven by chromosome
coding region amplifications and were independent factors that led to death from 
breast cancer among patients with triple-negative (TNBC) and HER2-/ER+ subtypes, 
respectively. Furthermore, amplification of HSF1 was correlated with higher
HSP90AA1 and HSP90AB1 mRNA expression among the breast cancer cells without
amplifications of these two genes. A collection of HSP90AA1, HSP90AB1 and HSF1
amplifications defined a subpopulation of breast cancer with up-regulated HSP90
gene expression, and up-regulated HSP90 expression independently elevated the
risk of recurrence of TNBC and poor prognosis of HER2-/ER+ breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Up-regulated HSP90 mRNA expression represents a confluence of
genomic vulnerability that renders HER2 negative breast cancers more aggressive, 
resulting in poor prognosis. Targeting breast cancer with up-regulated HSP90 may 
potentially improve the effectiveness of clinical intervention in this disease.

PMCID: PMC3446397
PMID: 22510516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Aging Cell. 2012 Aug;11(4):617-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2012.00827.x. Epub
2012 May 22.

The heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 is downregulated in DNA
damage-associated senescence, contributing to the maintenance of senescence
phenotype.

Kim G(1), Meriin AB, Gabai VL, Christians E, Benjamin I, Wilson A, Wolozin B,
Sherman MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118, USA.

Heat shock response (HSR) that protects cells from proteotoxic stresses is
downregulated in aging, as well as upon replicative senescence of cells in
culture. Here we demonstrate that HSR is suppressed in fibroblasts from the
patients with segmental progerioid Werner Syndrome, which undergo premature
senescence. Similar suppression of HSR was seen in normal fibroblasts, which
underwent senescence in response to DNA damaging treatments. The major
DNA-damage-induced signaling (DDS) pathways p53-p21 and p38-NF-kB-SASP
contributed to the HSR suppression. The HSR suppression was associated with
inhibition of both activity and transcription of the heat shock transcription
factor Hsf1. This inhibition in large part resulted from the downregulation of
SIRT1, which in turn was because of decrease in the expression of the translation
regulator HuR. Importantly, we uncovered a positive feedback regulation, where
suppression of Hsf1 further activates the p38-NF-<U+03BA>B-SASP pathway, which in turn
promotes senescence. Overexpression of Hsf1 inhibited the p38-NF<U+03BA>B-SASP pathway
and partially relieved senescence. Therefore, downregulation of Hsf1 plays an
important role in the development or in the maintenance of DNA damage
signaling-induced cell senescence.

© 2012 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3433748
PMID: 22510478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Jul;128(1):126-36. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs130. Epub 2012 Apr
10.

Inhibition of the heat shock response by PI103 enhances the cytotoxicity of
arsenic trioxide.

Yih LH(1), Hsu NC, Kuo HH, Wu YC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan, Republic of China. lhyih@gate.sinica.edu.tw

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a key regulator of the cytoprotective and
anti-apoptotic heat shock response and can be activated by arsenite. Inhibition
of HSF1 activation may therefore enhance the cytotoxicity of arsenic trioxide
(ATO). We show that ATO induced HSF1 phosphorylation at serine 326 (S326) and
induced HSF1-dependent expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) 27 and 70 in
cultured cells. HSF1 significantly reduced cell sensitivity to ATO by reducing
apoptosis. Disruption of HSF1 function not only reduced ATO induction of HSP27
and 70 but also enhanced ATO cytotoxicity by elevating apoptosis. These results
reveal that HSF1 activation and the resulting induction of HSPs may protect cells
from ATO cytotoxicity. The diminished expression of HSPs and hypersensitivity to 
ATO in cells stably depleted of HSF1 was rescued by ectopic expression of
wild-type HSF1 but not an S326A substitution mutant, indicating that
phosphorylation at S326 was critical for the protective effect of HSF1.
Simultaneous treatment of cells with ATO and PI103, an inhibitor of members of
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) family, suppressed not only ATO-induced 
expression of an HSP70 promoter-reporter construct and endogenous HSP70 but also 
phosphorylation of HSF1 S326. PI103 considerably reduced HSF1 transactivation in 
ATO-treated cells but had only a limited effect on HSF1 nuclear translocation and
DNA binding. Furthermore, PI103 enhanced ATO cytotoxicity in an HSF1-dependent
manner. Thus, inhibition of S326 phosphorylation by PI103 blocks the
transactivation of HSF1 and may consequently suppress ATO induction of the heat
shock response and sensitize cells to ATO.

PMID: 22496356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Proteome Res. 2012 May 4;11(5):2625-34. doi: 10.1021/pr201151a. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

Post-translational modification of human heat shock factors and their functions: 
a recent update by proteomic approach.

Xu YM(1), Huang DY, Chiu JF, Lau AT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Epigenetics, Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, China.

Heat shock factors (HSFs) are vital for modulating stress and heat shock-related 
gene expression in cells. The activity of HSFs is controlled largely by
post-translational modifications (PTMs). For example, basal phosphorylation of
HSF1 on three serine sites suppresses the heat shock response, and
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 on several other serine and threonine sites by
stress-activated kinases results in its activation, while acetylation on K80
inhibits its DNA-binding ability. Sumoylation of HSF2 on K82 regulates its
DNA-binding ability, whereas sumoylation of HSF4B on K293 represses its
transcriptional activity. With the advancement of proteomic technology, novel PTM
sites on various HSFs have been identified with the use of tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS), but the functions of many of these PTMs are still unclear. 
Yet, it should be noted that the discovery of these novel PTM sites provided the 
necessary evidence for the existence of these PTM marks in vivo. Followed by
subsequent functional analysis, this would ultimately lead to a better
understanding of these PTM marks. MS/MS-based proteomic approach is becoming a
gold standard in PTM validation in the field of life science. Here, the recent
literature of all known PTMs reported on human HSFs and the resulting functions
will be discussed.

PMID: 22494029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34349. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034349. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Analysis of IL12B gene variants in inflammatory bowel disease.

Glas J(1), Seiderer J, Wagner J, Olszak T, Fries C, Tillack C, Friedrich M,
Beigel F, Stallhofer J, Steib C, Wetzke M, Göke B, Ochsenkühn T, Diegelmann J,
Czamara D, Brand S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II-Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU),
Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: IL12B encodes the p40 subunit of IL-12, which is also part of IL-23. 
Recent genome-wide association studies identified IL12B and IL23R as
susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, the
phenotypic effects and potential gene-gene interactions of IL12B variants are
largely unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed IL12B gene variants regarding
association with Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Genomic DNA
from 2196 individuals including 913 CD patients, 318 UC patients and 965 healthy,
unrelated controls was analyzed for four SNPs in the IL12B gene region
(rs3212227, rs17860508, rs10045431, rs6887695). Our analysis revealed an
association of the IL12B SNP rs6887695 with susceptibility to IBD (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.035; OR 
1.15 [95% CI 1.01-1.31] including a trend for rs6887695 for association with CD
(OR 1.41; [0.99-1.31], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.066) and UC (OR 1.18 [0.97-1.43], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.092). CD
patients, who were homozygous C/C carriers of this SNP, had significantly more
often non-stricturing, non-penetrating disease than carriers of the G allele
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.8×10(-5); OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.84, 95% CI 1.66-4.84), while C/C homozygous UC patients
had less often extensive colitis than G allele carriers (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029; OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.36,
95% CI 0.14-0.92). In silico analysis predicted stronger binding of the minor C
allele of rs6887695 to the transcription factor RORa which is involved in Th17
differentiation. Differences regarding the binding to the major and minor allele 
sequence of rs6887695 were also predicted for the transcription factors HSF1,
HSF2, MZF1 and Oct-1. Epistasis analysis revealed weak epistasis of the IL12B SNP
rs6887695 with several SNPs (rs11889341, rs7574865, rs7568275, rs8179673,
rs10181656, rs7582694) in the STAT4 gene which encodes the major IL-12 downstream
transcription factor STAT4 (p<0.05) but there was no epistasis between IL23R and 
IL12B variants.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The IL12B SNP rs6887695 modulates the susceptibility
and the phenotype of IBD, although the effect on IBD susceptibilty is less
pronounced than that of IL23R gene variants.

PMCID: PMC3316707
PMID: 22479607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Sep;17(5):603-13. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0335-5.
Epub 2012 Apr 5.

Protein refolding in peroxisomes is dependent upon an HSF1-regulated function.

Heldens L(1), van Genesen ST, Hanssen LL, Hageman J, Kampinga HH, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Post-heat shock refolding of luciferase requires chaperones. Expression of a
dominant negative HSF1 mutant (dnHSF1), which among other effects depletes cells 
of HSF1-regulated chaperones, blocked post-heat shock refolding of luciferase
targeted to the cytoplasm, nucleus, or peroxisomes, while refolding of
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-targeted luciferase was inhibited by about 50 %.
Luciferase refolding in the cytoplasm could be partially restored by expression
of HSPA1A and fully by both HSPA1A and DNAJB1. For full refolding of ER
luciferase, HSPA1A expression sufficed. Neither nuclear nor peroxisomal refolding
was rescued by HSPA1A. A stimulatory effect of DNAJB1 on post-heat shock
peroxisomal luciferase refolding was seen in control cells, while refolding in
the cytoplasm or nucleus in control cells was inhibited by DNAJB1 expression in
the absence of added HSPA1A. HSPB1 also improved refolding of peroxisomal
luciferase in control cells, but not in dnHSF1 expressing cells. HSP90, HSPA5,
HSPA6, and phosphomevalonate kinase (of which the synthesis is also downregulated
by dnHSF1) had no effect on peroxisomal refolding in either control or
chaperone-depleted cells. The chaperone requirement for post-heat shock refolding
of peroxisomal luciferase in control cells is thus unusual in that it can be
augmented by DNAJB1 or HSPB1 but not by HSPA1A; in dnHSF1 expressing cells,
expression of none of the (co)-chaperones tested was effective, and an as yet to 
be identified, HSF1-regulated function is required.

PMCID: PMC3535170
PMID: 22477622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032467. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Modelling the regulation of thermal adaptation in Candida albicans, a major
fungal pathogen of humans.

Leach MD(1), Tyc KM, Brown AJ, Klipp E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

Eukaryotic cells have evolved mechanisms to sense and adapt to dynamic
environmental changes. Adaptation to thermal insults, in particular, is essential
for their survival. The major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida albicans, is
obligately associated with warm-blooded animals and hence occupies thermally
buffered niches. Yet during its evolution in the host it has retained a bona fide
heat shock response whilst other stress responses have diverged significantly.
Furthermore the heat shock response is essential for the virulence of C.
albicans. With a view to understanding the relevance of this response to
infection we have explored the dynamic regulation of thermal adaptation using an 
integrative systems biology approach. Our mathematical model of thermal
regulation, which has been validated experimentally in C. albicans, describes the
dynamic autoregulation of the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 and the
essential chaperone protein Hsp90. We have used this model to show that the
thermal adaptation system displays perfect adaptation, that it retains a
transient molecular memory, and that Hsf1 is activated during thermal transitions
that mimic fever. In addition to providing explanations for the evolutionary
conservation of the heat shock response in this pathogen and the relevant of this
response to infection, our model provides a platform for the analysis of thermal 
adaptation in other eukaryotic cells.

PMCID: PMC3308945
PMID: 22448221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2012 Jan;41(1):40-5.

[Protection of HSF1/HSP70 pathway on UVA-induced HaCaT cells apoptosis via
inhibiting the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang X(1), Wang C, Li B, Han Y.

Author information: 
(1)Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao 266071, China.
cookie.wenwen@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effect of heat shock factor1 (HSF1) and 
heat shock protein70 (HSP70) on ultraviolet A (UVA)-induced HaCaT cells apoptosis
and its mechanism.
METHODS: The apoptotic HaCaT cell model was induced by UVA irradiation (8mJ/cm2).
The cells were randomly divided into three groups, including a control group, a
model group (8mJ/cm2 UVA) and a HSP70 transcription inhibitor group (50
micromol/L quercetin). The morphologic alteration of apoptotic cells was
investigated by using Hoechst 33258 fluorescent staining. Western blotting was
used to investigate protein expression levels of phosphorylated HSF1 and HSP70 at
different time points, as well as c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and
phosphorylated JNK were investigated after incubating for 6 hours following UVA
irradiation. HSP70 mRNA was detected by Real-Time PCR.
RESULTS: Protein expression levels of both phosphorylated HSF1 and HSP70 were
time-dependent, appearing an increase at first and then decreased. The increase
of p-HSF1 begining at 1h, up to the peak at 3h; and the increase of HSP70 to the 
peak at 6h and then recovered to the original level at 24h. The pretreatment of
HSP70 transcription inhibitor quercetin could significantly inhibit the
expression of HSP70 mRNA., and increase the expression of phosphorylated JNK,
while increase the apoptosis rate in comparison with UVA model group observed by 
using Hoechst 33258 fluorescent staining.
CONCLUSION: 8mJ/cm2 UVA irradiation could stimulate the activation of HSF1 and
increase HSP70 protein expression. HSF1/HSP70 pathway has a protective effect on 
UVA-induced HaCaT cells apoptosis and its mechanism is that a large number of
HSP70 expression inhibited the activation of JNK.

PMID: 22443056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Animal. 2011 May;5(7):1071-81. doi: 10.1017/S1751731110002727.

Gene expression profiling in developing pig adipose tissue: non-secreted
regulatory proteins.

Hausman GJ(1), Barb CR, Dean RG.

Author information: 
(1)1USDA-ARS, Russell Agricultural Research Center, Athens, GA 30604, USA.

Erratum in
    Animal. 2012 Jul;6(7):1198.

The expression of many genes encoding secreted and non-secreted factors have been
studied in human and rodent adipose tissue with cDNA microarrays, but few such
studies in adipose tissue from growing pigs have been reported. Total RNA was
collected at slaughter from outer subcutaneous adipose tissue (OSQ) and middle
subcutaneous adipose tissue (MSQ) samples from gilts at 90, 150 and 210 days (n =
5/age). Dye-labeled cDNA probes were hybridized to custom microarrays (70-mer
oligonucleotides) representing about 600 pig genes involved in growth and
reproduction. Gene expression intensity ratios changed little with age for 100
transcription factors, nuclear receptors, enzymes and other regulatory proteins
in OSQ and MSQ from pigs between 90 and 210 days of age. However, the relative
expression of 13 genes distinguished OSQ and MSQ depots in growing pigs. The
expression of several genes were influenced by age including an increase in
CCND3, HSF1 and PTGR1 expression in MSQ and a decrease in UCP2 and REA
(prohibitin-2) expression in OSQ. These studies demonstrate for the first time
the expression of several key regulatory genes in pig adipose tissue. Simple
linear regression analysis showed that leptin gene expression was associated with
expression of some of these regulatory genes. Negative associations between
expression of some regulatory factors and leptin gene expression indicated that
local leptin may decrease or antagonize adipogenesis.

PMID: 22440102  [PubMed]


451. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Jun;341(3):829-39. doi: 10.1124/jpet.112.192245. Epub 
2012 Mar 21.

Heat shock protein 25-enriched plasma transfusion preconditions the heart against
doxorubicin-induced dilated cardiomyopathy in mice.

Krishnamurthy K(1), Kanagasabai R, Druhan LJ, Ilangovan G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Davis Heart & Lung Research Institute,
Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.

Extracellular heat shock proteins (eHsps) in the circulation have recently been
found to activate both apoptotic and protective signaling in the heart. However, 
the role of eHsps in doxorubicin (Dox)-induced heart failure has not yet been
studied. The objective of the present study was to determine how Dox affects
circulating eHsp25 in blood plasma and how eHsp25 affects Dox-induced dilated
cardiomyopathy. Wild-type mice [HSF-1(+/+)] were pretreated with 100 µl of
heterozygous heat shock factor-1 [HSF-1(+/-)] mouse plasma (which contained
4-fold higher eHsp25 compared with wild-type mice), HSF-1(+/+) plasma, or saline,
before treatment with Dox (6 mg/kg). After 4 weeks of this treatment protocol,
HSF-1(+/-) plasma-pretreated mice showed increased eHsp25 in plasma and improved 
cardiac function (percentage of fractional shortening 37.3 ± 2.1 versus 26.4 ±
4.0) and better life span (31 ± 2 versus 22 ± 3 days) compared with the
HSF-1(+/+) plasma or saline-pretreated mice. Preincubation of isolated adult
cardiomyocytes with HSF-1(+/-) plasma or recombinant human Hsp27 (rhHsp27)
significantly reduced Dox-induced activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and cytokine
release and delayed cardiomyocyte death. Moreover, when cardiomyocytes were
incubated with fluorescence-tagged rhHsp27, a saturation in binding was observed,
suggesting that eHsp25 can bind to surface receptors. Competitive assays with a
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) antibody reduced the rhHSP27 binding, indicating that
Hsp25 interacts with TLR2. In conclusion, transfusion of Hsp25-enriched blood
plasma protected the heart from Dox-induced cardiotoxicity. Hsp25 antagonized Dox
binding to the TLR2 receptor on cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3362880
PMID: 22438470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Mar 21;13:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-9.

Novel polysome messages and changes in translational activity appear after
induction of adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells.

Fromm-Dornieden C(1), von der Heyde S, Lytovchenko O, Salinas-Riester G, Brenig
B, Beissbarth T, Baumgartner BG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Control of translation allows for rapid adaptation of the cell to
stimuli, rather than the slower transcriptional control. We presume that
translational control is an essential process in the control of adipogenesis,
especially in the first hours after hormonal stimulation. 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
were cultured to confluency and adipogenesis was induced by standard protocols
using a hormonal cocktail. Cells were harvested before and 6 hours after hormonal
induction. mRNAs attached to ribosomes (polysomal mRNAs) were separated from
unbound mRNAs by velocity sedimentation. Pools of polysomal and unbound mRNA
fractions were analyzed by microarray analysis. Changes in relative abundance in 
unbound and polysomal mRNA pools were calculated to detect putative changes in
translational activity. Changes of expression levels of selected genes were
verified by qPCR and Western blotting.
RESULTS: We identified 43 genes that shifted towards the polysomal fraction
(up-regulated) and 2 genes that shifted towards free mRNA fraction
(down-regulated). Interestingly, we found Ghrelin to be down-regulated.
Up-regulated genes comprise factors that are nucleic acid binding (eIF4B, HSF1,
IRF6, MYC, POLR2a, RPL18, RPL27a, RPL6, RPL7a, RPS18, RPSa, TSC22d3), form part
of ribosomes (RPL18, RPL27a, RPL6, RPL7a, RPS18, RPSa), act on the regulation of 
translation (eIF4B) or transcription (HSF1, IRF6, MYC, TSC22d3). Others act as
chaperones (BAG3, HSPA8, HSP90ab1) or in other metabolic or signals transducing
processes.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that a moderate reorganisation of the functionality of
the ribosomal machinery and translational activity are very important steps for
growth and gene expression control in the initial phase of adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3347988
PMID: 22436005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Exp Physiol. 2012 Jun;97(6):730-40. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2011.064204. Epub
2012 Mar 16.

Heat shock factor 1 regulates the expression of the TRPV1 gene in the rat
preoptic-anterior hypothalamus area during lipopolysaccharide-induced fever.

Fan-xin M(1), Li-mei S, Bei S, Xin Q, Yu Y, Yu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, China Medical University, Beier Road, Heping
District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110001, China.

The TRPV1 cation channel is a member of the thermo-TRP family of ionic channels
activated by noxious heat and various endogenous mediators. Expression of TRPV1
is widespread and includes hypothalamic neurons. The preoptic-anterior
hypothalamus area (PO/AH) are required for regulation of body temperature,
suggesting that resident thermosensitive TRPV1 channels may be involved in
thermoregulation. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a ubiquitous heat-sensitive
transcription factor that co-ordinates the genomic response to noxious heat, but 
it is not known whether TRPV1 expression is part of this adaptive mechanism. We
therefore investigated whether HSF1 regulates TRPV1 transcription in response to 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced fever in rats. Expression of TRPV1 and nuclear
translocation of HSF1 were transiently upregulated during LPS-induced fever, with
temporal profiles that mirrored the rise and fall in body temperature. We used a 
series of luciferase reporter vectors encoding different spans of the TRPV1 gene 
5'-flanking region to identify possible HSF1-binding sites. Reporter assays in
transfected PC12 cells demonstrated that only TRPV1 promoters with the -1160 to
-821 region drove reporter expression in response to heat shock. This region
contains one putative heat shock-responsive element (HSE) for HSF1 binding at
-919 to -910. Site-directed mutagenesis of this HSE abrogated reporter activity
in response to heat shock, indicating that -919 to -910 contains the specific
HSF1-binding sequence. In the PO/AH, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay analyses demonstrated that HSF1 is recruited 
to the HSE of the TRPV1 gene in PO/AH cells during LPS-induced fever, resulting
in enhanced TRPV1 expression. Based on these findings, we conclude that HSF1
regulates TRPV1 gene expression in PO/AH of rats with LPS-induced fever.

PMID: 22427437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2012 Jun;52(6):1282-90. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2012.02.011.
Epub 2012 Mar 6.

Association of Stat3 with HSF1 plays a critical role in G-CSF-induced
cardio-protection against ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Ma H(1), Gong H, Chen Z, Liang Y, Yuan J, Zhang G, Wu J, Ye Y, Yang C, Nakai A,
Komuro I, Ge J, Zou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Zhongshan Hospital and
Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, 180 Feng Lin Road, Shanghai,
China.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) has been shown to be
cardio-protective against ischemia through activating Jak2/Stat3 pathway,
however, the mechanism is unclear. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), a
definite endogenous protective protein in cardiomyocytes, may interact with Stat 
family under stress conditions. We hypothesized that G-CSF could induce
cardio-protection against ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) through association of HSF1 
with Stat3. To test the hypothesis, we built cardiac I/R injury model with HSF1
knockout (KO) mice and wild type (WT) mice by occlusion of the left anterior
descending (LAD) coronary artery for 30min and subsequent release of the
occlusion for 24h. These mice were administered with G-CSF (100µg/kg/day) or
vehicle subcutaneously for 3days before surgery. As expected, G-CSF induced
significant cardio-protections against I/R injury, characterized by higher
ejection fraction (EF%), lower left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP),
increased dp/dt value and decreased infarct area as compared with the vehicle
treatment in WT mice. In HSF1-KO mice, however, these cardio-protections induced 
by G-CSF were greatly attenuated. Inhibition of oxidative stress-induced
cardiomyocyte apoptosis by G-CSF also disappeared due to the deficiency of HSF1
in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, G-CSF increased the phosphorylation and the
association of Stat3 with HSF1, which enhanced transcriptional activity of HSF1. 
Inhibition of either Stat3 or HSF1 by pharmacological agents suppressed
G-CSF-induced association of the two proteins and anti-apoptotic effect on
cardiomyocytes. Our data suggest that G-CSF stimulates phosphorylation and
association of Stat3 with HSF1 and therefore enhances transcriptional activity of
HSF1, leading to the cardio-protection against I/R injury.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22426029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Imaging. 2012 Feb;11(1):67-76.

Monitoring the induction of heat shock factor 1/heat shock protein 70 expression 
following 17-allylamino-demethoxygeldanamycin treatment by positron emission
tomography and optical reporter gene imaging.

Doubrovin M(1), Che JT, Serganova I, Moroz E, Solit DB, Ageyeva L, Kochetkova T, 
Pillarsetti N, Finn R, Rosen N, Blasberg RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Memorial Hospital,Sloan-KetteringInstitute, Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The cell response to proteotoxic cell stresses is mediated primarily through
activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). This transcription factor plays a major
role in the regulation of the heat shock proteins (HSPs), including HSP70. We
demonstrate that an [124I]iodide-pQHNIG70 positron emission tomography (PET)
reporter system that includes an inducible HSP70 promoter can be used to image
and monitor the activation of the HSF1/HSP70 transcription factor in response to 
drug treatment (17-allylamino-demethoxygeldanamycin [17-AAG]). We developed a
dual imaging reporter (pQHNIG70) for noninvasive imaging of the heat shock
response in cell culture and living animals previously and now study HSF1/HSP70
reporter activation in both cell culture and tumor-bearing animals following
exposure to 17-AAG. 17-AAG (10-1,000 nM) induced reporter expression; a 23-fold
increase was observed by 60 hours. Good correspondence between reporter
expression and HSP70 protein levels were observed. MicroPET imaging based on
[124I]iodide accumulation in pQHNIG70-transduced RG2 xenografts showed a
significant 6.2-fold reporter response to 17-AAG, with a corresponding increase
in tumor HSP70 and in tumor human sodium iodide symporter and green fluorescent
protein reporter proteins. The HSF1 reporter system can be used to screen
anticancer drugs for induction of cytotoxic stress and HSF1 activation both in
vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 22418029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2012 Jun;22(5):367-74. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2012.673091.
Epub 2012 Apr 5.

Mechanism of JNK signal regulation by placental HSP70 and HSP90 in endothelial
cell during preeclampsia.

Padmini E(1), Venkatraman U, Srinivasan L.

Author information: 
(1)P.G. Department of Biochemistry, Bharathi Women's College, Affiliated to
University of Madras, Tamil Nadu, India. ntrfbwc@gmail.com

CONTEXT: Preeclampsia is a placenta related disorder of during pregnancy
resulting in pre- and post-partum complications of the both mother and fetus. It 
is associated with improper trophoblast invasion and maternal endothelial cell
dysfunction leading to a placental dysregulation resulting in premature delivery.
OBJECTIVE: Aim of the present study is to elucidate of the protective role of
chaperones (HSP70 and 90) in preeclampsia and to test whether it is associated
with oxidative stress level in placental tissue.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Endothelial cell from normotensive and preeclamptic
placenta were analyzed for variation in viability and expression of signaling
molecules.
RESULTS: A significant decrease in viability of endothelial cell (p < 0.05) was
noted in preeclamptic samples when compared to normotensive samples. The results 
indicate that there were increases in HSP70 and HSP90 (p <0.01), HSF1 (p <0.01), 
NF-<U+03BA>B (p <0.05), JNK1 (p <0.05), JNK2 (p> 0.05) and Bcl2 (p <0.05).
DISCUSSION: The significant change in the viability of endothelial cell has not
predominantly affected the live fetal delivery during preeclampsia. This is
governed by alterations in expression of nuclear transcription factors like HSF1,
NF-<U+03BA>B and signaling molecules like JNK1/2 and Bcl2 in preeclamptic endothelial
cell.
CONCLUSION: This HSP mediated signal changes may contribute to live fetal
delivery in spite of existing endothelial cell complication during preeclampsia.

PMID: 22409343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Genes Dev. 2012 Mar 15;26(6):567-80. doi: 10.1101/gad.183251.111. Epub 2012 Feb
29.

Simulated body temperature rhythms reveal the phase-shifting behavior and
plasticity of mammalian circadian oscillators.

Saini C(1), Morf J, Stratmann M, Gos P, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, National Centers of Competence in Research
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva-4,
Switzerland.

The circadian pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus
maintains phase coherence in peripheral cells through metabolic, neuronal, and
humoral signaling pathways. Here, we investigated the role of daily body
temperature fluctuations as possible systemic cues in the resetting of peripheral
oscillators. Using precise temperature devices in conjunction with real-time
monitoring of the bioluminescence produced by circadian luciferase reporter
genes, we showed that simulated body temperature cycles of mice and even humans, 
with daily temperature differences of only 3°C and 1°C, respectively, could
gradually synchronize circadian gene expression in cultured fibroblasts. The time
required for establishing the new steady-state phase depended on the reporter
gene, but after a few days, the expression of each gene oscillated with a precise
phase relative to that of the temperature cycles. Smooth temperature oscillations
with a very small amplitude could synchronize fibroblast clocks over a wide
temperature range, and such temperature rhythms were also capable of entraining
gene expression cycles to periods significantly longer or shorter than 24 h. As
revealed by genetic loss-of-function experiments, heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), but
not HSF2, was required for the efficient synchronization of fibroblast
oscillators to simulated body temperature cycles.

PMCID: PMC3315118
PMID: 22379191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Genetics. 2012 May;191(1):95-106. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.135806. Epub 2012 Feb
29.

Role of Mediator in regulating Pol II elongation and nucleosome displacement in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kremer SB(1), Kim S, Jeon JO, Moustafa YW, Chen A, Zhao J, Gross DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130.

Mediator is a modular multisubunit complex that functions as a critical
coregulator of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. While it is well
accepted that Mediator plays important roles in the assembly and function of the 
preinitiation complex (PIC), less is known of its potential roles in regulating
downstream steps of the transcription cycle. Here we use a combination of genetic
and molecular approaches to investigate Mediator regulation of Pol II elongation 
in the model eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We find that ewe (expression
without heat shock element) mutations in conserved Mediator subunits Med7, Med14,
Med19, and Med21-all located within or adjacent to the middle module-severely
diminish heat-shock-induced expression of the Hsf1-regulated HSP82 gene.
Interestingly, these mutations do not impede Pol II recruitment to the gene's
promoter but instead impair its transit through the coding region. This implies
that a normal function of Mediator is to regulate a postinitiation step at HSP82.
In addition, displacement of histones from promoter and coding regions, a
hallmark of activated heat-shock genes, is significantly impaired in the med14
and med21 mutants. Suggestive of a more general role, ewe mutations confer
hypersensitivity to the anti-elongation drug 6-azauracil (6-AU) and one of
them-med21-impairs Pol II processivity on a GAL1-regulated reporter gene. Taken
together, our results suggest that yeast Mediator, acting principally through its
middle module, can regulate Pol II elongation at both heat-shock and
non-heat-shock genes.

PMCID: PMC3338273
PMID: 22377631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Apr;11(4):973-83. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0979. Epub 
2012 Feb 24.

Combination of pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor and autophagy inhibitor exerts
superior efficacy against triple-negative human breast cancer cells.

Rao R(1), Balusu R, Fiskus W, Mudunuru U, Venkannagari S, Chauhan L, Smith JE,
Hembruff SL, Ha K, Atadja P, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDI) induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress and apoptosis, while promoting autophagy, which promotes cancer cell
survival when apoptosis is compromised. Here, we determined the in vitro and in
vivo activity of the combination of the pan-HDI panobinostat and the autophagy
inhibitor chloroquine against human estrogen/progesterone receptor and HER2
(triple)-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells. Treatment of MB-231 and SUM159PT
cells with panobinostat disrupted the hsp90/histone deacetylase 6/HSF1/p97
complex, resulting in the upregulation of hsp. This was accompanied by the
induction of enhanced autophagic flux as evidenced by increased expression of
LC3B-II and the degradation of the autophagic substrate p62. Treatment with
panobinostat also induced the accumulation and colocalization of p62 with LC3B-II
in cytosolic foci as evidenced by immunofluorescent confocal microscopy.
Inhibition of panobinostat-induced autophagic flux by chloroquine markedly
induced the accumulation of polyubiquitylated proteins and p62, caused
synergistic cell death of MB-231 and SUM159PT cells, and inhibited mammosphere
formation in MB-231 cells, compared with treatment with each agent alone.
Finally, in mouse mammary fat pad xenografts of MB-231 cells, a tumor
size-dependent induction of heat shock response, ER stress and autophagy were
observed. Cotreatment with panobinostat and chloroquine resulted in reduced tumor
burden and increased the survival of MB-231 breast cancer xenografts.
Collectively, our findings show that cotreatment with an autophagy inhibitor and 
pan-HDI, for example, chloroquine and panobinostat results in accumulation of
toxic polyubiquitylated proteins, exerts superior inhibitory effects on TNBC cell
growth, and increases the survival of TNBC xenografts.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22367781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell. 2012 Mar 30;45(6):777-89. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.01.015. Epub 2012 
Feb 23.

IL6-mediated suppression of miR-200c directs constitutive activation of
inflammatory signaling circuit driving transformation and tumorigenesis.

Rokavec M(1), Wu W, Luo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL
33458, USA.

Abnormal inflammatory signaling activation occurs commonly in cancer cells.
However, how it is initiated and maintained and its roles in early stages of
tumorigensis are largely unknown. Here, we report that the monocyte-derived
MCP-1-induced transformation of immortal breast epithelial cells is triggered by 
transient activation of MEK/ERK and IKK/NF-<U+03BA>B pathways and maintained by
constitutive activation of a feed-forward inflammatory signaling circuit composed
of miR-200c, p65, JNK2, HSF1, and IL6. Suppression of miR-200c by IL6
constitutively activates p65/RelA and JNK2, and the latter phosphorylates and
activates HSF1. In turn, HSF1 triggers demethylation of the IL6 promoter that
facilitates the binding of p65 and c-Jun, which together drive constitutive IL6
transcription. Importantly, this signaling circuit is manifest in human cancer
cells and in a mouse model of ErbB2-driven breast cancer, where IL6 loss
significantly impairs tumorigenesis. Therefore, targeting this signaling circuit 
represents an effective therapeutic avenue for breast cancer prevention and
treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319241
PMID: 22364742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031304. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 expression by heat: a novel aspect of heat shock
factor 1 function in human cells.

Rossi A(1), Coccia M, Trotta E, Angelini M, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Translational Pharmacology, CNR, Rome, Italy.

The heat-shock response, a fundamental defense mechanism against proteotoxic
stress, is regulated by a family of heat-shock transcription factors (HSF). In
humans HSF1 is considered the central regulator of heat-induced transcriptional
responses. The main targets for HSF1 are specific promoter elements (HSE) located
upstream of heat-shock genes encoding cytoprotective heat-shock proteins (HSP)
with chaperone function. In addition to its cytoprotective function, HSF1 was
recently hypothesized to play a more complex role, regulating the expression of
non-HSP genes; however, the non-canonical role of HSF1 is still poorly
understood. Herein we report that heat-stress promotes the expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a key regulator of inflammation controlling prostanoid 
and thromboxane synthesis, resulting in the production of high levels of
prostaglandin-E(2) in human cells. We show that heat-induced COX-2 expression is 
regulated at the transcriptional level via HSF1-mediated signaling and identify, 
by in-vitro reporter gene activity assay and deletion-mutant constructs analysis,
the COX-2 heat-responsive promoter region and a new distal cis-acting HSE located
at position -2495 from the transcription start site. As shown by ChIP analysis,
HSF1 is recruited to the COX-2 promoter rapidly after heat treatment; by using
shRNA-mediated HSF1 suppression and HSE-deletion from the COX-2 promoter, we
demonstrate that HSF1 plays a central role in the transcriptional control of
COX-2 by heat. Finally, COX-2 transcription is also induced at febrile
temperatures in endothelial cells, suggesting that HSF1-dependent COX-2
expression could contribute to increasing blood prostaglandin levels during
fever. The results identify COX-2 as a human non-classical heat-responsive gene, 
unveiling a new aspect of HSF1 function.

PMCID: PMC3275557
PMID: 22347460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Front Neurosci. 2012 Feb 1;6:6. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2012.00006. eCollection 2012.

Adaptogens stimulate neuropeptide y and hsp72 expression and release in neuroglia
cells.

Panossian A(1), Wikman G, Kaur P, Asea A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Development, Swedish Herbal Institute Research and 
Development Åskloster, Sweden.

The beneficial stress-protective effect of adaptogens is related to the
regulation of homeostasis via mechanisms of action associated with the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the regulation of key mediators of the
stress response, such as molecular chaperones, stress-activated c-Jun N-terminal 
protein kinase, forkhead box O transcription factor, cortisol, and nitric oxide
(NO). However, it still remains unclear what the primary upstream targets are in 
response to stimulation by adaptogens. The present study addresses this gap in
our knowledge and suggests that an important target for adaptogen mediated
stress-protective effector functions is the stress hormone neuropeptide Y (NPY). 
We demonstrated that ADAPT-232, a fixed combination of adaptogens Eleutherococcus
senticosus root extract, Schisandra chinensis berry extract, Rhodiola rosea root 
extract SHR-5, and its active constituent salidroside, stimulated the expression 
of NPY and 72<U+2009>kDa heat shock protein (Hsp72) in isolated human neuroglia cells.
The central role of NPY was validated in experiments in which pre-treatment of
human neuroglia cells with NPY-siRNA and HSF1-siRNA resulted in the significant
suppression of ADAPT-232-induced NPY and Hsp72 release. Taken together our
studies suggest that the stimulation and release of the stress hormones, NPY and 
Hsp72, into systemic circulation is an innate defense response against mild
stressors (ADAPT-232), which increase tolerance and adaptation to stress.

PMCID: PMC3269752
PMID: 22347152  [PubMed]


463. Front Genet. 2011 Feb 16;2:3. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2011.00003. eCollection 2011.

Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in the Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF-1) Gene 
are Associated with Performance in Holstein-Friesian Dairy Cattle.

Mullen MP(1), Berry DP, Howard DJ, Diskin MG, Lynch CO, Giblin L, Kenny DA, Magee
DA, Meade KG, Waters SM.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Animal and Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre Teagasc, Athenry, County Galway, Ireland.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) has been shown to be associated with
fertility, growth, and development in cattle. The aim of this study was to (1)
identify novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the bovine IGF-1 gene
and alongside previously identified SNPs (2) determine their association with
traits of economic importance in Holstein-Friesian dairy cattle. Nine novel SNPs 
were identified across a panel of 22 beef and dairy cattle by sequence analysis
of the 5' promoter, intronic, and 3' regulatory regions, encompassing ~5<U+2009>kb of
IGF-1. Genotyping and associations with daughter performance for milk production,
fertility, survival, and measures of body size were undertaken on 848
Holstein-Friesian AI sires. Using multiple regression analysis nominal
associations (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) were identified between six SNPs (four novel and two
previously identified) and milk composition, survival, body condition score, and 
body size. The C allele of AF017143 a previously published SNP (C-512T) in the
promoter region of IGF-1 predicted to introduce binding sites for transcription
factors HSF1 and ZNF217 was associated (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with increased cow carcass
weight (i.e., an indicator of mature cow size). Novel SNPs were identified in the
3' region of IGF-1 were associated (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with functional survival and chest 
width. The remaining four SNPs, all located within introns of IGF-1 were
associated (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) with milk protein yield, milk fat yield, milk fat
concentration, somatic cell score, carcass conformation, and carcass fat. Results
of this study further demonstrate the multifaceted influences of IGF-1 on milk
production and growth related traits in cattle.

PMCID: PMC3268377
PMID: 22303302  [PubMed]


464. Cancer Lett. 2012 May 28;318(2):145-53. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.09.043. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Targeting heat shock factor 1 with a triazole nucleoside analog to elicit potent 
anticancer activity on drug-resistant pancreatic cancer.

Xia Y(1), Liu Y, Rocchi P, Wang M, Fan Y, Qu F, Iovanna JL, Peng L.

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille Université, Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanoscience de
Marseille, Marseille, France.

Issued from a lead optimization process, we have identified a novel triazole
nucleoside analog which elicits potent anticancer activity on drug-resistant
pancreatic cancer. Most importantly, this compound targets heat shock response
pathways by down-regulation of heat shock transcription factor 1 and
consequential down-regulation of multiple heat shock proteins HSP27, HSP70 and
HSP90. Down-regulation of these proteins caused the shut-down of several
oncogenic pathways and caspase-dependent apoptosis resulting in a potent
anticancer effect in vitro and in vivo. These results demonstrate the potential
rewards gained in searching for anticancer candidates with multimodal actions on 
heat shock response pathways via HSF1 down-regulation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 May;364(1-2):263-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1226-x. Epub
2012 Jan 15.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 inhibits H2O2-induced cardiomyocyte death
through suppression of high-mobility group box 1.

Yu Y(1), Liu M, Zhang L, Cao Q, Zhang P, Jiang H, Zou Y, Ge J.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), which has been identified as an
endogenous cardioprotective factor, possesses considerable anti-inflammatory
effects and the ability against oxidative stress. However, the mechanisms have
not been fully characterized yet. In this study, we investigated the effects of
HSF1-regulated HMGB1 on cardiomyocyte death. Cultured cardiomyocytes were
transfected with empty vector or HSF1 plasmid before the exposure to H(2)O(2).
Cell death was assessed by cell staining. Additionally, the levels of
intracellular and extracellular HMGB1 as well as its subcellular location were
detected, and the expression of heat shock proteins (HSP27 and HSP90) in the
cardiomyocytes was also determined. Not only did H(2)O(2) significantly increase 
cell death, but also elevated the levels of intracellular and extracellular HMGB1
and induced its translocation, whereas, as expected, HSF1 overexpression
effectively attenuated cell death. Furthermore, HSF1 inhibited the intracellular 
expression of HMGB1 at early stage of oxidative stress and subsequently, HSF1 did
negatively regulate the extracellular levels and the translocation of HMGB1 at
late stage. Besides, the expression of HSP27 and HSP90 was significantly
increased. These results suggested HSF1-attenuated cardiomyocyte death via
reducing intracellular and extracellular levels of HMGB1 as well as preventing
its translocation, which was partially associated with HSP27 and HSP90
up-regulated by HSF1 overexpression.

PMID: 22246807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012 Apr 1;83(7):909-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.12.040. Epub 
2012 Jan 8.

Purification and characterization of HSP-inducers from Eupatorium lindleyanum.

Yamashita Y(1), Ikeda T, Matsuda M, Maji D, Hoshino T, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University,
Tokyo 105-8512, Japan.

The expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs), particularly HSP70, provides
resistance to stressors. We recently reported that ultraviolet (UV)-induced
melanin production and skin damage were suppressed in transgenic mice expressing 
HSP70 and that an extract of Eupatorium lindleyanum induces the expression of
HSP70 in cells. Here we report the purification of eupalinolide A and B (EA and
EB) from E. lindleyanum, and describe their actions as HSP-inducers. EA and EB
both induced the expression of HSP70 in cells at concentrations that did not
significantly affect cell viability. Treatment of cells with EA or EB activated
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), while the artificial suppression of HSF1 expression
diminished the EA- or EB-mediated induction of HSP70 expression. Furthermore, EB 
inhibited the interaction between HSF1 and HSP90, which is known to inhibit the
activity of HSF1. These findings suggest that EA and EB induce the expression of 
HSP70 via the activation of HSF1 by inhibiting the interaction between HSF1 and
HSP90. EA and EB both induced the expression of HSP70 synergistically with other 
stressors. Furthermore, pre-treatment of cells with EA or EB suppressed melanin
production and stressor-induced apoptosis. These effects were suppressed by the
artificial suppression of HSP70 expression. In vivo, the percutaneous
administration of EB induced the expression of HSP70 and suppressed UVB
radiation-induced damage, inflammatory responses and melanin production in the
skin. These results suggest that EA and EB could be beneficial for use in
cosmetics and medicines as a consequence of their inhibitory action on UV-induced
skin damage and melanin production.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2012 Mar;33(2):205-11. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2011.12.002. Epub 2011 Dec 10.

Characterization of human DNA polymerase <U+03BA> promoter in response to benzo[a]pyrene
diol epoxide.

Zhu H(1), Fan Y, Shen J, Qi H, Shao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Zhejiang University School of
Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.

DNA polymerase <U+03BA> (Pol <U+03BA>), a member of Y-family DNA polymerases, can synthesize
DNA with moderate fidelity on undamaged DNAs and replicate accurately in vitro
thymine glycol, 8-oxo-G and aromatic adducts such as benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide 
(BPDE). However, few studies have been done on the transcriptional regulation of 
Pol <U+03BA>. In this study, we predicted and cloned the promoter region of the human
POLK gene. Through the analysis of deletion constructs of the POLK promoter, we
demonstrated that the region -336/-141 contained repressing elements and the
region -141/+226 contained positive regulatory elements for transcription of
human Pol <U+03BA>. Furthermore, quantitative RT-PCR showed that human POLK mRNA
expression was dysregulated in FL cells treated by BPDE. The transcriptional
activities of the POLK promoter regions -336/+437 and +20/+437 were significantly
reduced by BPDE treatment, indicating that transcription factors in this two
regions, such as HSF1, may regulate the transcription of human POLK gene in
response to BPDE.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22227292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Neurosci. 2012 Jan 4;32(1):124-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3442-11.2012.

SIRT1 protects against a-synuclein aggregation by activating molecular
chaperones.

Donmez G(1), Arun A, Chung CY, McLean PJ, Lindquist S, Guarente L.

Author information: 
(1)Paul F. Glenn Laboratory and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2012 May 9;32(19):6413-4.

a-Synuclein is a key molecule in the pathogenesis of synucleinopathy including
dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease, and multiple system atrophy.
Sirtuins are NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylases that are highly conserved and 
counter aging in lower organisms. We show that the life span of a mouse model
with A53T a-synuclein mutation is increased by overexpressing SIRT1 and decreased
by knocking out SIRT1 in brain. Furthermore, a-synuclein aggregates are reduced
in the brains of mice with SIRT1 overexpression and increased by SIRT1 deletion. 
We show that SIRT1 deacetylates HSF1 (heat shock factor 1) and increases HSP70
RNA and protein levels, but only in the brains of mice with A53T and SIRT1
expression. Thus, SIRT1 responds to a-synuclein aggregation-induced stress by
activating molecular chaperones to protect against disease.

PMCID: PMC3263206
PMID: 22219275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28950. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028950. Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Protein kinase A regulates molecular chaperone transcription and protein
aggregation.

Zhang Y(1), Murshid A, Prince T, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) regulates one of the major pathways of protein quality
control and is essential for deterrence of protein-folding disorders,
particularly in neuronal cells. However, HSF1 activity declines with age, a
change that may open the door to progression of neurodegenerative disorders such 
as Huntington's disease. We have investigated mechanisms of HSF1 regulation that 
may become compromised with age. HSF1 binds stably to the catalytic domain of
protein kinase A (PKAca) and becomes phosphorylated on at least one regulatory
serine residue (S320). We show here that PKA is essential for effective
transcription of HSP genes by HSF1. PKA triggers a cascade involving HSF1 binding
to the histone acetylase p300 and positive translation elongation factor 1
(p-TEFb) and phosphorylation of the c-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II, a key
mechanism in the downstream steps of HSF1-mediated transcription. This cascade
appears to play a key role in protein quality control in neuronal cells
expressing aggregation-prone proteins with long poly-glutamine (poly-Q) tracts.
Such proteins formed inclusion bodies that could be resolved by HSF1 activation
during heat shock. Resolution of the inclusions was inhibited by knockdown of
HSF1, PKAca, or the pTEFb component CDK9, indicating a key role for the HSF1-PKA 
cascade in protein quality control.

© 2011 Zhang et al.

PMCID: PMC3245242
PMID: 22216146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;18(1):64-76. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1000.

Hsp90 molecular chaperone inhibitors: are we there yet?

Neckers L(1), Workman P.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. neckersl@mail.nih.gov

Heat shock protein (Hsp) 90 is an ATP-dependent molecular chaperone that is
exploited by malignant cells to support activated oncoproteins, including many
cancer-associated kinases and transcription factors, and it is essential for
oncogenic transformation. Originally viewed with skepticism, Hsp90 inhibitors are
now being actively pursued by the pharmaceutical industry, with 17 agents having 
entered clinical trials. Investigators established Hsp90's druggability using the
natural products geldanamycin and radicicol, which mimic the unusual ATP
structure adopted in the chaperone's N-terminal nucleotide-binding pocket and
cause potent and selective blockade of ATP binding/hydrolysis, inhibit chaperone 
function, deplete oncogenic clients, and show antitumor activity. Preclinical
data obtained with these natural products have heightened interest in Hsp90 as a 
drug target, and 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG, tanespimycin)
has shown clinical activity (as defined by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors) in HER2+ breast cancer. Many optimized synthetic, small-molecule Hsp90
inhibitors from diverse chemotypes are now in clinical trials. Here, we review
the discovery and development of Hsp90 inhibitors and assess their potential.
There has been significant learning from studies of the basic biology of Hsp90,
as well as translational drug development involving this chaperone, enhanced by
the use of Hsp90 inhibitors as chemical probes. Success will likely lie in
treating cancers that are addicted to particular driver oncogene products (e.g., 
HER2, ALK, EGFR, and BRAF) that are sensitive Hsp90 clients, as well as
malignancies (especially multiple myeloma) in which buffering of proteotoxic
stress is critical for survival. We discuss approaches for enhancing the
effectiveness of Hsp90 inhibitors and highlight new chaperone and stress-response
pathway targets, including HSF1 and Hsp70.

© 2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3252205
PMID: 22215907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(5):929-40. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05921-11. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 is involved in tumor progression via
regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and RNA-binding protein HuR.

Gabai VL(1), Meng L, Kim G, Mills TA, Benjamin IJ, Sherman MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. Gabai@bu.edu

Previously we demonstrated that the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 is
indispensable for transformation of mammary epithelial cells by the Her2
oncogene. Since Hsf1 affects oncogene-induced senescence (OIS), these findings
suggest that Hsf1 affects tumor initiation when OIS plays a role. Indeed, here we
report that Hsf1 knockout suppressed mammary hyperplasia in Her2-expressing mice 
and reduced tumor emergence. On the other hand, Hsf1 expression increases with
advanced breast cancer, indicating that there is an additional role of Hsf1 in
tumor progression. We studied rare tumors that developed in Hsf1-knockout mice
and found that these tumors grew slower than tumors in control animals and showed
suppressed angiogenesis. Similarly, in the xenograft model, knockdown of Hsf1
suppressed angiogenesis, which was associated with suppression of the HIF-1
pathway. Suppression of HIF-1 was at the level of translation due to
downregulation of the RNA-binding protein HuR. Importantly, besides HIF-1, HuR
controls translation of other major regulators of cancer progression, many of
which were suppressed in Hsf1-knockdown cells. Therefore, in addition to OIS,
Hsf1 regulates the HuR-HIF-1 pathway, thus affecting both cancer initiation and
progression.

PMCID: PMC3295200
PMID: 22215620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Genetics. 2012 Apr;190(4):1157-95. doi: 10.1534/genetics.111.128033. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

The response to heat shock and oxidative stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Morano KA(1), Grant CM, Moye-Rowley WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Medical
School and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

A common need for microbial cells is the ability to respond to potentially toxic 
environmental insults. Here we review the progress in understanding the response 
of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to two important environmental stresses:
heat shock and oxidative stress. Both of these stresses are fundamental
challenges that microbes of all types will experience. The study of these
environmental stress responses in S. cerevisiae has illuminated many of the
features now viewed as central to our understanding of eukaryotic cell biology.
Transcriptional activation plays an important role in driving the multifaceted
reaction to elevated temperature and levels of reactive oxygen species. Advances 
provided by the development of whole genome analyses have led to an appreciation 
of the global reorganization of gene expression and its integration between
different stress regimens. While the precise nature of the signal eliciting the
heat shock response remains elusive, recent progress in the understanding of
induction of the oxidative stress response is summarized here. Although these
stress conditions represent ancient challenges to S. cerevisiae and other
microbes, much remains to be learned about the mechanisms dedicated to dealing
with these environmental parameters.

PMCID: PMC3316637
PMID: 22209905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. ISRN Biochem. 2012 Sep 1;2012:707586. doi: 10.5402/2012/707586. eCollection 2012.

Withaferin a induces proteasome-dependent degradation of breast cancer
susceptibility gene 1 and heat shock factor 1 proteins in breast cancer cells.

Zhang X(1), Timmermann B(2), Samadi AK(1), Cohen MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City,
KS 66160, USA. (2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, The University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS 66045, USA.

The purpose of this study was to examine the regulation of prosurvival factors
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1) by a
natural withanolide withaferin A (WA) in triple negative breast cancer cell lines
MDA-MB-231 and BT20. Western analysis was used to examine alternations in HSF1
and BRCA1 protein levels following WA treatment. A protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide and a proteasome inhibitor MG132 were used to investigate the
mechanisms of HSF1 and BRCA1 regulation by WA. It was found that WA induced a
dose-dependent decrease in HSF1 and BRCA1 protein levels. Further analysis showed
that levels of HSF1 and BRCA1 proteins decreased rapidly after WA treatment, and 
this was attributed to WA-induced denaturation of HSF1 and BRCA1 proteins and
subsequent degradation via proteasome-dependent, and protein-synthesis dependent 
mechanism. In summary, WA induces denaturation and proteasomal degradation of
HSF1 and BRCA1 proteins. Further studies are warranted to examine the
contribution of HSF1 and BRCA1 depletion to the anticancer effects of WA in
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4392979
PMID: 25969759  [PubMed]


474. Scientifica (Cairo). 2012;2012:606104. doi: 10.6064/2012/606104. Epub 2012 Dec
23.

The Role of Sulfhydryl Reactivity of Small Molecules for the Activation of the
KEAP1/NRF2 Pathway and the Heat Shock Response.

Dinkova-Kostova AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research
Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, James
Arrott Drive, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK ; Department of Pharmacology and Molecular
Sciences and Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The KEAP1/NRF2 pathway and the heat shock response are two essential
cytoprotective mechanisms that allow adaptation and survival under conditions of 
oxidative, electrophilic, and thermal stress by regulating the expression of
elaborate networks of genes with versatile protective functions. The two pathways
are independently regulated by the transcription factor nuclear factor-erythroid 
2 p45-related factor 2 (NRF2) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), respectively. The
activity of these transcriptional master regulators increases during conditions
of stress and also upon encounter of small molecules (inducers), both naturally
occurring as well as synthetically produced. Inducers have a common chemical
property: the ability to react with sulfhydryl groups. The protein targets of
such sulfhydryl-reactive compounds are equipped with highly reactive cysteine
residues, which serve as sensors for inducers. The initial cysteine-sensed signal
is further relayed to affect the expression of large networks of genes, which in 
turn can ultimately influence complex cell fate decisions such as life and death.
The paper summarizes the multiple lines of experimental evidence demonstrating
that the reactivity with sulfhydryl groups is a major determinant of the
mechanism of action of small molecule dual activators of the KEAP1/NRF2 pathway
and the heat shock response.

PMCID: PMC3820647
PMID: 24278719  [PubMed]


475. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:663-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_84.

HSP70 gene expression in the zebrafish retina after optic nerve injury: a
comparative study under heat shock stresses.

Fujikawa C(1), Nagashima M, Mawatari K, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa,
920-8640, Japan.

PMID: 22183391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;723:191-7. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0631-0_26.

Functional rescue of P23H rhodopsin photoreceptors by gene delivery.

Gorbatyuk MS(1), Gorbatyuk OS, LaVail MM, Lin JH, Hauswirth WW, Lewin AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of North Texas Health
Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107, USA. Marina.Gorbatyuk@unthsc.edu

PMCID: PMC3365920
PMID: 22183333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28818. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028818. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

Membrane-lipid therapy in operation: the HSP co-inducer BGP-15 activates stress
signal transduction pathways by remodeling plasma membrane rafts.

Gombos I(1), Crul T, Piotto S, Güngör B, Török Z, Balogh G, Péter M, Slotte JP,
Campana F, Pilbat AM, Hunya A, Tóth N, Literati-Nagy Z, Vígh L Jr, Glatz A,
Brameshuber M, Schütz GJ, Hevener A, Febbraio MA, Horváth I, Vígh L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.

Aging and pathophysiological conditions are linked to membrane changes which
modulate membrane-controlled molecular switches, causing dysregulated heat shock 
protein (HSP) expression. HSP co-inducer hydroxylamines such as BGP-15 provide
advanced therapeutic candidates for many diseases since they preferentially
affect stressed cells and are unlikely have major side effects. In the present
study in vitro molecular dynamic simulation, experiments with lipid monolayers
and in vivo ultrasensitive fluorescence microscopy showed that BGP-15 alters the 
organization of cholesterol-rich membrane domains. Imaging of nanoscopic
long-lived platforms using the raft marker glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored 
monomeric green fluorescent protein diffusing in the live Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cell plasma membrane demonstrated that BGP-15 prevents the transient
structural disintegration of rafts induced by fever-type heat stress. Moreover,
BGP-15 was able to remodel cholesterol-enriched lipid platforms reminiscent of
those observed earlier following non-lethal heat priming or membrane stress, and 
were shown to be obligate for the generation and transmission of stress signals. 
BGP-15 activation of HSP expression in B16-F10 mouse melanoma cells involves the 
Rac1 signaling cascade in accordance with the previous observation that
cholesterol affects the targeting of Rac1 to membranes. Finally, in a human
embryonic kidney cell line we demonstrate that BGP-15 is able to inhibit the
rapid heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) acetylation monitored during the early phase of 
heat stress, thereby promoting a prolonged duration of HSF1 binding to heat shock
elements. Taken together, our results indicate that BGP-15 has the potential to
become a new class of pharmaceuticals for use in 'membrane-lipid therapy' to
combat many various protein-misfolding diseases associated with aging.

PMCID: PMC3236211
PMID: 22174906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 3;287(6):4299-310. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.282152. Epub 2011 
Dec 14.

NF-<U+03BA>B regulates MICA gene transcription in endothelial cell through a genetically
inhibitable control site.

Lin D(1), Lavender H, Soilleux EJ, O'Callaghan CA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Building for Molecular Physiology, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

Endothelial cells form a barrier between blood and the underlying vessel wall,
which characteristically demonstrates inflammatory damage in atherosclerotic
disease. MICA is a highly polymorphic ligand for the activating immune receptor
NKG2D and can be expressed on endothelial cells. We hypothesized that damaged
vessel walls, such as those involved in atherosclerosis, might express MICA,
which could contribute to the vascular immunopathology. Immune activation
resulting from MICA expression could play a significant role in the development
of vascular damage. We have demonstrated that TNFa up-regulates MICA on human
endothelial cells. The up-regulation is mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B, and we have defined
the regulatory control site responsible for this at -130 bp upstream of the MICA 
transcription start site. This site overlaps with a heat shock response element
and integrates input from the two pathways. We have shown that in atherosclerotic
lesions there is expression of MICA on endothelial cells. Using
lentivirus-mediated gene delivery in primary human endothelial cells, we were
able to inhibit the MICA response to TNFa with a truncated HSF1 that lacked a
transactivation domain. This highlights the potential for transcription-based
therapeutic approaches in atherosclerotic vascular disease to reduce
immune-mediated endothelial and vessel wall damage.

PMCID: PMC3281736
PMID: 22170063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012 Feb 1;302(3):H611-20. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00950.2011. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Increased arterial smooth muscle Ca2+ signaling, vasoconstriction, and myogenic
reactivity in Milan hypertensive rats.

Linde CI(1), Karashima E, Raina H, Zulian A, Wier WG, Hamlyn JM, Ferrari P,
Blaustein MP, Golovina VA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology, Univ. of Maryland School of Medicine, 685 W. Baltimore
St. HSF1, Rm. 565, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The Milan hypertensive strain (MHS) rats are a genetic model of hypertension with
adducin gene polymorphisms linked to enhanced renal tubular Na(+) reabsorption.
Recently we demonstrated that Ca(2+) signaling is augmented in freshly isolated
mesenteric artery myocytes from MHS rats. This is associated with greatly
enhanced expression of Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger-1 (NCX1), C-type transient receptor
potential (TRPC6) protein, and sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase
(SERCA2) compared with arteries from Milan normotensive strain (MNS) rats. Here, 
we test the hypothesis that the enhanced Ca(2+) signaling in MHS arterial smooth 
muscle is directly reflected in augmented vasoconstriction [myogenic and
phenylephrine (PE)-evoked responses] in isolated mesenteric small arteries.
Systolic blood pressure was higher in MHS (145 ± 1 mmHg) than in MNS (112 ± 1
mmHg; P < 0.001; n = 16 each) rats. Pressurized mesenteric resistance arteries
from MHS rats had significantly augmented myogenic tone and reactivity and
enhanced constriction to low-dose (1-100 nM) PE. Isolated MHS arterial myocytes
exhibited approximately twofold increased peak Ca(2+) signals in response to 5 µM
PE or ATP in the absence and presence of extracellular Ca(2+). These augmented
responses are consistent with increased vasoconstrictor-evoked sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) release and increased Ca(2+) entry, respectively. The
increased SR Ca(2+) release correlates with a doubling of inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 and tripling of SERCA2 expression.
Pressurized MHS arteries also exhibited a ~70% increase in 100 nM ouabain-induced
vasoconstriction compared with MNS arteries. These functional alterations reveal 
that, in a genetic model of hypertension linked to renal dysfunction, multiple
mechanisms within the arterial myocytes contribute to enhanced Ca(2+) signaling
and myogenic and vasoconstrictor-induced arterial constriction. MHS rats have
elevated plasma levels of endogenous ouabain, which may initiate the protein
upregulation and enhanced Ca(2+) signaling. These molecular and functional
changes provide a mechanism for the increased peripheral vascular resistance
(whole body autoregulation) that underlies the sustained hypertension.

PMCID: PMC3353797
PMID: 22140038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Chembiochem. 2012 Jan 2;13(1):97-104. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201100524. Epub 2011 Dec 
1.

Inhibition of heat shock transcription factor binding by a linear polyamide
binding in an unusual 1:1 mode.

Wang RE(1), Pandita RK, Cai J, Hunt CR, Taylor JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are known to protect cells from heat, oxidative
stress, and the cytotoxic effects of drugs, and thus can enhance cancer cell
survival. As a result, HSPs are a newly emerging class of protein targets for
chemotherapy. Among the various HSPs, the HSP70 family is the most highly
conserved and prevalent. Herein we describe the development of a ß-alanine rich
linear polyamide that binds the GGA heat shock elements (HSEs) 3 and 4 in the
HSP70 promoter in an unusual 1:1 mode and inhibits heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) binding in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3516905
PMID: 22134972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Mar 1;302(5):F614-24. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00189.2011. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

The pendrin anion exchanger gene is transcriptionally regulated by uroguanylin: a
novel enterorenal link.

Rozenfeld J(1), Tal O, Kladnitsky O, Adler L, Efrati E, Carrithers SL, Alper SL, 
Zelikovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Nephrology, Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, Haifa, Israel.

The pendrin/SLC26A4 Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchanger, encoded by the PDS gene, is
expressed in cortical collecting duct (CCD) non-A intercalated cells. Pendrin is 
essential for CCD bicarbonate secretion and is also involved in NaCl balance and 
blood pressure regulation. The intestinal peptide uroguanylin (UGN) is produced
in response to oral salt load and can function as an "intestinal natriuretic
hormone." We aimed to investigate whether UGN modulates pendrin activity and to
explore the molecular mechanisms responsible for this modulation. Injection of
UGN into mice resulted in decreased pendrin mRNA and protein expression in the
kidney. UGN decreased endogenous pendrin mRNA levels in HEK293 cells. A 4.2-kb
human PDS (hPDS) promoter sequence and consecutive 5' deletion products were
cloned into luciferase reporter vectors and transiently transfected into HEK293
cells. Exposure of transfected cells to UGN decreased hPDS promoter activity.
This UGN-induced effect on the hPDS promoter occurred within a 52-bp region
encompassing a single heat shock element (HSE). The effect of UGN on the promoter
was abolished when the HSE located between nt -1119 and -1115 was absent or was
mutated. Furthermore, treatment of HEK293 cells with heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
small interfering RNA (siRNA) reversed the UGN-induced decrease in endogenous PDS
mRNA level. In conclusion, pendrin-mediated Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange in the renal
tubule may be regulated transcriptionally by the peptide hormone UGN. UGN exerts 
its inhibitory activity on the hPDS promoter likely via HSF1 action at a defined 
HSE site. These data define a novel signaling pathway involved in the enterorenal
axis controlling electrolyte and water homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3353648
PMID: 22129966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Toxicol Sci. 2011;36(6):851-3.

siRNA-mediated silencing of the gene for heat shock transcription factor 1 causes
hypersensitivity to methylmercury in HEK293 cells.

Hwang GW(1), Ryoke K, Lee JY, Takahashi T, Naganuma A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Biochemical Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences,Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Methylmercury is a hazardous heavy metal compound that can damage the central
nervous system. The mechanisms of methylmercury toxicity and the biological
defense mechanisms against it remain unclear. We employed gene knockdown using
siRNA to search for transcription factors involved in the manifestation of
methylmercury toxicity. We found that the inhibition of expression of the gene
for heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) sensitized HEK293 cells to
methylmercury.

PMID: 22129751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 6;287(2):1406-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.294801. Epub 2011
Nov 28.

A screen for enhancers of clearance identifies huntingtin as a heat shock protein
90 (Hsp90) client protein.

Baldo B(1), Weiss A, Parker CN, Bibel M, Paganetti P, Kaupmann K.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Pathway, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Novartis
Pharma AG, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.

Mechanisms to reduce the cellular levels of mutant huntingtin (mHtt) provide
promising strategies for treating Huntington disease (HD). To identify compounds 
enhancing the degradation of mHtt, we performed a high throughput screen using a 
hippocampal HN10 cell line expressing a 573-amino acid mHtt fragment. Several hit
structures were identified as heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) inhibitors. Cell
treatment with these compounds reduced levels of mHtt without overt toxic effects
as measured by time-resolved Förster resonance energy transfer assays and Western
blots. To characterize the mechanism of mHtt degradation, we used the potent and 
selective Hsp90 inhibitor NVP-AUY922. In HdhQ150 embryonic stem (ES) cells and in
ES cell-derived neurons, NVP-AUY922 treatment substantially reduced soluble
full-length mHtt levels. In HN10 cells, Hsp90 inhibition by NVP-AUY922 enhanced
mHtt clearance in the absence of any detectable Hsp70 induction. Furthermore,
inhibition of protein synthesis with cycloheximide or overexpression of dominant 
negative heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) in HdhQ150 ES cells attenuated Hsp70
induction but did not affect NVP-AUY922-mediated mHtt clearance. Together, these 
data provided evidence that direct inhibition of Hsp90 chaperone function was
crucial for mHtt degradation rather than heat shock response induction and Hsp70 
up-regulation. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed a physical interaction
of mutant and wild-type Htt with the Hsp90 chaperone. Hsp90 inhibition disrupted 
the interaction and induced clearance of Htt through the ubiquitin-proteasome
system. Our data suggest that Htt is an Hsp90 client protein and that Hsp90
inhibition may provide a means to reduce mHtt in HD.

PMCID: PMC3256905
PMID: 22123826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):le26; author reply le27. doi:
10.1074/jbc.L111.221796.

Hsf1 knock-out.

Christians E.

Comment on
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):29828-37.

PMCID: PMC3308899
PMID: 22121189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Chem Biol. 2011 Nov 23;18(11):1355-61. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2011.09.008.

HSF1-dependent upregulation of Hsp70 by sulfhydryl-reactive inducers of the
KEAP1/NRF2/ARE pathway.

Zhang Y(1), Ahn YH, Benjamin IJ, Honda T, Hicks RJ, Calabrese V, Cole PA,
Dinkova-Kostova AT.

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Cancer Research, Medical Research Institute, University of Dundee, 
Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland, UK.

The KEAP1/NRF2/ARE pathway and the heat shock response are inducible
cytoprotective systems regulated by transcription factors NRF2 and HSF1,
respectively. We report that structurally distinct small molecule NRF2
activators, all of which react with sulfhydryl groups but differ in potency by
15,000-fold, upregulate Hsp70, a prototypic HSF1-dependent gene. Hsp70
upregulation requires HSF1 but is NRF2 independent. We further demonstrate that a
sulfoxythiocarbamate inducer conjugates to the negative regulator of HSF1, Hsp90.
The differential concentration dependence of the two responses suggests that
activation of NRF2 precedes that of HSF1: the KEAP1/NRF2/ARE pathway is at the
forefront of cellular defense, protecting against instant danger; the heat shock 
response closely follows to resolve subsequent potentially devastating damage,
saving the proteome. This uncovered duality undoubtedly contributes to the
cytoprotective effects of such molecules in models of carcinogenesis,
cardiovascular disease, and neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3302153
PMID: 22118669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Apr;113(4):1096-103. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23461.

Molecular chaperones in mammary cancer growth and breast tumor therapy.

Calderwood SK(1), Gong J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School, 99 Brookline Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA. scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu

Heat shock protein (HSP) levels are elevated in breast cancer and are molecular
targets for novel therapies. HSPs were first observed as proteins induced in
massive amounts in normal cells exposed to stresses that lead to protein
denaturation. Their expanded expression in mammary carcinoma appears to be
largely due to the proliferation of malfolded mutant proteins and overexpressed
oncoproteins that trigger transcription of HSP genes. HSPs play major roles in
malignant transformation and progression mediated through their intrinsic
molecular chaperone properties. These permit the emergence of new malignant
traits through the facilitated accumulation of altered oncoproteins. The
elevation of HSP concentrations in mammary carcinoma is at least partially
dependent on heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), a protein that responds to
unfolded proteins and leads to HSP transcription. HSF1 activation has additional 
downstream activities, crucial for emergence of the breast cancer phenotype and
these include activated cell signaling, HSP-mediated ability to evade apoptosis
and senescence and an HSF1-dependent bias in transcriptional activity towards a
metastatic phenotype. The HSPs are currently being targeted in breast cancer
therapy and effective drugs for Hsp90 have been synthesized and evaluated in
clinical trial. Mammary carcinoma cells also contain abundant quantities of
HSPtumor antigen complexes and these complexes are being used to develop
effective tumor vaccine approaches that provide personalized therapy for each
individual's cancer.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3309170
PMID: 22105880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Hepatology. 2012 May;55(5):1585-95. doi: 10.1002/hep.24802. Epub 2012 Mar 18.

Inhibition of heat shock protein (molecular weight 90 kDa) attenuates
proinflammatory cytokines and prevents lipopolysaccharide-induced liver injury in
mice.

Ambade A(1), Catalano D, Lim A, Mandrekar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA 01605, USA.

Endotoxin-mediated proinflammatory cytokines play a significant role in the
pathogenesis of acute and chronic liver diseases. Heat shock protein 90
(molecular weight, 90 kDa) (hsp90) functions as an important chaperone of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) signaling and is required for the production of
proinflammatory cytokines. We hypothesized that inhibition of hsp90 would prevent
LPS-induced liver injury by decreasing proinflammatory cytokines. C57BL/6 mice
were injected intraperitoneally with an hsp90 inhibitor,
17-dimethylamino-ethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-DMAG), and LPS.
Parameters of liver injury, proinflammatory cytokines, and associated mechanisms 
were studied by in vivo and in vitro experiments. Inhibition of hsp90 by 17-DMAG 
prevented LPS-induced increases in serum alanine aminotransferase activity and
significantly reduced serum tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) and interleukin-6 
(IL-6) protein as well as messenger RNA (mRNA) in liver. Enhanced DNA-binding
activity of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and induction of target gene
heat shock protein 70 (molecular weight, 70 kDa) confirmed hsp90 inhibition in
liver. 17-DMAG treatment decreased cluster of differentiation 14 mRNA and
LPS-induced nuclear factor kappa light-chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF<U+03BA>B)
DNA binding without affecting Toll-like receptor 4 mRNA in liver. Mechanistic
studies revealed that 17-DMAG-mediated inhibition of TNFa showed no effect on
LPS-induced NF<U+03BA>B promoter-driven reporter activity, but significantly decreased
TNFa promoter-driven reporter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
showed that 17-DMAG enhanced HSF1 binding to the TNFa promoter, but not the IL-6 
promoter, suggesting HSF1 mediated direct inhibition of TNFa, but not IL-6. We
show that HSF1 indirectly regulates IL-6 by the induction of another
transcription factor, activating transcription factor 3. Inhibition of HSF1,
using small interfering RNA, prevented 17-DMAG-mediated down-regulation of
NF<U+03BA>B-binding activity, TNFa, and IL-6 induction, supporting a repressive role for
HSF1 on proinflammatory cytokine genes during hsp90 inhibition.CONCLUSION: Hsp90 
inhibition in vivo reduces proinflammatory cytokines and prevents LPS-induced
liver injury likely through repressive action of HSF1. Our results suggest a
novel application for 17-DMAG in alleviating LPS-induced liver injury.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3342823
PMID: 22105779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Genes Cells. 2011 Dec;16(12):1168-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01560.x. Epub
2011 Nov 13.

NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway is inhibited by heat shock independently of active
transcription factor HSF1 and increased levels of inducible heat shock proteins.

Janus P(1), Pakula-Cis M, Kalinowska-Herok M, Kashchak N, Szoltysek K, Piglowski 
W, Widlak W, Kimmel M, Widlak P.

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice, Poland.

NF-<U+03BA>B transcription factor regulates numerous genes important for inflammation,
immune responses and cell survival. HSF1 is the primary transcription factor
activated under stress conditions that is responsible for induction of genes
encoding heat shock proteins. Previous studies have shown that the NF-<U+03BA>B
activation pathway is blocked by heat shock possibly involving heat shock
proteins. Here, we investigate whether active HSF1 inhibited this pathway in the 
absence of stress conditions. Activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and expression of
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes were analyzed in TNFa-stimulated U-2 OS human osteosarcoma 
cells that were either heat-shocked or engineered to express a constitutively
active form of HSF1 in the absence of heat shock. As expected, heat shock
resulted in a general blockade in the degradation of the I<U+03BA>Ba inhibitor, nuclear 
translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B and expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent target genes. In marked 
contrast, the presence of constitutively active HSF1 did not block TNFa-induced
activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway or expression of a set of the NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
genes. We conclude that in the absence of heat shock, the NF-<U+03BA>B activation
pathway is inhibited by neither active HSF1 transcription factor nor by increased
levels of HSF1-induced heat shock proteins.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22077664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2012 Jun;14(3):332-42. doi: 10.1007/s10126-011-9417-0. Epub 
2011 Nov 9.

Heat shock protein gene family of the Porphyra seriata and enhancement of heat
stress tolerance by PsHSP70 in Chlamydomonas.

Park HS(1), Jeong WJ, Kim E, Jung Y, Lim JM, Hwang MS, Park EJ, Ha DS, Choi DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology Education and Kumho Life Science Laboratory, Chonnam
National University, Kwangju 500-757, South Korea.

Heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones are key components contributing to
survival in the abiotic stress response. Porphyra seriata grows on intertidal
rocks exposed to dynamic environmental changes associated with the turning tides,
including desiccation and heat stress. Analysis of the ESTs of P. seriata allows 
us to identify the nine HSP cDNAs, which are predicted to be PsHSP90, three
PsHSP70, PsHSP40 and PsHSP20, and three 5'-truncated HSP cDNAs. RT-PCR results
show that most of the PsHSP transcripts were detected under normal cell growth
conditions as well as heat stress, with the exception of two cDNAs. In
particular, PsHSP70b and PsHSP20 transcripts were upregulated by heat stress.
When the putative mitochondrial PsHSP70b was introduced and overexpressed in
Chlamydomonas, transformed Chlamydomonas evidenced higher rates of survival and
growth than those of the wild type under heat stress conditions. Constitutive
overexpression of the PsHSP70b gene increases the transcription of the HSF1 as
well as the CrHSP20 and CrHSP70 gene. These results indicate that PsHSP70b is
involved in tolerance to heat stress and the effects on transcription of the
CrHSP20 and CrHSP70 genes.

PMID: 22068390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2012 Jan;78(2):385-92. doi: 10.1128/AEM.06341-11. Epub
2011 Nov 4.

Association of constitutive hyperphosphorylation of Hsf1p with a defective
ethanol stress response in Saccharomyces cerevisiae sake yeast strains.

Noguchi C(1), Watanabe D, Zhou Y, Akao T, Shimoi H.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Brewing, Higashi-hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-0046,
Japan.

Modern sake yeast strains, which produce high concentrations of ethanol, are
unexpectedly sensitive to environmental stress during sake brewing. To reveal the
underlying mechanism, we investigated a well-characterized yeast stress response 
mediated by a heat shock element (HSE) and heat shock transcription factor Hsf1p 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae sake yeast. The HSE-lacZ activity of sake yeast
during sake fermentation and under acute ethanol stress was severely impaired
compared to that of laboratory yeast. Moreover, the Hsf1p of modern sake yeast
was highly and constitutively hyperphosphorylated, irrespective of the
extracellular stress. Since HSF1 allele replacement did not significantly affect 
the HSE-mediated ethanol stress response or Hsf1p phosphorylation patterns in
either sake or laboratory yeast, the regulatory machinery of Hsf1p is presumed to
function differently between these types of yeast. To identify phosphatases whose
loss affected the control of Hsf1p, we screened a series of phosphatase gene
deletion mutants in a laboratory strain background. Among the 29 mutants, a <U+0394>ppt1
mutant exhibited constitutive hyperphosphorylation of Hsf1p, similarly to the
modern sake yeast strains, which lack the entire PPT1 gene locus. We confirmed
that the expression of laboratory yeast-derived functional PPT1 recovered the
HSE-mediated stress response of sake yeast. In addition, deletion of PPT1 in
laboratory yeast resulted in enhanced fermentation ability. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that hyperphosphorylation of Hsf1p caused by loss of the PPT1
gene at least partly accounts for the defective stress response and high ethanol 
productivity of modern sake yeast strains.

PMCID: PMC3255739
PMID: 22057870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. ACS Chem Biol. 2012 Feb 17;7(2):340-9. doi: 10.1021/cb200353m. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Using the heat-shock response to discover anticancer compounds that target
protein homeostasis.

Santagata S(1), Xu YM, Wijeratne EM, Kontnik R, Rooney C, Perley CC, Kwon H,
Clardy J, Kesari S, Whitesell L, Lindquist S, Gunatilaka AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States.

Unlike normal tissues, cancers experience profound alterations in protein
homeostasis. Powerful innate adaptive mechanisms, especially the transcriptional 
response regulated by Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), are activated in cancers to
enable survival under these stressful conditions. Natural products that further
tax these stress responses can overwhelm the ability to cope and could provide
leads for the development of new, broadly effective anticancer drugs. To identify
compounds that drive the HSF1-dependent stress response, we evaluated over 80,000
natural and synthetic compounds as well as partially purified natural product
extracts using a reporter cell line optimized for high-throughput screening.
Surprisingly, many of the strongly active compounds identified were natural
products representing five diverse chemical classes (limonoids, curvularins,
withanolides, celastraloids, and colletofragarones). All of these compounds share
the same chemical motif, an a,ß-unsaturated carbonyl functionality, with strong
potential for thiol-reactivity. Despite the lack of a priori mechanistic
requirements in our primary phenotypic screen, this motif was found to be
necessary albeit not sufficient, for both heat-shock activation and inhibition of
glioma tumor cell growth. Within the withanolide class, a promising therapeutic
index for the compound withaferin A was demonstrated in vivo using a stringent
orthotopic human glioma xenograft model in mice. Our findings reveal that diverse
organisms elaborate structurally complex thiol-reactive metabolites that act on
the stress responses of heterologous organisms including humans. From a chemical 
biology perspective, they define a robust approach for discovering candidate
compounds that target the malignant phenotype by disrupting protein homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3291478
PMID: 22050377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. FASEB J. 2012 Feb;26(2):766-77. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-186197. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Misfolded proteins inhibit proliferation and promote stress-induced death in
SV40-transformed mammalian cells.

Arslan MA(1), Chikina M, Csermely P, Soti C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Protein misfolding is implicated in neurodegenerative diseases and occurs in
aging. However, the contribution of the misfolded ensembles to toxicity remains
largely unknown. Here we introduce 2 primate cell models of destabilized proteins
devoid of specific cellular functions and interactors, as bona fide misfolded
proteins, allowing us to isolate the gain-of-function of non-native structures.
Both GFP-degron and a mutant chloramphenicol-acetyltransferase fused to GFP
(GFP-<U+0394>9CAT) form perinuclear aggregates, are degraded by the proteasome, and
colocalize with and induce the chaperone Hsp70 (HSPA1A/B) in COS-7 cells. We find
that misfolded proteins neither significantly compromise chaperone-mediated
folding capacity nor induce cell death. However, they do induce growth arrest in 
cells that are unable to degrade them and promote stress-induced death upon
proteasome inhibition by MG-132 and heat shock. Finally, we show that
overexpression of all heat-shock factor-1 (HSF1) and Hsp70 proteins, as well as
wild-type and deacetylase-deficient (H363Y) SIRT1, rescue survival upon stress,
implying a noncatalytic action of SIRT1 in response to protein misfolding. Our
study establishes a novel model and extends our knowledge on the mechanism of the
function-independent proteotoxicity of misfolded proteins in dividing cells.

PMID: 22049061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 8;108(45):18378-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1115031108. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

High levels of nuclear heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) are associated with poor
prognosis in breast cancer.

Santagata S(1), Hu R, Lin NU, Mendillo ML, Collins LC, Hankinson SE, Schnitt SJ, 
Whitesell L, Tamimi RM, Lindquist S, Ince TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Future Oncol. 2012 Apr;8(4):399-401.

Heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master transcriptional regulator of the
cellular response to heat and a wide variety of other stressors. We previously
reported that HSF1 promotes the survival and proliferation of malignant cells. At
this time, however, the clinical and prognostic significance of HSF1 in cancer is
unknown. To address this issue breast cancer samples from 1,841 participants in
the Nurses' Health Study were scored for levels of nuclear HSF1. Associations of 
HSF1 status with clinical parameters and survival outcomes were investigated by
Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazard models. The associations were
further delineated by Kaplan-Meier analysis using publicly available mRNA
expression data. Our results show that nuclear HSF1 levels were elevated in ~80% 
of in situ and invasive breast carcinomas. In invasive carcinomas, HSF1
expression was associated with high histologic grade, larger tumor size, and
nodal involvement at diagnosis (P < 0.0001). By using multivariate analysis to
account for the effects of covariates, high HSF1 levels were found to be
independently associated with increased mortality (hazards ratio: 1.62; 95%
confidence interval: 1.21-2.17; P < 0.0013). This association was seen in the
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive population (hazards ratio: 2.10; 95% confidence
interval: 1.45-3.03; P < 0.0001). In public expression profiling data, high HSF1 
mRNA levels were also associated with an increase in ER-positive breast
cancer-specific mortality. We conclude that increased HSF1 is associated with
reduced breast cancer survival. The findings indicate that HSF1 should be
evaluated prospectively as an independent prognostic indicator in ER-positive
breast cancer. HSF1 may ultimately be a useful therapeutic target in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3215027
PMID: 22042860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Innate Immun. 2012;4(1):59-68. doi: 10.1159/000333089. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Heat shock factor 1 protects against lung mycoplasma pneumoniae infection in
mice.

Gally F(1), Minor MN, Smith SK, Case SR, Chu HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a transcriptional factor that controls the
induction of heat shock proteins (e.g. HSP70) in response to stress. Bacterial
infections contribute to the pathobiology of chronic lung diseases such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma. Whether HSF1 is critical to
lung bacterial infection remains unknown. This study is aimed at investigating
the impact of HSF1 deficiency on lung Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mp) infection and
elucidating the underlying molecular mechanisms, such as Toll-like receptor 2
(TLR2) signaling. HSF1(-/-) and HSF1(+/+) mice were intranasally infected with Mp
or saline and sacrificed 4, 24 and 72 h after treatment. HSF1(-/-) mice had a
higher lung Mp load than HSF1(+/+) mice. Mp-induced lung TLR2, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B 
and associated inflammation [e.g. keratinocyte-derived chemokine (KC),
neutrophils and histopathology] were delayed in HSF1(-/-) mice as compared to
HSF1(+/+) mice. HSP70 protein levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of HSF1(-/-)
mice were decreased. Furthermore, in response to Mp infection, HSF1(-/-) alveolar
macrophages had less TLR2 mRNA expression and KC production than HSF1(+/+)
counterparts. Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activity and KC production in HSF1(-/-)
macrophages could be rescued by addition of exogenous HSP70 protein. These data
suggest that HSF1 is necessary to initiate host defense against bacterial
infection partly through promoting early TLR2 signaling activation.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3250656
PMID: 22042134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Virology. 2011 Dec 20;421(2):184-91. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.10.001. Epub 2011 
Oct 21.

Heat shock factor 1 upregulates transcription of Epstein-Barr Virus nuclear
antigen 1 by binding to a heat shock element within the BamHI-Q promoter.

Wang FW(1), Wu XR, Liu WJ, Liao YJ, Lin S, Zong YS, Zeng MS, Zeng YX, Mai SJ, Xie
D.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 1 (EBNA1) is essential for maintenance
of the episome and establishment of latency. In this study, we observed that heat
treatment effectively induced EBNA1 transcription in EBV-transformed B95-8 and
human LCL cell lines. Although Cp is considered as the sole promoter used for the
expression of EBNA1 transcripts in the lymphoblastoid cell lines, the RT-PCR
results showed that the EBNA1 transcripts induced by heat treatment arise from
Qp-initiated transcripts. Using bioinformatics, a high affinity and functional
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)-binding element within the -17/+4 oligonucleotide of
the Qp was found, and was determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Moreover, heat shock and exogenous HSF1
expression induced Qp activity in reporter assays. Further, RNA
interference-mediated HSF1 gene silencing attenuated heat-induced EBNA1
expression in B95-8 cells. These results provide evidence that EBNA1 is a new
target for the transcription factor HSF1.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Cancer. 2012 Apr 1;118(7):1782-94. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26482. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Heat shock factor 1 promotes invasion and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma 
in vitro and in vivo.

Fang F(1), Chang R, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
Hunan, China.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a powerful, multifaceted modifier of
carcinogenesis. However, the clinical significance and biologic function of HSF1 
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unknown.
METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis,
Western blot analysis, and immunohistochemical staining were used to detect
expression levels of HSF1, and its correlation with clinicopathologic parameters 
and the prognosis for patients with HCC were analyzed. In addition, the biologic 
function and molecular mechanisms of HSF1 in HCC were investigated in vitro and
in vivo.
RESULTS: HSF1 levels were elevated predominantly in HCC, especially in venous
emboli from HCC (P < .05), and high expression levels of HSF1 were correlated
significantly with multiple nodules, venous invasion, absence of capsular
formation, and high Edmondson-Steiner grade as well as poor overall survival and 
disease-free survival in patients with HCC (P < .05). Multivariate Cox regression
analysis revealed that high HSF1 expression was an independent prognostic factor 
for overall survival in patients with HCC (relative risk, 4.874; P < .001).
Finally, HSF1 was capable of promoting HCC cell migration and invasion in vitro
and in vivo by facilitating the expression and phosphorylation of heat shock
protein 27.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, the current findings suggested that HSF1 may serve as 
a novel prognostic marker and therapeutic target for HCC.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 22009757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2011 Oct 6;11:84. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-11-84.

Down-regulation of estrogen receptor-alpha and rearranged during transfection
tyrosine kinase is associated with withaferin a-induced apoptosis in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

Zhang X(1), Mukerji R, Samadi AK, Cohen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City,
Kansas, USA. xzhang2@kumc.edu

BACKGROUND: Withaferin A (WA), a naturally occurring withanolide, induces
apoptosis in both estrogen-responsive MCF-7 and estrogen-independent MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cell lines with higher sensitivity in MCF-7 cells, but the
underlying mechanisms are not well defined. The purpose of this study was to
determine the anti-cancer effects of WA in MCF-7 breast cancer cells and explore 
alterations in estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and its associated molecules in
vitro as novel mechanisms of WA action.
METHODS: The effects of WA on MCF-7 viability and proliferation were evaluated by
3-(4,
5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazoli
um (MTS) assay and trypan blue exclusion assays. Apoptosis was evaluated by
Annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)/propidium iodide (PI) flow cytometry 
and Western blot analysis of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage. Cell
cycle effects were analyzed by PI flow cytometry. Western blotting was also
conducted to examine alterations in the expression of ERa and pathways that are
associated with ERa function.
RESULTS: WA resulted in growth inhibition and decreased viability in MCF-7 cells 
with an IC50 of 576 nM for 72 h. It also caused a dose- and time-dependent
apoptosis and G2/M cell cycle arrest. WA-induced apoptosis was associated with
down-regulation of ERa, REarranged during Transfection (RET) tyrosine kinase, and
heat shock factor-1 (HSF1), as well as up-regulation of phosphorylated p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase (phospho-p38 MAPK), p53 and p21 protein
expression. Co-treatment with protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide or
proteasome inhibitor MG132 revealed that depletion of ERa by WA is
post-translational, due to proteasome-dependent ERa degradation.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, down-regulation of ERa, RET, HSF1 and up-regulation 
of phospho-p38 MAPK, p53, p21 are involved in the pro-apoptotic and
growth-inhibitory effects of WA in MCF-7 breast cancer cells in vitro.
Down-regulation of ERa protein levels by WA is caused by proteasome-dependent ERa
degradation.

PMCID: PMC3198756
PMID: 21978374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Jan;17(1):121-30. doi: 10.1007/s12192-011-0292-4.
Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Heat shock protein 70 inhibits hydrogen peroxide-induced nucleolar fragmentation 
via suppressing cleavage and down-regulation of nucleolin.

Wang K(1), Deng G, Chen G, Liu M, Yi Y, Yang T, McMillan DR, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008, People's Republic of China.

It has been reported that nucleolar fragmentation is a part of the overall
apoptotic morphology, however, it is currently obscure whether and how nucleolar 
fragmentation can be induced by hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) and heat shock
protein 70 (Hsp70) can prevent nucleolar fragmentation. To dissect these two
questions, C(2)C(12) myogenic cells and immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts 
(MEFs) with heat shock transcriptional factor 1 (HSF1) null mutation were treated
with heat shock response (HS) (42.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5°C for 1 h and recovery at 37°C for
24 h) and then were insulted with 0.5 mmol/L H(2)O(2). Morphological changes of
nucleoli were observed under contrast microscope or electronic microscope. It was
found that (1) stimulation with H(2)O(2)-induced nucleolar fragmentation by
mediating cleavage and down-regulation of nucleolar protein, nucleolin in
C(2)C(12) myocytes and MEFs; (2) HS suppressed nucleolar fragmentation by
inducing the expression of Hsp70 in an HSF1-dependent manner as indicated by
assays of transfection with Hsp70 antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ONs) or
recombinant plasmids of full-length Hsp70 cDNA; (3) protection of Hsp70 against
nucleolar fragmentation was related to its accumulation in nucleolus mediated by 
nuclear localization sequence and its inhibition against cleavage and
down-regulation of nucleolin. These results suggested that H(2)O(2)-induced
nucleolar fragmentation and HS or Hsp70 inhibit H(2)O(2)-induced nucleolar
fragmentation through the translocation of Hsp70 into nucleolar and its
protection against impairment of nucleolin.

PMCID: PMC3227849
PMID: 21960124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Nat Prod. 2011 Oct 28;74(10):2109-15. doi: 10.1021/np200355n. Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Diarylheptanoids from the seeds of Alpinia katsumadai as heat shock factor 1
inducers.

Nam JW(1), Kang GY, Han AR, Lee D, Lee YS, Seo EK.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Cell Signaling & Drug Discovery Research, College of Pharmacy, 
Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

Seven new diarylheptanoids, (-)-(R)-4<U+2033>-hydroxyyashabushiketol (1),
(3S,5S)-alpinikatin (2), katsumain C (3), 7-epi-katsumain C (4), ent-alpinnanin B
(5), ent-alpinnanin A (6), and ent-calyxin H (8), were isolated from the EtOAc
extract of the seeds of Alpinia katsumadai together with three known compounds,
alpinnanin B (7), epicalyxin H (9), and calyxin H (10). Each isomer mixture of 3 
and 4, 5-7, and 8-10 was separated successfully by preparative HPLC using a
chiral column. The three isomer mixtures (3 and 4, 5-7, 8-10) at 1 µM increased
expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) with fold increases of 1.438, 1.190, and
1.316, respectively, which was accompanied with increased expression of heat
shock protein (HSP) 27 (1.403-, 1.250-, and 1.270-fold, respectively) and HSP70
(1.373-, 1.313-, and 1.229-fold, respectively) without cellular cytotoxicity,
suggesting a possible application of these compounds as HSP inducers. Celastrol
was used as a positive control of HSP induction, producing fold increases of
1.066 (HSF1), 1.216 (HSP27), and 1.371 (HSP70) at 1 µM. Compounds 1 and 2 did not
affect the induction of HSF1 protein.

PMID: 21942765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012 Feb;13(1):29-37. doi: 10.1007/s10162-011-0289-9.
Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Induction of heat shock proteins by hyperthermia and noise overstimulation in
hsf1 -/- mice.

Gong TW(1), Fairfield DA, Fullarton L, Dolan DF, Altschuler RA, Kohrman DC, Lomax
MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head Neck Surgery, Kresge Hearing Research
Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5648, USA.

Diverse cellular and environmental stresses can activate the heat shock response,
an evolutionarily conserved mechanism to protect proteins from denaturation.
Stressors activate heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), which binds to heat 
shock elements in the genes for heat shock proteins, leading to rapid induction
of these important molecular chaperones. Both heat and noise stress are known to 
activate the heat shock response in the cochlea and protect it from subsequent
noise trauma. However, the contribution of HSF1 to induction of heat shock
proteins following noise trauma has not been investigated at the molecular level.
We evaluated the role of HSF1 in the cochlea following noise stress by examining 
induction of heat shock proteins in Hsf1 ( +/- ) control and Hsf1 ( -/- ) mice.
Heat stress rapidly induced expression of Hsp25, Hsp47, Hsp70.1, Hsp70.3, Hsp84, 
Hsp86, and Hsp110 in the cochleae of wild-type and Hsf1 ( +/- ) mice, but not in 
Hsf1 ( -/- ) mice, confirming the essential role of HSF1 in mediating the heat
shock response. Exposure to broadband noise (2-20 kHz) at 106 dB SPL for 2 h
produced partial hearing loss. Maximal induction of heat shock proteins occurred 
4 h after the noise. In comparison to heat stress, noise stress resulted in lower
induced levels of Hsp25, Hsp70.1, Hsp70.3, Hsp86, and Hsp110 in Hsf1 ( +/- )
mice. Induction of these heat shock proteins was attenuated, but not completely
eliminated, in Hsf1 ( -/- ) mice. These same noise exposure conditions induced
genes for several immediate early transcription factors and maximum induction
occurred earlier than for heat shock proteins. Thus, additional signaling
pathways and transcriptional regulators that are activated by noise probably
contribute to induction of heat shock proteins in the cochlea.

PMCID: PMC3254713
PMID: 21932106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cancer Lett. 2011 Dec 22;312(2):158-67. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.07.031. Epub
2011 Aug 22.

A novel C-terminal HSP90 inhibitor KU135 induces apoptosis and cell cycle arrest 
in melanoma cells.

Samadi AK(1), Zhang X, Mukerji R, Donnelly AC, Blagg BS, Cohen MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
United States. asamadi@kumc.edu

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is differentially expressed in tumor cells
including melanoma and involved in proper folding, stabilization and regulation
of cellular proteins. We investigated a novobiocin-derived Hsp90 C-terminal
inhibitor, KU135, for anti-proliferative effects in melanoma cells. The results
indicate that KU135 reduced cell viability and cell proliferation in melanoma
cells and IC(50) values for A735(DRO), M14(NPA), B16F10 and SKMEL28 cells were
0.82, 0.92, 1.33 and 1.30µM respectively. KU135 induced a more potent
anti-proliferative effect in most melanoma cells versus N-terminal Hsp90
inhibitor 17AAG. KU135 induced apoptosis in melanoma cells, as indicated by
annexin V/PI staining, reduction in the mitochondrial membrane potential,
mitochondrial cytochrome C release and caspase 3 activation. KU135 reduced levels
of Hsp90 client proteins Akt, BRAF, RAF-1, cyclin B and cdc25. Additionally,
levels of Hsp90 and Hsp70 did not increase, while the levels of phosphorylated
HSF1 levels decreased. KU135 induced strong G2/M cell cycle arrest, associated
with decreased expression of cdc25c, cyclin B and increased phosphorylation of
cdc25c. These finding show that KU135 reduced cell survival, proliferation, and
induces apoptosis in melanoma cells. We suggest that KU135 may be a potential
candidate for cancer therapy against melanoma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Fertil Steril. 2011 Nov;96(5):1239-45. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.08.023.
Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Effect of antifreeze protein supplementation in vitrification medium on mouse
oocyte developmental competence.

Jo JW(1), Jee BC, Lee JR, Suh CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University Bundang
Hospital, Seongnam, Gyeonggi, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of antifreeze protein (AFP) supplementation 
during mouse oocyte vitrification on the survival, fertilization and embryonic
development.
DESIGN: Animal study.
SETTING: University laboratory.
ANIMAL(S): BDF-1 mice.
INTERVENTION(S): In vivo-matured metaphase II oocytes were vitrified with the use
of CryoTop by two-step exposure to equilibrium and vitrification solution
supplemented or not with 500 ng/mL AFP III.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Postwarming survival, fertilization, embryonic
development up to blastocyst in vitro, morphology of spindle and chromosome,
membrane integrity, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) contents, and several gene
expressions.
RESULT(S): In the AFP-treated group, blastocyst formation rate was significantly 
higher and blastomere count with positive caspase was significantly lower
compared with the nontreated group. Rate of intact spindle/chromosome, stable
membrane, and ATP contents were significantly higher in AFP group. AFP group
showed higher Mad2 and lower Eg5 gene expression. Both vitrification groups
showed increased Hsf1, Zar1, and Zp1/Zp2 expression and decreased Hook1 and Zp3
expression compared with fresh control samples.
CONCLUSION(S): Supplementation of AFP in vitrification medium has a protective
effect on mouse oocytes for chilling injury; it can preserve spindle/membrane
integrity and intracellular ATP contents. More stable spindle integrity in the
AFP group may be associated with higher Mad2 and lower Eg5 gene expression.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21917250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024521. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Synchronization of circadian Per2 rhythms and HSF1-BMAL1:CLOCK interaction in
mouse fibroblasts after short-term heat shock pulse.

Tamaru T(1), Hattori M, Honda K, Benjamin I, Ozawa T, Takamatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Advanced Research Center for Medical Science,
Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. tetamaru@med.toho-u.ac.jp

Circadian rhythms are the general physiological processes of adaptation to daily 
environmental changes, such as the temperature cycle. A change in temperature is 
a resetting cue for mammalian circadian oscillators, which are possibly regulated
by the heat shock (HS) pathway. The HS response (HSR) is a universal process that
provides protection against stressful conditions, which promote
protein-denaturation. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is essential for HSR. In the
study presented here, we investigated whether a short-term HS pulse can reset
circadian rhythms. Circadian Per2 rhythm and HSF1-mediated gene expression were
monitored by a real-time bioluminescence assay for mPer2 promoter-driven
luciferase and HS element (HSE; HSF1-binding site)-driven luciferase activity,
respectively. By an optimal duration HS pulse (43°C for approximately 30
minutes), circadian Per2 rhythm was observed in the whole mouse fibroblast
culture, probably indicating the synchronization of the phases of each cell. This
rhythm was preceded by an acute elevation in mPer2 and HSF1-mediated gene
expression. Mutations in the two predicted HSE sites adjacent (one of them
proximally) to the E-box in the mPer2 promoter dramatically abolished circadian
mPer2 rhythm. Circadian Per2 gene/protein expression was not observed in
HSF1-deficient cells. These findings demonstrate that HSF1 is essential to the
synchronization of circadian rhythms by the HS pulse. Importantly, the
interaction between HSF1 and BMAL1:CLOCK heterodimer, a central circadian
transcription factor, was observed after the HS pulse. These findings reveal that
even a short-term HS pulse can reset circadian rhythms and cause the
HSF1-BMAL1:CLOCK interaction, suggesting the pivotal role of crosstalk between
the mammalian circadian and HSR systems.

PMCID: PMC3168500
PMID: 21915348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023988. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Systematic identification of novel, essential host genes affecting bromovirus RNA
replication.

Gancarz BL(1), Hao L, He Q, Newton MA, Ahlquist P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America.

Positive-strand RNA virus replication involves viral proteins and cellular
proteins at nearly every replication step. Brome mosaic virus (BMV) is a
well-established model for dissecting virus-host interactions and is one of very 
few viruses whose RNA replication, gene expression and encapsidation have been
reproduced in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Previously, our laboratory
identified ~100 non-essential host genes whose loss inhibited or enhanced BMV
replication at least 3-fold. However, our isolation of additional BMV-modulating 
host genes by classical genetics and other results underscore that genes
essential for cell growth also contribute to BMV RNA replication at a frequency
that may be greater than that of non-essential genes. To systematically identify 
novel, essential host genes affecting BMV RNA replication, we tested a collection
of ~900 yeast strains, each with a single essential gene promoter replaced by a
doxycycline-repressible promoter, allowing repression of gene expression by
adding doxycycline to the growth medium. Using this strain array of ~81% of
essential yeast genes, we identified 24 essential host genes whose depleted
expression reproducibly inhibited or enhanced BMV RNA replication. Relevant host 
genes are involved in ribosome biosynthesis, cell cycle regulation and protein
homeostasis, among other cellular processes. BMV 2a(Pol) levels were
significantly increased in strains depleted for a heat shock protein (HSF1) or
proteasome components (PRE1 and RPT6), suggesting these genes may affect BMV RNA 
replication by directly or indirectly modulating 2a(Pol) localization,
post-translational modification or interacting partners. Investigating the
diverse functions of these newly identified essential host genes should advance
our understanding of BMV-host interactions and normal cellular pathways, and
suggest new modes of virus control.

PMCID: PMC3161824
PMID: 21915247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;787:1-20. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-295-3_1.

Targeted deletion of Hsf1, 2, and 4 genes in mice.

Jin X(1), Eroglu B, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA.

Heat-shock transcription factors (Hsfs) regulate transcription of heat-shock
proteins as well as other genes whose promoters contain heat-shock elements.
There are at least five Hsfs in mammalian cells, Hsf1, Hsf2, Hsf3, Hsf4, and
Hsfy. To understand the physiological roles of Hsf1, Hsf2, and Hsf4 in vivo, we
generated knockout mouse lines for these factors. In this chapter, we describe
the design of the targeting vectors, the plasmids used, and the successful
generation of mice lacking the individual genes. We also briefly describe what we
have learned about the physiological functions of these genes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3665288
PMID: 21898223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jan;40(1):47-52. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1178. Epub 2011 Aug 29.

State of heat shock factor 1 expression as a putative diagnostic marker for oral 
squamous cell carcinoma.

Ishiwata J(1), Kasamatsu A, Sakuma K, Iyoda M, Yamatoji M, Usukura K, Ishige S,
Shimizu T, Yamano Y, Ogawara K, Shiiba M, Tanzawa H, Uzawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is responsible for expres-- sion of a large class of
heat shock proteins that have been implicated in the malignant phenotype of human
cancers. Little is known about the effect of a high level of HSF1 on the behavior
of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). In this study, we assessed the value of
HSF1 for predicting clinical outcomes in OSCC. Quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting showed that the
expressions of HSF1 mRNA and protein in OSCC-derived cell lines (HSC-2, HSC-3,
HSC-4, Sa3, Ca9-22, KON and Ho-1-u-1) were elevated compared with those in human 
normal oral keratinocytes (P<0.05). Similar to in vitro data, HSF1 mRNA
expression in primary OSCCs (n=50) was significantly greater than in normal
counterparts (P<0.05). Since HSF1 was observed in the nucleus and cytoplasm by
immu-- nohistochemistry, we investigated the correlation between the HSF1
expression status at each subcellular location and the clinical behavior of
OSCCs. Among the clinical classifications, higher nuclear HSF1 expression was
closely related to tumor size and histopathologic types (P<0.05). These results
showed for the first time that nuclear HSF1 expression may contribute to cancer
progression and that HSF1 might be a potential diagnostic biomarker and a
therapeutic target for OSCCs.

PMID: 21879256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Nov;51(5):821-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.07.030. Epub 
2011 Aug 7.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 protects heart after pressure overload through 
promoting myocardial angiogenesis in male mice.

Zou Y(1), Li J, Ma H, Jiang H, Yuan J, Gong H, Liang Y, Guan A, Wu J, Li L, Zhou 
N, Niu Y, Sun A, Nakai A, Wang P, Takano H, Komuro I, Ge J.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, China. zou.yunzeng@zs-hospital.sh.cn

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) plays an important role not only in
excise-induced cardiac hypertrophy but also in protection against pressure
overload-induced cardiac dysfunction. However, the mechanism is not completely
understood. We here elucidate the potential mechanisms by which HSF1 protects
against pressure overload-induced cardiac remodeling and dysfunction. A sustained
constriction of transverse aorta (TAC) was imposed to HSF1 transgenic (TG),
knockout (KO) and their littermate wild type (WT) male mice. Four weeks later,
adaptive responses to TAC, such as cardiac hypertrophy, contractility and
angiogenesis evaluated by echocardiography, catheterization, coronary perfusion
pressure and immunohistochemistry were well preserved in TG but not in KO
compared with WT mice. An angiogenesis inhibitor TNP-470 abrogated all these
adaptive responses in TG mice, while cardiac transfection of VEGF with
angiopoietin-1 rescued the broken heart in KO mice. In response to TAC, p53 was
downregulated and hypoxia-inducing transcription factor-1 (HIF-1) was upregulated
not only in the heart but also in the cultured cardiac endothelial cells (EC) of 
TG mice as compared to WT mice whereas these changes became opposite in KO mice. 
A small interfering RNA (siRNA) of HIF-1 but not a p53 gene impaired the adaptive
responses of the heart and EC in TG mice, and a siRNA of p53 but not a HIF-1 gene
significantly reversed the heart and EC disorders in KO mice after TAC. We
conclude that HSF1 promotes cardiac angiogenesis through suppression of p53 and
subsequent upregulation of HIF-1 in endothelial cells during chronic pressure
overload, leading to the maintenance of cardiac adaptation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21854784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23512. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023512. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

An atypical unfolded protein response in heat shocked cells.

Heldens L(1), Hensen SM, Onnekink C, van Genesen ST, Dirks RP, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The heat shock response (HSR) and the unfolded protein response (UPR)
are both activated by proteotoxic stress, although in different compartments, and
share cellular resources. How these resources are allocated when both responses
are active is not known. Insight in possible crosstalk will help understanding
the consequences of failure of these systems in (age-related) disease.
RESULTS: In heat stressed HEK293 cells synthesis of the canonical UPR
transcription factors XBP1s and ATF4 was detected as well as HSF1 independent
activation of the promoters of the ER resident chaperones HSPA5 (BiP) and DNAJB9 
(ERdj4). However, the heat stress activation of the DNAJB9 promoter, a XBP1s
target, was not blocked in cells expressing a dominant negative IRE1a mutant, and
thus did not require XBP1s. Furthermore, the DNA element required for heat stress
activation of the DNAJB9 promoter is distinct from the ATF4 and ATF6 target
elements; even though inhibition of eIF2a phosphorylation resulted in a decreased
activation of the DNAJB9 promoter upon heat stress, suggesting a role for an
eIF2a phosphorylation dependent product.
CONCLUSIONS: The initial step in the UPR, synthesis of transcription factors, is 
activated by heat stress but the second step, transcriptional transactivation by 
these factors, is blocked and these pathways of the UPR are thus not productive. 
Expression of canonical ER chaperones is part of the response of heat stressed
cells but another set of transcription factors has been recruited to regulate
expression of these ER chaperones.

PMCID: PMC3154502
PMID: 21853144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Hyperthermia. 2011;27(6):573-81. doi: 10.3109/02656736.2011.587493.

Hyperthermia protects mice against chronic unpredictable stress-induced
anxiety-like behaviour and hippocampal CA3 cell apoptosis.

Zhu X(1), Peng M, Cheng M, Xiao X, Yi J, Yao S, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Psychological Institute, Second XiangYa Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

PURPOSE: It is widely accepted that chronic stress can induce anxiety; however,
the cellular and molecular mechanisms of stress-induced anxiety are far from
being elucidated. Hyperthermia has been shown to induce expression of heat shock 
proteins (HSPs) to provide protection against a variety of stresses. To our
knowledge, the effect of hyperthermia on the development of chronic unpredictable
stress (CUS)-induced anxiety has not been studied. This study was to determine
the relationship between hyperthermia induced Hsp72 and CUS related anxiety.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Heat shock factor 1 knockout (hsf1(-/-)) and wild-type
(hsf1(+/+)) mice were subjected to CUS with or without hyperthermia treatment.
Anxiety-like behaviours were evaluated by elevated plus maze and open field
tests. Apoptosis in the hippocampal CA3 area was detected by TUNEL staining.
Hsp72 protein level in the hippocampus was measured by Western blot.
RESULTS: CUS caused significant apoptosis in hippocampal CA3 cells in both
hsf1(-/-) and hsf1(+/+) mice, which significantly correlated with anxiety-like
behaviours. Hyperthermia induced Hsp72 expression in hsf1(+/+) mice, but not in
hsf1(-/-) mice. Importantly, hyperthermia protected hsf1(+/+) mice against
developing CUS-related anxiety-like behaviours and reduced CUS-induced apoptosis 
in hippocampal CA3 cells. In contrast, hyperthermia exhibited no protective role 
in hsf1(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Apoptosis of hippocampal CA3 cells is involved in the development of
anxiety-like behaviours underlying CUS. Hsp72 protein is a crucial player in the 
protective effect of hyperthermia against CUS-induced apoptosis and development
of anxiety-like behaviours. Our study suggests hyperthermia is an effective
treatment for CUS-induced mood disorders.

PMID: 21846193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Curr Aging Sci. 2012 Jul;5(2):87-95.

Longevity pathways: HSF1 and FoxO pathways, a new therapeutic target to prevent
age-related diseases.

Perez FP(1), Moinuddin SS, ul ain Shamim Q, Joseph DJ, Morisaki J, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Geriatric Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indiana 46202, USA. fpperez@iupui.edu

Modern medicine is directed towards the prevention, detection and cure of
individual diseases. Yet, current medical models inadequately describe
aging-associated diseases. We now know that failure in longevity pathways
including oxidative stress, multisystem dysregulation, inflammation, sarcopenia, 
protein deposition and atherosclerosis are associated with age-related diseases. 
Such longevity pathways are potential targets for therapeutic intervention.
Interventions in specific pathways have been shown to ameliorate and postpone the
aging phenotype by activation of multiple genes. The strategy that we propose in 
this paper is to apply interventions simultaneously on complementary longevity
pathways to achieve a synergistic result. For instance, aging is known to
attenuate the HSF1 pathway leading to production of very toxic beta-amyloid
fibrils. Consequently, the FoxO pathway is activated, resulting in the formation 
of less toxic high molecular weight aggregates as a defense mechanism. Thus the
simultaneous upregulation of the HSF1 and FoxO pathways could potentially
decrease protein deposition and proteotoxicity, thereby retarding or possibly
preventing the onset of neurodegenerative diseases. Modulating these two pathways
may also delay the onset of other age-related pathologies including cognitive
decline, cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disease due to its multi-gene
effect. In this paper, we will discuss the role of several agents on the
simultaneous modulation of these two central longevity pathways. The aging of
western societies makes prevention of age-related diseases a pressing priority.

PMID: 21834787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. FEBS Lett. 2011 Sep 2;585(17):2744-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.07.041. Epub
2011 Aug 4.

Regulation of chaperone gene expression by heat shock transcription factor in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae: importance in normal cell growth, stress resistance,
and longevity.

Sakurai H(1), Ota A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. sakurai@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF), a key regulator in the expression of heat 
shock protein (HSP) chaperones, is involved in the maintenance of protein
homeostasis. However, the impact of HSF-mediated transcription of each HSP gene
on this process is not fully understood. We show that Saccharomyces cerevisiae
cells containing mutations in the HSF-binding sequences of chromosomal HSP90
promoters exhibit various phenotypes, including slow growth, proteotoxic stress
sensitivity, and reduced chronological lifespan. Similar phenotypes were observed
when HSF-binding sequences in five mitochondrial HSP promoters were mutated.
Therefore, HSF-regulated changes in expression of these chaperone genes are
necessary to maintain cell viability under various growth conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21827755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Oct;111(4):1142-9. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00471.2011. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Absence of heat shock transcription factor 1 retards the regrowth of atrophied
soleus muscle in mice.

Yasuhara K(1), Ohno Y, Kojima A, Uehara K, Beppu M, Sugiura T, Fujimoto M, Nakai 
A, Ohira Y, Yoshioka T, Goto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Japan.

Effects of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) gene on the regrowth of
atrophied mouse soleus muscles were studied. Both HSF1-null and wild-type mice
were subjected to continuous hindlimb suspension for 2 wk followed by 4 wk of
ambulation recovery. There was no difference in the magnitude of
suspension-related decrease of muscle weight, protein content, and the
cross-sectional area of muscle fibers between both types of mice. However, the
regrowth of atrophied soleus muscle in HSF1-null mice was slower compared with
that in wild-type mice. Lower baseline expression level of HSP25, HSC70, and
HSP72 were noted in soleus muscle of HSF1-null mice. Unloading-associated
downregulation and reloading-associated upregulation of HSP25 and HSP72 mRNA were
observed not only in wild-type mice but also in HSF1-null mice.
Reloading-associated upregulation of HSP72 and HSP25 during the regrowth of
atrophied muscle was observed in wild-type mice. Minor and delayed upregulation
of HSP72 at mRNA and protein levels was also seen in HSF1-null mice. Significant 
upregulations of HSF2 and HSF4 were observed immediately after the suspension in 
HSF1-null mice, but not in wild-type mice. Therefore, HSP72 expression in soleus 
muscle might be regulated by the posttranscriptional level, but not by the stress
response. Evidence from this study suggested that the upregulation of HSPs
induced by HSF1-associated stress response might play, in part, important roles
in the mechanical loading (stress)-associated regrowth of skeletal muscle.

PMID: 21817109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 13;193:63-71. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.035.
Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Alcohol induces synaptotagmin 1 expression in neurons via activation of heat
shock factor 1.

Varodayan FP(1), Pignataro L, Harrison NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Columbia University, 40 Haven Avenue, Room 865,
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Many synapses within the central nervous system are sensitive to ethanol.
Although alcohol is known to affect the probability of neurotransmitter release
in specific brain regions, the effects of alcohol on the underlying synaptic
vesicle fusion machinery have been little studied. To identify a potential
pathway by which ethanol can regulate neurotransmitter release, we investigated
the effects of acute alcohol exposure (1-24 h) on the expression of the gene
encoding synaptotagmin 1 (Syt1), a synaptic protein that binds calcium to
directly trigger vesicle fusion. Syt1 was identified in a microarray screen as a 
gene that may be sensitive to alcohol and heat shock. We found that Syt1 mRNA and
protein expression are rapidly and robustly up-regulated by ethanol in mouse
cortical neurons, and that the distribution of Syt1 protein along neuronal
processes is also altered. Syt1 mRNA up-regulation is dependent on the activation
of the transcription factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). The transfection of a
constitutively active Hsf1 construct into neurons stimulates Syt1 transcription, 
while transfection of Hsf1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) or a constitutively
inactive Hsf1 construct into neurons attenuates the induction of Syt1 by ethanol.
This suggests that the activation of HSF1 can induce Syt1 expression and that
this may be a mechanism by which alcohol regulates neurotransmitter release
during brief exposures. Further analysis revealed that a subset of the genes
encoding the core synaptic vesicle fusion (soluble NSF
(N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor) attachment protein receptor; SNARE) proteins 
share this property of induction by ethanol, suggesting that alcohol may trigger 
a specific coordinated adaptation in synaptic function. This molecular mechanism 
could explain some of the changes in synaptic function that occur following
alcohol administration and may be an important step in the process of neuronal
adaptation to alcohol.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3202342
PMID: 21816209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22268. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022268. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

HSF1 is essential for the resistance of zebrafish eye and brain tissues to
hypoxia/reperfusion injury.

Tucker NR(1), Middleton RC, Le QP, Shelden EA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington, United States of America.

Ischemia and subsequent reperfusion (IR) produces injury to brain, eye and other 
tissues, contributing to the progression of important clinical pathologies. The
response of cells to IR involves activation of several signaling pathways
including those activating hypoxia and heat shock responsive transcription
factors. However, specific roles of these responses in limiting cell damage and
preventing cell death after IR have not been fully elucidated. Here, we have
examined the role of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in the response of zebrafish
embryos to hypoxia and subsequent return to normoxic conditions (HR) as a model
for IR. Heat shock preconditioning elevated heat shock protein expression and
protected zebrafish embryo eye and brain tissues against HR-induced apoptosis.
These effects were inhibited by translational suppression of HSF1 expression.
Reduced expression of HSF1 also increased cell death in brain and eye tissues of 
embryos subjected to hypoxia and reperfusion without prior heat shock.
Surprisingly, reduced expression of HSF1 had only a modest effect on
hypoxia-induced expression of Hsp70 and no effect on hypoxia-induced expression
of Hsp27. These results establish the zebrafish embryo as a model for the study
of ischemic injury in the brain and eye and reveal a critical role for HSF1 in
the response of these tissues to HR. Our results also uncouple the role of HSF1
expression from that of Hsp27, a well characterized heat shock protein considered
essential for cell survival after hypoxia. Alternative roles for HSF1 are
considered.

PMCID: PMC3141033
PMID: 21814572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Oct;22(19):3571-83. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-04-0330. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

Heat shock factor 2 is required for maintaining proteostasis against
febrile-range thermal stress and polyglutamine aggregation.

Shinkawa T(1), Tan K, Fujimoto M, Hayashida N, Yamamoto K, Takaki E, Takii R,
Prakasam R, Inouye S, Mezger V, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock response is characterized by the induction of heat shock proteins
(HSPs), which facilitate protein folding, and non-HSP proteins with diverse
functions, including protein degradation, and is regulated by heat shock factors 
(HSFs). HSF1 is a master regulator of HSP expression during heat shock in
mammals, as is HSF3 in avians. HSF2 plays roles in development of the brain and
reproductive organs. However, the fundamental roles of HSF2 in vertebrate cells
have not been identified. Here we find that vertebrate HSF2 is activated during
heat shock in the physiological range. HSF2 deficiency reduces threshold for
chicken HSF3 or mouse HSF1 activation, resulting in increased HSP expression
during mild heat shock. HSF2-null cells are more sensitive to sustained mild heat
shock than wild-type cells, associated with the accumulation of ubiquitylated
misfolded proteins. Furthermore, loss of HSF2 function increases the accumulation
of aggregated polyglutamine protein and shortens the lifespan of R6/2
Huntington's disease mice, partly through aB-crystallin expression. These results
identify HSF2 as a major regulator of proteostasis capacity against febrile-range
thermal stress and suggest that HSF2 could be a promising therapeutic target for 
protein-misfolding diseases.

PMCID: PMC3183013
PMID: 21813737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Sep;32(9):1305-14. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr174. Epub 2011 Jul
28.

NOR1 is an HSF1- and NRF1-regulated putative tumor suppressor inactivated by
promoter hypermethylation in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Li W(1), Li X, Wang W, Li X, Tan Y, Yi M, Yang J, McCarthy JB, Xiong W, Wu M, Ma 
J, Su B, Zhang Z, Liao Q, Xiang B, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China.

Promoter hypermethylation-mediated silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) is 
a hallmark of oncogenesis. Oxidored-nitro domain-containing protein 1 (NOR1) is a
candidate TSG that is downregulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). In the
present study, we identified a functional NOR1 promoter that is regulated by heat
shock factor 1 and nuclear respiratory factor 1. The promoter is located within a
CpG island. Hypermethylation of this CpG island was found in NPC tissue samples
and cancer cell lines, whereas no aberrant promoter methylation was detected in
non-cancerous nasopharyngeal tissue samples or normal nasopharyngeal epithelial
cells. Treatment of NPC 6-10B cells and leukemia HL60 cells with
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine increased endogenous levels of NOR1 messenger RNA.
Ectopic expression of NOR1 in NPC HNE1 cells inhibited tumor cell colony
formation and viability. These findings suggest that promoter hypermethylation
may participate in transcriptional inactivation of the NOR1 gene in NPC. Frequent
epigenetic inactivation of the NOR1 gene in NPC suggests that it may be a
critical tumor suppressor involved in the development of NPC.

PMID: 21803736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2012 Jun;39(3):270-4. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2011.06.001. Epub
2011 Jul 26.

Geranylgeranylacetone suppresses noise-induced expression of proinflammatory
cytokines in the cochlea.

Nakamoto T(1), Mikuriya T, Sugahara K, Hirose Y, Hashimoto T, Shimogori H, Takii 
R, Nakai A, Yamashita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine,
Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is a master regulator of heat
shock response, and also inhibits expression of inflammatory cytokines directly
or indirectly. Here, we examined effects of HSF1 activation on the expression of 
proinflammatory cytokines in mouse cochlea after exposure to noise.
METHODS: Male CBA/N mice with normal Preyer's reflex were exposed to intense
noise for 3h. Three hours after noise exposure, bilateral cochleae were removed
and expression of major inflammatory cytokines was examined.
RESULTS: We found that interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) expression
increased significantly after noise exposure, and the expression was suppressed
significantly in mice administered with geranylgeranylacetone (GGA), which
activates HSF1. Seven days after noise exposure, thresholds for auditory
brainstem response were elevated, and GGA administration significantly suppressed
this elevation.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that HSF1-mediated suppression of
proinflammatory cytokines in the cochlea by GGA administration could be an
important means of inner ear protection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21794995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Clin Invest. 2011 Aug;121(8):3306-19. doi: 10.1172/JCI57413. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Altered chromatin architecture underlies progressive impairment of the heat shock
response in mouse models of Huntington disease.

Labbadia J(1), Cunliffe H, Weiss A, Katsyuba E, Sathasivam K, Seredenina T,
Woodman B, Moussaoui S, Frentzel S, Luthi-Carter R, Paganetti P, Bates GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Kings College London, London,
UK.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2011 Aug;121(8):2972-5.

Huntington disease (HD) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder for which
there are no disease-modifying treatments. Previous studies have proposed that
activation of the heat shock response (HSR) via the transcription factor heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1) may be of therapeutic benefit. However, the effect of
disease progression on the HSR and the therapeutic potential of this pathway are 
currently unknown. Here, we used a brain-penetrating HSP90 inhibitor and
physiological, molecular, and behavioral readouts to demonstrate that
pharmacological activation of HSF1 improves huntingtin aggregate load, motor
performance, and other HD-related phenotypes in the R6/2 mouse model of HD.
However, the beneficial effects of this treatment were transient and diminished
with disease progression. Molecular analyses to understand the transient nature
of these effects revealed altered chromatin architecture, reduced HSF1 binding,
and impaired HSR accompanied disease progression in both the R6/2 transgenic and 
HdhQ150 knockin mouse models of HD. Taken together, our findings reveal that the 
HSR, a major inducible regulator of protein homeostasis and longevity, is
disrupted in HD. Consequently, pharmacological induction of HSF1 as a therapeutic
approach to HD is more complex than was previously anticipated.

PMCID: PMC3148745
PMID: 21785217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 9;286(36):31397-408. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.255851. Epub
2011 Jul 22.

Promotion of heat shock factor Hsf1 degradation via adaptor protein filamin
A-interacting protein 1-like (FILIP-1L).

Hu Y(1), Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Georgia
Health Sciences University, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Heat shock factor Hsf1 is involved in the regulation of a variety of cellular
processes including heat shock response, development and differentiation, aging, 
and tumorigenesis. Hsf1 transcriptional activity is tightly controlled through
phosphorylation, sumoylation, and acetylation, and through association with a
number of regulatory proteins. However, regulation of Hsf1 protein stability or
turnover remains unknown. We have identified a novel Hsf1-interacting protein,
FILIP-1L, that was found to bind to Hsf1 through yeast two-hybrid screening.
FILIP-1L encodes multiple isoforms spanning from 711 to 1135 amino acid residues.
FILIP-1L contains four coiled-coil and two N-terminal leucine zipper domains.
Ectopic expression of FILIP-1L reduces the expression of the Hsf1 protein because
FILIP-1L promotes Hsf1 ubiquitination and degradation through the
ubiquitin-proteasome system, leading to a reduction in Hsf1-mediated
transcription. FILIP-1L, Hsf1, and the ubiquitin-binding domain of HhR23A, a
receptor that transports polyubiquitinated proteins to the 19 S proteasome
subunit targeting them for degradation, are found in a complex. This indicates
that FILIP-1L is a potential adaptor that is involved in the Hsf1 degradation
pathway. Taken together, our results indicate that FILIP-1L interacts with Hsf1, 
controlling its stability and thus modulating the heat shock response. These data
indicate a novel function for FILIP-1L and a pathway for Hsf1 degradation through
the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

PMCID: PMC3173115
PMID: 21784850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):3987-93. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1179-2. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

Heat stress activates ER stress signals which suppress the heat shock response,
an effect occurring preferentially in the cortex in rats.

Liu Y(1), Sakamoto H, Adachi M, Zhao S, Ukai W, Hashimoto E, Hareyama M, Ishida
T, Imai K, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, S-1, W-16, Chuo-Ku, Sapporo, 060-8543, Japan.

Although heat stress induces a variety of illnesses, there have been few studies 
designed to uncover the molecular mechanisms underlining the illnesses. We here
demonstrate that heat activates ER stress, which inhibits heat shock responses
(HSR) via translational block. In heat-stressed rats, ER stress responses, as
represented by eIF2a phosphorylation and XBP1 splicing, occurred mainly in the
cortex, where the HSR was substantially inhibited. Heat exposure also activated
ER stress signals in primary cortical neurons. Since HSF1 knockdown enhanced
heat-induced ER stress and subsequent cell death, HSR inhibition in turn augments
ER stress, implying a vicious spiral of both stresses. Taken together,
heat-induced ER stress impairs the HSR and enhances cell damage, thereby
manifesting its unique effect on heat stress.

PMID: 21779805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell Signal. 2011 Nov;23(11):1758-66. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.06.010. Epub
2011 Jun 30.

The driver of malignancy in KG-1a leukemic cells, FGFR1OP2-FGFR1, encodes an
HSP90 addicted oncoprotein.

Jin Y(1), Zhen Y, Haugsten EM, Wiedlocha A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Montebello, N-0310 Oslo, Norway.

The KG-1a cell line is developed from a human stem cell myeloproliferative
neoplasm as the result of intragenic disruption and a chromosomal translocation
of the FGFR1 gene and the FGFR1OP2 gene encoding a protein of unknown function
called FOP2 (FGFR1 Oncogene Partner 2). The resulting fusion protein FOP2-FGFR1
is soluble and has constitutive tyrosine kinase activity. Since the heat shock
protein HSP90 and its co-chaperone CDC37 have been shown to stabilize many
oncogenic proteins, we investigated the requirement for HSP90 or HSP90-CDC37
assistance to maintain the stability or activity of FOP2-FGFR1 expressed in KG-1a
cells. We found that HSP90-CDC37 forms a permanent complex with FOP2-FGFR1. This 
results in protection against degradation of FOP2-FGFR1 and holds the oncoprotein
in a permanently active conformation. Inhibition of HSP90 or depletion of CDC37
or heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) reduced the expression level of FOP2-FGFR1 and was 
sufficient to block the oncoprotein induced proliferation of KG-1a cells. We
conclude that the driver of malignancy in KG-1a leukemic cells, FOP2-FGFR1, is an
HSP90 addicted oncoprotein. This provides a rationale for the therapeutic use of 
HSP90 inhibitors in myeloid leukemias that contain FGFR fusion proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21745565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jul;19 Suppl 3:S421-9. doi: 10.1245/s10434-011-1881-2. Epub 
2011 Jul 6.

Inhibition of heat shock protein response enhances PS-341-mediated glioma cell
death.

Liu Y(1), Zheng T, Zhao S, Liu H, Han D, Zhen Y, Xu D, Wang Y, Yang H, Zhang G,
Wang C, Wu J, Ye Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, The People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Previous study indicated that PS-341 induces cell death via JNK
pathway in vitro in glioma. However, suppressing proteasome complex by PS-341 may
induce expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs), which confer potential
protection against cellular stress. In this study, we explored whether induction 
of HSPs could impair PS-341-induced cell death and whether inhibition of HSPs
could enhance cell damage induced by PS-341 in glioma cells.
METHODS: HSP expression in glioma cells was modulated by HSP inhibitor, sublethal
heat, or knockdown of heat shock factor1 (HSF1), then PS-341-induced cell damage 
was examined by different methods. Similar experiments were also performed in
HSF1+/+ and HSF1-/- cells. HSP70 expression and HSF1 nuclear localization were
compared between glioma and normal brain tissues.
RESULTS: HSP level was upregulated mediated by HSF1 when glioma cells were
treated with PS-341. PS-341-mediated cell damage could be significantly augmented
by HSP inhibition. Furthermore, HSP70 expression and HSF1 nuclear localization
were much more abundant in gliomas than in normal brain tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that HSP70 impaired cell death induced by
PS-341 in glioma cells. Administration of PS-341 in combination with either HSP70
inhibitor or HSF1 knockdown may act as a new approach to treatment of glioma.

PMID: 21732139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell Metab. 2011 Jul 6;14(1):91-103. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.03.025.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 is a key determinant of HCC development by
regulating hepatic steatosis and metabolic syndrome.

Jin X(1), Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Georgia
Health Sciences University, 1410 Laney Walker Boulevard, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) occurrence and progression are linked tightly to
progressive hepatic metabolic syndrome associated with insulin resistance,
hepatic steatosis, and chronic inflammation. Heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1), a major transactivator of stress proteins, increases survival by
protecting cells against environmental stressors. It has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of cancer, but specific mechanisms by which HSF1 supports cancer
development remain elusive. We propose a pathogenic mechanism whereby HSF1
activation promotes growth of premalignant cells and HCC development by
stimulating lipid biosynthesis and perpetuating chronic hepatic metabolic disease
induced by carcinogens. Our work shows that inactivation of HSF1 impairs cancer
progression, mitigating adverse effects of carcinogens on hepatic metabolism by
enhancing insulin sensitivity and sensitizing activation of AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), an important regulator of energy homeostasis and inhibitor of
lipid synthesis. HSF1 is a potential target for the control of hepatic steatosis,
hepatic insulin resistance, and HCC development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3214631
PMID: 21723507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Fungal Genet Biol. 2011 Oct;48(10):947-55. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2011.06.005. Epub
2011 Jun 16.

Characterisation of the heat shock factor of the human thermodimorphic pathogen
Paracoccidioides lutzii.

Paes HC(1), Mello-de-Sousa TM, Fernandes L, Teixeira Mde M, Melo Rde O,
Derengowski Lda S, Torres FA, Felipe MS.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Universidade de Brasília, 70910-900
Brasília, DF, Brazil.

Thermodimorphic fungi include most causative agents of systemic mycoses, but the 
molecular mechanisms that underlie their defining trait, i.e. the ability to
shift between mould and yeast on temperature change alone, remain poorly
understood. We hypothesised that the heat shock factor (Hsf), a protein that
evolved to sense thermal stimuli quickly, might play a role in this process in
addition to the known regulator Drk1 and the Ryp proteins. To test this
hypothesis, we characterised the Hsf from the thermodimorph Paracoccidioides
lutzii (formerly Paracoccidioides brasiliensis isolate 01). We show in the
present work that PlHsf possesses regulatory domains that are exclusive of the
Eurotiomycetidae family, suggesting evolutionary specialisation; that it can
successfully rescue the otherwise lethal loss of the native protein of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae; and that its DNA-binding domain is able to recognise
regulatory elements from the promoters of both Drk1 and Ryp1. An in silico
screening of all 1 kb sequences upstream of P. lutzii ORFs revealed that 7% of
them possess a heat shock element. This is the first description of a heat shock 
factor in a thermodimorphic fungus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21708278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Plant Cell. 2011 Jun;23(6):2285-301. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.085266. Epub 2011 Jun
24.

Transcription factor-dependent chromatin remodeling at heat shock and
copper-responsive promoters in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Strenkert D(1), Schmollinger S, Sommer F, Schulz-Raffelt M, Schroda M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.

How transcription factors affect chromatin structure to regulate gene expression 
in response to changes in environmental conditions is poorly understood in the
green lineage. To shed light on this issue, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation
and formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements to investigate the
chromatin structure at target genes of HSF1 and CRR1, key transcriptional
regulators of the heat shock and copper starvation responses, respectively, in
the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Generally, we detected
lower nucleosome occupancy, higher levels of histone H3/4 acetylation, and lower 
levels of histone H3 Lys 4 (H3K4) monomethylation at promoter regions of active
genes compared with inactive promoters and transcribed and intergenic regions.
Specifically, we find that activated HSF1 and CRR1 transcription factors mediate 
the acetylation of histones H3/4, nucleosome eviction, remodeling of the H3K4
mono- and dimethylation marks, and transcription initiation/elongation. By this, 
HSF1 and CRR1 quite individually remodel and activate target promoters that may
be inactive and embedded into closed chromatin (HSP22F/CYC6) or weakly active and
embedded into partially opened (CPX1) or completely opened chromatin
(HSP70A/CRD1). We also observed HSF1-independent histone H3/4 deacetylation at
the RBCS2 promoter after heat shock, suggesting interplay of specific and
presumably more generally acting factors to adapt gene expression to the new
requirements of a changing environment.

PMCID: PMC3160021
PMID: 21705643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;31(16):3410-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05237-11. Epub 2011 Jun 
20.

Identification of heat shock factor 1 molecular and cellular targets during
embryonic and adult female meiosis.

Le Masson F(1), Razak Z, Kaigo M, Audouard C, Charry C, Cooke H, Westwood JT,
Christians ES.

Author information: 
(1)Université Toulouse 3, UPS, UMR 5547, Centre de Biologie du Développement, 118
route de Narbonne (Bat 4R3B3), 31062 Toulouse Cedex 09, France.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), while recognized as the major regulator of the heat
shock transcriptional response, also exerts important functions during mammalian 
embryonic development and gametogenesis. In particular, HSF1 is required for
oocyte maturation, the adult phase of meiosis preceding fertilization. To
identify HSF1 target genes implicated in this process, comparative transcriptomic
analyses were performed with wild-type and HSF-deficient oocytes. This revealed a
network of meiotic genes involved in cohesin and synaptonemal complex (SC)
structures, DNA recombination, and the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC). All of 
them were found to be regulated by HSF1 not only during adult but also in
embryonic phases of female meiosis. Additional investigations showed that SC,
recombination nodules, and DNA repair were affected in Hsf1(-/-) oocytes during
prenatal meiotic prophase I. However, targeting Hsf1 deletion to postnatal
oocytes (using Zp3 Cre; Hsf1(loxP/loxP)) did not fully rescue the chromosomal
anomalies identified during meiotic maturation, which possibly caused a
persistent SAC activation. This would explain the metaphase I arrest previously
described in HSF1-deficient oocytes since SAC inhibition circumvented this block.
This work provides new insights into meiotic gene regulation and points out
potential links between cellular stress and the meiotic anomalies frequently
observed in humans.

PMCID: PMC3147796
PMID: 21690297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Sci. 2011 Jul 1;124(Pt 13):2277-86. doi: 10.1242/jcs.082800. Epub 2011 Jun
7.

Malin and laforin are essential components of a protein complex that protects
cells from thermal stress.

Sengupta S(1), Badhwar I, Upadhyay M, Singh S, Ganesh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur 208016, India. sganesh@iitk.ac.in

The heat-shock response is a conserved cellular process characterized by the
induction of a unique group of proteins known as heat-shock proteins. One of the 
primary triggers for this response, at least in mammals, is heat-shock factor 1
(HSF1)--a transcription factor that activates the transcription of heat-shock
genes and confers protection against stress-induced cell death. In the present
study, we investigated the role of the phosphatase laforin and the ubiquitin
ligase malin in the HSF1-mediated heat-shock response. Laforin and malin are
defective in Lafora disease (LD), a neurodegenerative disorder associated with
epileptic seizures. Using cellular models, we demonstrate that these two
proteins, as a functional complex with the co-chaperone CHIP, translocate to the 
nucleus upon heat shock and that all the three members of this complex are
required for full protection against heat-shock-induced cell death. We show
further that laforin and malin interact with HSF1 and contribute to its
activation during stress by an unknown mechanism. HSF1 is also required for the
heat-induced nuclear translocation of laforin and malin. This study demonstrates 
that laforin and malin are key regulators of HSF1 and that defects in the
HSF1-mediated stress response pathway might underlie some of the pathological
symptoms in LD.

PMID: 21652633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Free Radic Res. 2011 Sep;45(9):1013-23. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2011.587419. Epub
2011 Jun 9.

Involvement of NADPH oxidase in up-regulation of plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 and heat shock factor-1 in mouse embryo fibroblasts induced by
oxidized LDL and in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice.

Zhao R(1), Moghadasian MH, Shen GX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.

The present study demonstrated that oxidized LDL (oLDL) increased the generation 
of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), the abundances of NADPH oxidase
(NOX)4, NOX2, p22-phox and lectin-like oLDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) in wild-type or
heat shock factor-1 (HSF1)-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF). LOX-1
antibody inhibited LDL or oLDL-induced expression of NOX components in MEF.
Abundance of HSF1 or plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) was increased by
oLDL in wild-type, but not in HSF1-deficient MEF. Diphenyleneiodonium or siRNA
for NOX or p22-phox inhibited oLDL-induced increases of HSF1, PAI-1 and H(2)O(2) 
in MEF. Increased NOX4, NOX2, LOX1, HSF1 and PAI-1 were detected in aortae and
hearts of apolipoprotein E-knockout (apoE-KO) mice compared to controls, which
were associated with increased serum cholesterol or plasma PAI-1. The results
suggest that NOX is required for oLDL-induced HSF1 or PAI-1 expression in MEF,
which was supported by the up-regulation of NOX, LOX-1, HSF1 and PAI-1 in apoE-KO
mice.

PMID: 21651452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. EMBO Rep. 2011 Jul 1;12(7):673-81. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.82.

Transformation of eEF1Bd into heat-shock response transcription factor by
alternative splicing.

Kaitsuka T(1), Tomizawa K, Matsushita M.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences, 11 Minami-ooya, Machida, Tokyo
194-8511, Japan; Department of Molecular Physiology, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

Protein translation factors have crucial roles in a variety of stress responses. 
Here, we show that eukaryotic elongation factor 1Bd (eEF1Bd) changes its
structure and function from a translation factor into a heat-shock response
transcription factor by alternative splicing. The long isoform of eEF1Bd
(eEF1BdL) is localized in the nucleus and induces heat-shock element
(HSE)-containing genes in cooperation with heat-shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1). Moreover, the amino-terminal domain of eEF1BdL binds to NF-E2-related
factor 2 (Nrf2) and induces stress response haem oxygenase 1 (HO1). Specific
inhibition of eEF1BdL with small-interfering RNA completely inhibits
Nrf2-dependent HO1 induction. In addition, eEF1BdL directly binds to HSE oligo
DNA in vitro and associates with the HSE consensus in the HO1 promoter region in 
vivo. Thus, the transcriptional role of eEF1BdL could provide new insights into
the molecular mechanism of stress responses.

PMCID: PMC3128969
PMID: 21597468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Aug;39(15):6729-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr206. Epub 2011
May 16.

An RNA aptamer perturbs heat shock transcription factor activity in Drosophila
melanogaster.

Salamanca HH(1), Fuda N, Shi H, Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF1) is a conserved master regulator that
orchestrates the protection of normal cells from stress. However, HSF1 also
protects abnormal cells and is required for carcinogenesis. Here, we generate an 
highly specific RNA aptamer (iaRNA(HSF1)) that binds Drosophila HSF1 and inhibits
HSF1 binding to DNA. In Drosophila animals, iaRNA(HSF1) reduces normal Hsp83
levels and promotes developmental abnormalities, mimicking the spectrum of
phenotypes that occur when Hsp83 activity is reduced. The HSF1 aptamer also
effectively suppresses the abnormal growth phenotypes induced by constitutively
active forms of the EGF receptor and Raf oncoproteins. Our results indicate that 
HSF1 contributes toward the morphological development of animal traits by
controlling the expression of molecular chaperones under normal growth
conditions. Additionally, our study demonstrates the utility of the RNA aptamer
technology as a promising chemical genetic approach to investigate biological
mechanisms, including cancer and for identifying effective drug targets in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3159435
PMID: 21576228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Radiat Res. 2011 Jul;176(1):17-24. Epub 2011 May 10.

Loss of HSF1 results in defective radiation-induced G(2) arrest and DNA repair.

Li Q(1), Martinez JD.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

HSF1 is a transcription factor that plays a key role in the response to heat
stress and was previously shown by us to also be essential for importation of p53
into the nucleus. Here we extend these studies and show that loss of HSF1 renders
cells more sensitive to killing by ionizing radiation. Cells that lack a
functional HSF1 were unable to arrest in G(2) after exposure to ionizing
radiation, suggesting that HSF1 activity was essential for activation of this
cell cycle checkpoint. In addition, cells with no HSF1 showed a reduced capacity 
to repair radiation-induced double-stranded DNA breaks. We found that in these
cells 53BP1 did not accumulate at sites of DNA damage, suggesting that HSF1 was
also essential for the functioning of this DNA damage mediator. Taken together
our results indicate that HSF1 plays an important role in checkpoint activation
and DNA repair and suggest that there is overlap between the heat stress response
pathway and the pathway that responds to ionizing radiation.

PMCID: PMC3142266
PMID: 21557666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011 Jun 1;3(6). pii: a009704. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a009704.

The stress of protein misfolding: from single cells to multicellular organisms.

Gidalevitz T(1), Prahlad V, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Rice Institute for Biomedical Research,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Organisms survive changes in the environment by altering their rates of
metabolism, growth, and reproduction. At the same time, the system must ensure
the stability and functionality of its macromolecules. Fluctuations in the
environment are sensed by highly conserved stress responses and homeostatic
mechanisms, and of these, the heat shock response (HSR) represents an essential
response to acute and chronic proteotoxic damage. However, unlike the strategies 
employed to maintain the integrity of the genome, protection of the proteome must
be tailored to accommodate the normal flux of nonnative proteins and the
differences in protein composition between cells, and among individuals.
Moreover, adult cells are likely to have significant differences in the rates of 
synthesis and clearance that are influenced by intrinsic errors in protein
expression, genetic polymorphisms, and fluctuations in physiological and
environmental conditions. Here, we will address how protein homeostasis
(proteostasis) is achieved at the level of the cell and organism, and how the
threshold of the stress response is set to detect and combat protein misfolding. 
For metazoans, the requirement for coordinated function and growth imposes
additional constraints on the detection, signaling, and response to misfolding,
and requires that the HSR is integrated into various aspects of organismal
physiology, such as lifespan. This is achieved by hierarchical regulation of heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1) by the metabolic state of the cell and centralized neuronal
control that could allow optimal resource allocation between cells and tissues.
We will examine how protein folding quality control mechanisms in individual
cells may be integrated into a multicellular level of control, and further, even 
custom-designed to support individual variability and impose additional
constraints on evolutionary adaptation.

PMCID: PMC3098679
PMID: 21536706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4585-97. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0127. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

Overcoming trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer by targeting dysregulated
glucose metabolism.

Zhao Y(1), Liu H, Liu Z, Ding Y, Ledoux SP, Wilson GL, Voellmy R, Lin Y, Lin W,
Nahta R, Liu B, Fodstad O, Chen J, Wu Y, Price JE, Tan M.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience,
University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama 36604, USA.

Trastuzumab shows remarkable efficacy in treatment of ErbB2-positive breast
cancers when used alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutics. However, 
acquired resistance develops in most treated patients, necessitating alternate
treatment strategies. Increased aerobic glycolysis is a hallmark of cancer and
inhibition of glycolysis may offer a promising strategy to preferentially kill
cancer cells. In this study, we investigated the antitumor effects of trastuzumab
in combination with glycolysis inhibitors in ErbB2-positive breast cancer. We
found that trastuzumab inhibits glycolysis via downregulation of heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) in ErbB2-positive cancer
cells, resulting in tumor growth inhibition. Moreover, increased glycolysis via
HSF1 and LDH-A contributes to trastuzumab resistance. Importantly, we found that 
combining trastuzumab with glycolysis inhibition synergistically inhibited
trastuzumab-sensitive and -resistant breast cancers in vitro and in vivo, due to 
more efficient inhibition of glycolysis. Taken together, our findings show how
glycolysis inhibition can dramatically enhance the therapeutic efficacy of
trastuzumab in ErbB2-positive breast cancers, potentially useful as a strategy to
overcome trastuzumab resistance.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3129363
PMID: 21498634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Histopathology. 2011 Jun;58(7):1072-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03803.x.
Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Expression of heat shock proteins in classical Hodgkin lymphoma: correlation with
apoptotic pathways and prognostic significance.

Santón A(1), García-Cosío M, Cristóbal E, Pascual A, Muriel A, García-Laraña J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, IRYCIS, Madrid,
Spain. asanton.hrc@salud.madrid.org

AIMS: Heat shock proteins (HSPs), known to inhibit apoptosis and promote cellular
survival, are overexpressed in many tumours. We analysed the expression of
relevant HSPs and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) 
and their relationship with caspase signalling pathways and patient outcome.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using tissue microarrays (TMAs), most cases showed strong
immunohistochemical expression of HSPs [10, 27, 40, 60, 70, 90, 110, HO1, cell
division cycle 37 homolog (CDC37) and HSF1, which points to cHL as a potential
candidate to stress-response inhibitors. Active caspases 3, 8 and 9 were detected
in 55.1%, 55.4% and 96.2% of cases although cleaved poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 
(PARP) was observed in only 16.1%, suggesting an improper functioning of
apoptosis. Statistical analysis showed associations of HSP70 with active caspase 
3 (P = 0.000); HSP40 with active caspase 9 (P = 0.031) and p53 (P = 0.003); HO1
with p53 (P = 0.006) and p21 (P = 0.005); and p53 with p21 (P = 0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: Correlations between the expression of apoptotic markers and HSPs
may suggest a role for the latter in modulating apoptosis in cHL, mainly through 
the HSP70-HSP40 system, and in the stabilization of p53. Survival analyses showed
that absence of active caspase 8 and HO1 had a negative impact in patient
outcome.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21480956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Apr;78(4):283-91. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21304. Epub 2011 Apr 8.

Expression of Hsf1, Hsf2, and Phlda1 in cells undergoing cryptorchid-induced
apoptosis in rat testes.

Liu F(1), Xu ZL, Qian XJ, Qiu WY, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Surgery-induced cryptorchidism, in which the testes are prevented from descending
into the scrotal sac, results in testicular germ cell death, and it is commonly
used as an experimental tool in the study of spermatogenesis. However, the
molecular events underlying the activation of germ cell death remain poorly
understood. In the present study, we investigate selective cell loss from
cryptorchid rat testis by using DNA flow cytometry and by determining protein and
mRNA expression of Hsf1, Hsf2, and Phlda1. The hypo-haploid cell fraction is
significantly decreased as early as 3 days after surgical induction of
cryptorchidism (from 42.01<U+2009>±<U+2009>5.74% to 15.98<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.88%), followed by a significant
decrease in the haploid cell fraction at Day 7. At the latter time point, an
apoptotic peak of spermatocytes appears in DNA histograms just before the
tetraploid peak; the percentage of aneuploid cells between diploid and tetraploid
rises as high as 14.05<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.98% of the total cells in 7-day cryptorchid testis,
suggesting that a large number of spermatocytes are undergoing apoptosis. The
expression of Phlda1 mRNA is significantly elevated 3 days after induction of
cryptorchidism. After 7 days of cryptorchidism, Hsf1 and Phlda1 are strongly
expressed in the nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively, of primary spermatocytes.
Numerous apoptotic spermatocytes are also observed at this time point. These
results suggest that the Hsf1/Phlda1 pathway plays an important role in the
apoptosis of primary spermatocytes in cryptorchid testis. We present evidence
suggesting that Hsf2 is also involved in germ cell removal in cryptorchid testis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21480429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 May;9(5):577-88. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0534. Epub
2011 Apr 8.

Functional inactivation of endogenous MDM2 and CHIP by HSP90 causes aberrant
stabilization of mutant p53 in human cancer cells.

Li D(1), Marchenko ND, Schulz R, Fischer V, Velasco-Hernandez T, Talos F, Moll
UM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8691,
USA.

The tight control of wild-type p53 by mainly MDM2 in normal cells is permanently 
lost in tumors harboring mutant p53, which exhibit dramatic constitutive p53
hyperstabilization that far exceeds that of wild-type p53 tumors. Importantly,
mutant p53 hyperstabilization is critical for oncogenic gain of function of
mutant p53 in vivo. Current insight into the mechanism of this dysregulation is
fragmentary and largely derived from ectopically constructed cell systems.
Importantly, mutant p53 knock-in mice established that normal mutant p53 tissues 
have sufficient enzymatic reserves in MDM2 and other E3 ligases to maintain full 
control of mutant p53. We find that in human cancer cells, endogenous mutant p53,
despite its ability to interact with MDM2, suffers from a profound lack of
ubiquitination as the root of its degradation defect. In contrast to wild-type
p53, the many mutant p53 proteins which are conformationally aberrant are engaged
in complexes with the HSP90 chaperone machinery to prevent its aggregation. In
contrast to wild-type p53 cancer cells, we show that in mutant p53 cancer cells, 
this HSP90 interaction blocks the endogenous MDM2 and CHIP (carboxy-terminus of
Hsp70-interacting protein) E3 ligase activity. Interference with HSP90 either by 
RNA interference against HSF1, the transcriptional regulator of the HSP90
pathway, or by direct knockdown of Hsp90 protein or by pharmacologic inhibition
of Hsp90 activity with 17AAG (17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) destroys
the complex, liberates mutant p53, and reactivates endogenous MDM2 and CHIP to
degrade mutant p53. Of note, 17AAG induces a stronger viability loss in mutant
p53 than in wild-type p53 cancer cells. Our data support the rationale that
suppression of mutant p53 levels in vivo in established cancers might achieve
clinically significant effects.

PMCID: PMC3097033
PMID: 21478269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Aug;39(14):5879-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr198. Epub 2011
Apr 1.

Cellular heat shock factor 1 positively regulates human immunodeficiency virus-1 
gene expression and replication by two distinct pathways.

Rawat P(1), Mitra D.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411 007, India.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infection leads to changes in cellular
gene expression, which in turn tend to modulate viral gene expression and
replication. Cellular heat shock proteins (HSPs) are induced upon heat shock, UV 
irradiation and microbial or viral infections. We have reported earlier
Nef-dependent induction of HSP40 leading to increased HIV-1 gene expression;
however, the mechanism of induction remained to be elucidated. As expression of
HSPs is regulated by heat shock factors (HSFs), we have now studied the role of
HSF1 not only in Nef-dependent HSP40 induction but also in HIV-1 gene expression.
Our results show that HSF1 is also induced during HIV-1 infection and it
positively regulates HIV-1 gene expression by two distinct pathways. First, along
with Nef it activates HSP40 promoter which in turn leads to increased HIV-1 gene 
expression. Second, HSF1 directly interacts with newly identified HSF1 binding
sequence on HIV-1 LTR promoter and induces viral gene expression and replication.
Thus, the present work not only identifies a molecular basis for HSF1-mediated
enhancement of viral replication but also provides another example of how HIV-1
uses host cell machinery for its successful replication in the host.

PMCID: PMC3152347
PMID: 21459854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Exp Zool A Ecol Genet Physiol. 2011 Aug 1;315(7):394-407. doi: 10.1002/jez.685.
Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Novel isoforms of heat shock transcription factor 1 are induced by hypoxia in the
Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas.

Kawabe S(1), Yokoyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Bioscience, Faculty of Marine Bioscience, Fukui
Prefectural University, Fukui, Japan.

The Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas inhabits the intertidal zone and shows
tolerance to various stress conditions such as hypoxia and heat shock. However,
little is known about the cellular mechanism of responses to these stresses. Heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) regulates the transcription of several genes,
including heat shock proteins (HSPs). In this study, we cloned HSF1 from the
oyster and investigated its response to air-exposure. The cDNA of oyster Hsf1
contains 2,931<U+2009>bp, of which 1,389<U+2009>bp encode a protein of 463 amino acid residues.
Moreover, we found that the oyster has seven novel alternatively spliced
isoforms, Hsf1b-h, consisting of insertion A with 48<U+2009>bp, insertion B with 42<U+2009>bp
and/or insertion C with 42<U+2009>bp. We determined the sequences of oyster genomic DNA 
containing Hsf1 insertions A, B and C. The results indicated that eight isoforms 
of Hsf1 are generated from a single Hsf1 gene by alternative splicing without
frameshifting. Real-time PCR analysis showed that Hsf1a is expressed
constitutively, and the expression of Hsf1b-h and Hsp70 mRNA is induced by air
exposure and/or hypoxia. In addition, we found that 11 putative hypoxia response 
elements, which are hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) binding sequences, are
located in the Hsf1 promoter region. These data suggest that the oyster has an
HIF-HSF pathway in which HSPs are induced in an HIF-dependent manner, and that it
also has a novel mechanism of alternative splicing of Hsf1 in response to
hypoxia.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc., A Wiley Company.

PMID: 21455948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2011 Sep;16(5):517-28. doi: 10.1007/s12192-011-0263-9.
Epub 2011 Apr 1.

Heat shock proteins in stabilization of spontaneously restored sinus rhythm in
permanent atrial fibrillation patients after mitral valve surgery.

Cao H(1), Xue L, Xu X, Wu Y, Zhu J, Chen L, Chen D, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou RD, Nanjing, 210029, China.

A spontaneously restored sinus rhythm in permanent atrial fibrillation patients
has been often observed after mitral valve (MV) surgery, but persisting duration 
in sinus rhythm varies from patient to patient. Heat shock proteins (Hsps) may be
involved in pathogenesis of atrial fibrillation. We hypothesized that
stabilization of restored sinus rhythm is associated with expression of Hsps in
the atria. To test this hypothesis, clinical data, biopsies of right atrial
appendage, and blood samples were collected from 135 atrial fibrillation patients
who spontaneously restored sinus rhythm after conventional isolated MV
replacement. Comparison was made between patients who had recurrence of atrial
fibrillation within 7 days (AF) vs. patients with persisted sinus rhythm for more
than 7 days (SR). Results showed that SR patients had higher activity of heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) as well as upregulated expressions of heat
shock cognate 70, Hsp70, and Hsp27 in the tissues. The activation of HSF1-Hsps
pathway was associated with less-aggressive pathogenesis as reflected by lower
rates of myolysis, apoptosis, interstitial fibrosis, and inflammation in SR
patients. However, Hsp60 was lower in both tissue and plasma in SR patients, and 
was positively correlated with apoptosis, interstitial fibrosis, and
inflammation. These findings suggest that the Hsps play important roles in
stabilization of restored sinus rhythm after MV surgery by inhibiting AF-related 
atrial remodeling and arrhythmogenic substrates in atrial fibrillation patients. 
Low circulating Hsp60 levels preoperatively might predict a stable spontaneously 
restored sinus rhythm postoperatively.

PMCID: PMC3156265
PMID: 21455828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Jun;352(1-2):11-7. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0624-1. Epub
2011 Apr 1.

HSF1 regulates expression of G-CSF through the binding element for NF-IL6/CCAAT
enhancer binding protein beta.

Zhang L(1), Yang M, Wang Q, Liu M, Liang Q, Zhang H, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the major heat shock transcription factor and plays
an essential role in mediating the cellular response to physiological and
environmental stress. We found that LPS-induced expression of the
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) gene was upregulated in HSF1
knock-out (HSF1(-/-)) mice using a gene array. In order to determine whether and 
how HSF1 regulates the induced expression of G-CSF, mRNA, and protein levels of
G-CSF were detected by Northern blotting and ELISA, the promoter of G-CSF was
analyzed with an online transcription element search system and the
transcriptional activity of the G-CSF promoter was analyzed by EMSA and a
reporter gene assay. The results showed that transcription and protein secretion 
of G-CSF induced by LPS are both inhibited by HSF1. Three high affinity binding
sites for NF-IL6/CCAAT enhancer binding protein beta, but no heat shock element, 
were identified in the core promoter of G-CSF. The DNA-binding capability of
NF-IL6 to the G-CSF promoter was reinforced by LPS but not influenced by heat
shock or HSF1. However, HSF1 was observed to bind to the binding sites of NF-IL6 
in the G-CSF promoter. The transcriptional activity of the G-CSF promoter was
enhanced by LPS or NF-IL6 and inhibited by HSF1 in a dose dependent manner. We
conclude that HSF1 regulates expression of G-CSF through binding to the
NF-IL6-binding element.

PMID: 21455770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Zygote. 2012 May;20(2):123-34. doi: 10.1017/S0967199411000086. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Post-hatching development of bovine embryos in vitro: the effects of tunnel
preparation and gender.

Machado GM(1), Caixeta ES, Lucci CM, Rumpf R, Franco MM, Dode MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, Embrapa Genetic Resources and
Biotechnology, Parque Estação Biológica - PqEB - Av. W5 Norte (final), Caixa
Postal 02372, Brasília, DF - Brazil - 70.770-917.

The objective of this study was to compare morphological characteristics,
kinetics of development, and gene expression of male and female IVP embryos that 
were cultured until day (D)15 (fertilization = D0), using either
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or Milli-Q water (MQW) to dilute the agarose gel 
used for tunnel construction. On D11, embryos (n = 286) were placed in agarose
gel tunnels diluted in PBS and MQW. Embryos were evaluated for morphology, and
embryo size was recorded on D11, D12.5, D14 and D15. Then, embryos were sexed and
used for gene expression analyses (G6PD, GLUT1, GLUT3, PGK1, PLAC8, KRT8, HSF1
and IFNT). The percentage of elongated embryos at D15 was higher (p < 0.05) in
the PBS (54%) than in the MQW (42%) gel. However, embryos produced in MQW were
bigger (p < 0.05) and had a lower expression of GLUT1 (p = 0.08) than those
cultured in PBS. There was a higher proportion of male than female embryos at D15
in both treatments, MQW (65% vs. 35%; p < 0.05) and PBS (67% vs. 33%; p < 0.05); 
however, embryo size was not significantly different between genders. Moreover,
D15 female embryos had greater expression of G6PD (p = 0.05) and KRT8 (p = 0.03) 
than male embryos. In conclusion, the diluent used for tunnel construction
affected embryo development in the post-hatching development (PHD) system, and
the use of MQW was the most indicative measure for the evaluation of embryo
quality. Male and female embryos cultured from D11 to D15, either in an MQW or
PBS agarose gel, demonstrated similar development but different gene expression.

PMID: 21426624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Annu Rev Biochem. 2011;80:1089-115. doi: 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060809-095203.

Regulation of HSF1 function in the heat stress response: implications in aging
and disease.

Anckar J(1), Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, BioCity, 20520 Turku,
Finland. julius.anckar@btk.fi

To dampen proteotoxic stresses and maintain protein homeostasis, organisms
possess a stress-responsive molecular machinery that detects and neutralizes
protein damage. A prominent feature of stressed cells is the increased synthesis 
of heat shock proteins (Hsps) that aid in the refolding of misfolded peptides and
restrain protein aggregation. Transcriptional activation of the heat shock
response is orchestrated by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), which rapidly
translocates to hsp genes and induces their expression. Although the role of HSF1
in protecting cells and organisms against severe stress insults is well
established, many aspects of how HSF1 senses qualitatively and quantitatively
different forms of stresses have remained poorly understood. Moreover, recent
discoveries that HSF1 controls life span have prompted new ways of thinking about
an old transcription factor. Here, we review the established role of HSF1 in
counteracting cell stress and prospect the role of HSF1 as a regulator of disease
states and aging.

PMID: 21417720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 May;1811(5):314-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.02.005.
Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Novel sterol glucosyltransferase in the animal tissue and cultured cells:
evidence that glucosylceramide as glucose donor.

Akiyama H(1), Sasaki N, Hanazawa S, Gotoh M, Kobayashi S, Hirabayashi Y,
Murakami-Murofushi K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences, Department of Life Science,
Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 Ohtsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan.

Cholesteryl glucoside (CG), a membrane glycolipid, regulates heat shock response.
CG is rapidly induced by heat shock before the activation of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and production of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70),
and the addition of CG in turn induces HSF1 activation and HSP70 production in
human fibroblasts; thus, a reasonable correlation is that CG functions as a
crucial lipid mediator in stress responses in the animal. In this study, we
focused on a CG-synthesizing enzyme, animal sterol glucosyltransferase, which has
not yet been identified. In this study, we describe a novel type of animal sterol
glucosyltransferase in hog stomach and human fibroblasts (TIG-3) detected by a
sensitive assay with a fluorescence-labeled substrate. The cationic requirement, 
inhibitor resistance, and substrate specificity of animal sterol
glucosyltransferase were studied. Interestingly, animal sterol
glucosyltransferase did not use uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose) as an
immediate glucose donor, as has been shown in plants and fungi. Among the
glycolipids tested in vitro, glucosylceramide (GlcCer) was the most effective
substrate for CG formation in animal tissues and cultured cells. Using chemically
synthesized [U-((13))C]Glc-ß-Cer as a glucose donor, we confirmed by mass
spectrometry that [U-((13))C]CG was synthesized in hog stomach homogenate. These 
results suggest that animal sterol glucosyltransferase transfers glucose moiety
from GlcCer to cholesterol. Additionally, using GM-95, a mutant B16 melanoma cell
line that does not express ceramide glucosyltransferase, we showed that GlcCer is
an essential substrate for animal sterol glucosyltransferase in the cell.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Insect Physiol. 2011 Aug;57(8):1115-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2011.02.016.
Epub 2011 Mar 4.

Chaperone proteins and winter survival by a freeze tolerant insect.

Zhang G(1), Storey JM, Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Department of Chemistry, Carleton University,
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1S 5B6.

The role of chaperone proteins in the winter survival of insects was evaluated in
freeze tolerant gall fly larvae, Eurosta solidaginis. Levels of four heat shock
proteins (Hsp110, Hsp70, Hsp60, Hsp40), two glucose-regulated proteins (Grp75,
Grp78) and three others (tailless complex polypeptide 1 [TCP-1], aA-crystallin,
aB-crystallin) were tracked in outdoor larvae from September to April and, in
addition, laboratory experiments assessed chilling, freezing, and anoxia effects 
on these proteins. Gall fly larvae showed consistent elevation of Hsp110, Hsp70, 
Hsp40, Grp78 and aB-crystallin over the late autumn and winter months, generally 
1.5-2.0-fold higher than September values. This suggests that these proteins
contribute to cell preservation over the winter months via protection and
stabilization of macromolecules. By contrast, levels of the mitochondrial Hsp60
fell to just 40% of September values by midwinter, paralleling the responses by
numerous mitochondrial enzymes and consistent with a reduction in total
mitochondria numbers over the winter. None of the proteins were altered when 15°C
acclimated larvae were chilled to 3°C for 24h but Hsp70, Hsp40 and Grp75
increased during freezing at -16°C for 24h whereas others (Hsp110, TCP-1 and both
crystallins) increased significantly after larvae thawed at 3°C. Anoxia exposure 
(24h under N2 gas at 15°C) elevated levels of Hsp70, Grp78 and the two
crystallins. Levels of active hyperphosphorylated heat shock transcription factor
(HSF1) were also analyzed, giving an indication of the state of hsp gene
transcription in the larvae. HSF1 was high in September and October but fell to
less than 40% of September values in midwinter consistent with suppression of
gene transcription in diapause larvae. HSF1 levels responded positively to
freezing and increased robustly by 4.9-fold under anoxia. Overall, the data
provide strong evidence for the importance of protein chaperones as a mechanism
of cell preservation in freeze tolerant insects.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21382374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Invest Clin. 2010 Dec;51(4):479-88.

Human hepatoma cell line (HepG2) cellular response to hypothermic stress with
recovery. Induction of Hsp70, Hsp60 and Hsf1 expression.

Rada A(1), Merentes E, Rodríguez M, Anselmi G, Strauss M.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Biología Celular, Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad Central de Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.

The cell response of human HepG2 cells exposed to hypothermia with rewarming was 
analyzed. Ultrastructural findings in hypothermic stressed cells showed swollen
mitochondria, dispersed chromatin, vacuoles and ring-shape nucleolar
reorganization. These changes were coupled with significative differences in the 
induction of Hsp60, inducible Hsp70 and monomeric Hsfl in all treated samples,
but not in Hsc 70 expression. Cellular response to hypothermia could be
associated with the synergistic induction of Hsp expression.

PMID: 21361146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2011 Jun;156(2):158-64. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2011.01.026. Epub 2011 Feb 25.

HSP70-mediated control of endothelial cell apoptosis during pre-eclampsia.

Padmini E(1), Lavanya S.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Department of Biochemistry, Bharathi Women's College, Affiliated 
to University of Madras, Chennai 600108, Tamil Nadu, India.
dstpadmini@rediffmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Pre-eclampsia is a hypertensive disorder characterized by maternal
vascular endothelial dysfunction. It is likely that this enhanced rate of
endothelial cell stress is associated with the pre- and post-partum complications
of both mother and fetus. Deciphering the expression pattern of factors involved 
in altering placental endothelial cell viability in pre-eclampsia aids in
identifying components that may protect the fetus from the consequences of
placental dysfunction and oxidative stress.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of thioredoxin (Trx), an antioxidant protein; heat shock
protein (HSP) 70, a cytoprotective protein; heat shock factor (HSF)1, a
transcriptional factor of HSPs; and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), 
a pro-apoptotic protein, was elucidated in endothelial cells from human term
placentas of normotensive and pre-eclamptic subjects (n=35).
RESULTS: A significant increase in HSP70 (p<0.05), HSF1 (p<0.05), Trx (p<0.05)
and an insignificant increase in ASK1 were noted in pre-eclamptic endothelial
cells.
CONCLUSION: This analysis supports the role of HSP70 expression in promoting cell
survival by regulating ASK expression in pre-eclampsia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21353370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Neurochem Int. 2011 Jul;58(8):888-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2011.02.017. Epub
2011 Feb 19.

HSP70, the earliest-induced gene in the zebrafish retina during optic nerve
regeneration: its role in cell survival.

Nagashima M(1), Fujikawa C, Mawatari K, Mori Y, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa University,
5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

Fish retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) can survive and regrow their axons after optic
nerve injury. Injured RGCs express anti-apoptotic proteins, such as Bcl-2, after 
nerve injury; however, upstream effectors of this anti-apoptotic protein are not 
yet fully understood. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) play a crucial role in cell
survival against various stress conditions. In this study, we focused on HSP70
expression in the zebrafish retina after optic nerve injury. HSP70 mRNA and
protein levels increased rapidly 2.3-fold in RGCs by 1-6 h after injury and
returned to control levels by 1-3 days. HSP70 transcription is regulated by heat 
shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 mRNA and phosphorylated-HSF1 protein rapidly
increased by 2.2-fold in RGCs 0.5-6 h after injury. Intraocular injection of HSP 
inhibitor I significantly suppressed the induction of HSP70 expression after
nerve injury. It also suppressed Bcl-2 protein induction and resulted in
TUNEL-positive cell death of RGCs at 5 days post-injury. Zebrafish treated with
HSP inhibitor I retarded axonal elongation or visual function after injury, as
analyzed by GAP43 expression and behavioral analysis of optomotor response,
respectively. These results strongly indicate that HSP70, the earliest induced
gene in the zebrafish retina after optic nerve injury, is a crucial factor for
RGCs survival and optic nerve regeneration in fish.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21338645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Jun;300(6):G948-55. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00346.2010. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Prosurvival role of heat shock factor 1 in the pathogenesis of pancreatobiliary
tumors.

Dudeja V(1), Chugh RK, Sangwan V, Skube SJ, Mujumdar NR, Antonoff MB, Dawra RK,
Vickers SM, Saluja AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

Several mechanisms have evolved to ensure the survival of cells under adverse
conditions. The heat shock response is one such evolutionarily conserved survival
mechanism. Heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) is a transcriptional regulator of the heat 
shock response. By the very nature of its prosurvival function, HSF1 may
contribute to the pathogenesis of cancer. The current study investigates the role
of HSF1 in the pathogenesis of pancreatobiliary tumors. HSF1 was downregulated in
pancreatic cancer (MIA PaCa-2 and S2-013) and cholangiocarcinoma (KMBC and KMCH) 
cell lines by HSF1-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA). Nonsilencing siRNA was
used as control. The effect of HSF1 downregulation on viability and apoptosis
parameters, i.e., annexin V, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP-mediated 
nick end labeling (TUNEL), and caspase-3, was measured. To evaluate the
cancer-specific effects of HSF1, the effect of HSF1 downregulation on normal
human pancreatic ductal cells was also evaluated. HSF1 is abundantly expressed in
human pancreatobiliary cancer cell lines, as well as in pancreatic cancer tissue,
as demonstrated by Western blot and immunohistochemistry, respectively.
Inhibition of HSF1 expression by the HSF1 siRNA sequences leads to time-dependent
death in pancreatic and cholangiocarcinoma cell lines. Downregulation of HSF1
expression induces annexin V and TUNEL positivity and caspase-3 activation,
suggesting activation of a caspase-dependent apoptotic pathway. Although
caspase-3 inhibition protects against cell death induced by HSF1 expression, it
does not completely prevent it, suggesting a role for caspase-independent cell
death. HSF1 plays a prosurvival role in the pathogenesis of pancreatobiliary
tumors. Modulation of HSF1 activity could therefore emerge as a novel therapeutic
strategy for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3307520
PMID: 21330448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 May;300(5):E894-901. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00699.2010. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Restoring HSP70 deficiencies improves glucose tolerance in diabetic monkeys.

Kavanagh K(1), Flynn DM, Jenkins KA, Zhang L, Wagner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Section on Comparative Medicine and Lipid Sciences, Wake
Forest University Health Sciences, Medical Center Blvd., Winston-Salem, NC 27157,
USA. kkavanag@wfubmc.edu

We evaluated heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) changes in diabetes mellitus (DM) in a
nonhuman primate model. To this end, two studies were conducted in DM vervet
monkeys. 1) Normal control and streptozotocin-induced DM monkeys (Stz-DM) that
were differentiated into moderately or poorly controlled DM by judicious insulin 
administration were evaluated. Liver was collected at 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20 wk
after streptozotocin, exposed to ex vivo heat shock at 42°C, and immunoblotted
for heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), HSP70, and phosphorylated HSF1. 2) Spontaneous DM
monkeys that were not pharmacologically induced were included in a crossover
study of the HSP70-inducing drug geranylgeranylacetone (GGA). GGA at 20 mg/kg was
given for 14 days with a 6-wk washout period. Glucose tolerance testing and
plasma and muscle HSP70 were the primary outcome measurements. In Stz-DM,
hyperglycemia reduced hepatic HSP70 in a dose-dependent fashion. HSF1 was
increased in livers of monkeys with Stz-DM, but responses to ex vivo heat shock
were impaired vs. normal monkeys. Activation of HSF1 appears to be important,
because the phosphorylation change with heat stress was nearly perfectly
correlated with HSP70 increases. Impaired HSF1 activation was also seen in Stz-DM
after chronic hyperglycemia (>12 wk). In naturally occurring DM, increased
circulating HSP70 resulted in significantly improved glucose tolerance and
significant, positive trends in other measurements of insulin resistance. No
change in muscle HSP70 content was observed. We conclude that increasing HSP70,
potentially through targeting hyperglycemia-related deficits in HSF1 induction
and activation in the liver, is a potent and viable strategy to improve glucose
tolerance.

PMCID: PMC3093978
PMID: 21325107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Physiol. 2011 May 1;589(Pt 9):2139-45. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.206623. Epub 
2011 Feb 14.

Age-related changes in skeletal muscle reactive oxygen species generation and
adaptive responses to reactive oxygen species.

Jackson MJ(1), McArdle A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool
L69 3GA, UK. m.j.jackson@liverpool.ac.uk

Skeletal muscle generates superoxide and nitric oxide at rest and this generation
is increased by contractile activity. In young and adult animals and man, an
increase in activities of these species and the secondary products derived from
them (reactive oxygen species, ROS) stimulate redox-sensitive signalling pathways
to modify the cellular content of cytoprotective regulatory proteins such as the 
superoxide dismutases, catalase and heat shock proteins that prevent oxidative
damage to tissues. The mechanisms underlying these adaptive responses to
contraction include activation of redox-sensitive transcription factors such as
nuclear factor B (NFB), activator protein-1 (AP1) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1).
During ageing all tissues, including skeletal muscle, demonstrate an accumulation
of oxidative damage that may contribute to loss of tissue homeostasis. The causes
of this increased oxidative damage are uncertain, but substantial data now
indicate that the ability of skeletal muscle from aged organisms to respond to an
increase in ROS generation by increased expression of cytoprotective proteins
through activation of redox-sensitive transcription factors is severely
attenuated. This age-related lack of physiological adaptations to the ROS induced
by contractile activity appears to contribute to a loss of ROS homeostasis and
increased oxidative damage in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC3098693
PMID: 21320885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2011 Feb;51(1):47-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1479-828X.2010.01246.x. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

Over expression of HSP70 and HSF1 in endothelial cells during pre-eclamptic
placental stress.

Padmini E(1), Lavanya S.

Author information: 
(1)P.G. Department of Biochemistry, Bharathi Women's College, Chennai, Tamilnadu,
India. ntrfbwc@gmail.com

BACKGROUND AIM: Pre-eclampsia is a hypertensive disorder characterised by
endothelial dysfunction and is one of the leading cause of preterm birth.
Increasing oxidative stress and antioxidant disequilibria promote apoptosis and
may play a defining role in the development of pre-eclampsia. Heat shock protein 
70 (HSP70) is an effective molecular chaperone, playing a role in cell protection
from damage in response to stress stimuli. This study focus on the expression of 
HSP70 in endothelial cells during pre-eclampsia compared with normotensive
pregnant women.METHOD: The conjugated diene (CD), lipid hydro peroxide (LHP),
total antioxidant capacity (TAC) analysis and glutathione redox ratio (GRR) are
the stress specific parameters assessed in the placental endothelial cells of
normotensive and pre-eclamptic subjects to evaluate the oxidative stress status. 
As the synthesis of HSP70 is regulated by a transcription factor, heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1), its expression was also analysed.
RESULTS: There was a significant decrease in the viability (P < 0.05) of the
endothelial cells isolated from pre-eclamptic subjects compared to normotensive
subjects. The level of CD (P < 0.01) and LHP (P < 0.01) was increased with a
simultaneous decrease in GRR (P < 0.05) and TAC (P < 0.05) levels in the
endothelial cells of pre-eclamptic subjects compared to normotensive subjects.
The expression of HSP70 (P < 0.05) and HSF1 (P < 0.05) was increased in
pre-eclamptic subjects compared to normotensive subjects.
CONCLUSION: The over expression of HSP70 and HSF1 seen in the pre-eclamptic
endothelial cells suggests its possible protective role as stress specific
natural adaptive response against the generated stress.

© 2010 The Authors. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology © 2010 The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians 
and Gynaecologists.

PMID: 21299508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Brain Res. 2011 Apr 6;1383:99-107. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.01.093. Epub 2011
Feb 2.

FLZ, a novel HSP27 and HSP70 inducer, protects SH-SY5Y cells from apoptosis
caused by MPP(+).

Kong XC(1), Zhang D, Qian C, Liu GT, Bao XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,1 Xian Nong Tan Street, Beijing
100050, PR China. kxc1981@yeah.net

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) play an essential role in various neurodegenerative
diseases. Manipulation of upregulation of HSPs in cells has been demonstrated to 
provide a therapeutic strategy to counteract the misfolding and aggregation of
proteins that resulted in neurodegenerative disease. Our previous studies have
shown that FLZ, a synthetic novel derivative of squamosamide from a Chinese herb,
had potent neuroprotective effect against several experimental Parkinson's
disease (PD) models. However, the mechanism of its neuroprotective effect is
still not clarified. The present study demonstrated that FLZ induced HSP27 and
HSP70 proteins and mRNA expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner in
SH-SY5Y cells. Further studies showed that FLZ treatment stimulated the
activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and its regulatory kinase Akt.
Inactivation of Akt pathway by the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 blocked the expression
of HSP27 and HSP70 induced by FLZ. Moreover, the inducing effects of FLZ on
HSP27, HSP70, and HSF1 were all blocked by quercetin, an inhibitor of HSP
biosynthesis. The cytoprotective effect of HSP27/HSP70 induced by FLZ against
MPP(+) was assessed in SH-SY5Y cells. The pretreatment of FLZ significantly
induced the accumulations of HSP27/HSP70 and suppressed the apoptosis caused by
MPP(+) in SH-SY5Y cells. However, the protective effects of FLZ against MPP(+)
were significantly blocked by quercetin, which indicated that the cytoprotective 
action of FLZ against MPP(+)-induced apoptosis is at least partially mediated by 
its induction of HSP27/HSP70. These results provide new evidence for elucidating 
the mechanism of the neuroprotective effect of FLZ against PD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jan 15;203(2):220-7. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiq038.

Selective sweeps and genetic lineages of Plasmodium falciparum drug -resistant
alleles in Ghana.

Alam MT(1), de Souza DK, Vinayak S, Griffing SM, Poe AC, Duah NO, Ghansah A,
Asamoa K, Slutsker L, Wilson MD, Barnwell JW, Udhayakumar V, Koram KA.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global 
Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
hsf1@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: In 2005, Ghana adopted artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT)
for primary treatment of falciparum malaria. A comprehensive study of the
drug-resistance-associated mutations and their genetic lineages will lead to a
better understanding of the evolution of antimalarial drug resistance in this
region.
METHODS: The pfcrt, pfmdr1, dhps, and dhfr mutations associated with chloroquine 
(CQ) and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) resistance and the microsatellite loci
flanking these genes were genotyped in Plasmodium falciparum isolates from Ghana.
RESULTS: The prevalence of mutations associated with both CQ and SP resistance
was high in Ghana. However, we observed a decrease in prevalence of the pfcrt
K76T mutation in northern Ghana after the change in drug policy from CQ to ACT.
Analysis of genetic diversity and differentiation at microsatellite loci flanking
all 4 genes indicated that they have been under strong selection, because of CQ
and SP use. The triple-mutant pfcrt and dhfr alleles in Ghana were derived from
Southeast Asia, whereas the double-mutant dhfr, dhps, and pfmdr1 alleles were of 
African lineage.
CONCLUSION: Because of the possible role of pfmdr1 in amodiaquine and mefloquine 
resistance, demonstrating selection on pfmdr1 and defining lineages of resistant 
alleles in an African population holds great importance.

PMCID: PMC3071065
PMID: 21288822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cell Metab. 2011 Feb 2;13(2):125-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.01.006.

Crosstalk between components of circadian and metabolic cycles in mammals.

Asher G(1), Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and National Centre of Competence in Research 
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 30, Quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva-4, Switzerland. gad.asher@unige.ch

In mammals, most metabolic processes are influenced by biological clocks and
feeding rhythms. The mechanisms that couple metabolism to circadian oscillators
are just emerging. NAD-dependent enzymes (e.g., Sirtuins and poly[ADP-ribose]
polymerases), redox- and/or temperature-dependent transcription factors (e.g.,
CLOCK, NPAS2, and HSF1), nutrient-sensing transcriptional regulatory proteins
(e.g., CREB-CBP-CRCT2, FOXO-p300, nuclear receptors, PGC-1, and SP1 family
members) and protein kinases (e.g., AMPK), are plausible candidates for conveying
a cell's metabolic state to the core clock circuitry. The intertwining between
these acute regulators and circadian clock components is so tight that the
discrimination between metabolic and circadian oscillations may be somewhat
arbitrary.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21284980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cytokine. 2011 Apr;54(1):61-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.12.017. Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Distinct, gene-specific effect of heat shock on heat shock factor-1 recruitment
and gene expression of CXC chemokine genes.

Maity TK(1), Henry MM, Tulapurkar ME, Shah NG, Hasday JD, Singh IS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA.

The heat shock (HS) response, a phylogenetically conserved ubiquitous response to
stress, is generally characterized by the induced expression of heat shock
protein (HSP) genes. Our earlier studies showed that the stress-activated
transcription factor, heat shock factor-1 (HSF1), activated at febrile range or
HS temperatures also modified expression of non-HSP genes including cytokine and 
chemokine genes. We also showed by in silico analysis that 28 among 29 human and 
mouse CXC chemokine genes had multiple putative heat shock response elements
(HSEs) present in their gene promoters. To further determine whether these
potential HSEs were functional and bound HSF1, we analyzed the recruitment of
HSF1 to promoters of 5 human CXC chemokine genes (CXCL-1, 2, 3, 5 and 8) by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and analyzed the effect of HS exposure
on tumor necrosis factor-a (TNFa)-induced expression of these genes in human lung
epithelial-like A549 cells. HSF1 ChIP analysis showed that HSF1 was recruited to 
all but one of these CXC chemokine genes (CXCL-3) and HS caused a significant
increase in recruitment of HSF1 to one or multiple HSEs present in the promoters 
of CXCL-1, 2, 5 and 8 genes. However, the effect of HS exposure on expression of 
these genes showed a variable gene-specific effect. For example, CXCL8 expression
was markedly enhanced (p<0.05) whereas CXCL5 expression was significantly
repressed (p<0.05) in cells exposed to HS coincident with TNFa stimulation. In
contrast, expression of CXCL1 and CXCL2, despite HSF1 recruitment to their
promoters, was not affected by HS exposure. Our results indicate that some, if
not all, putative HSEs present in the CXC chemokine gene promoters are functional
and recruit HSF1 in vivo but the effects on gene expression are variable and gene
specific. We speculate, the physical proximity and interactions of other
transcription factors and co-regulators with HSF1 could be critical to
determining the effects of HS on the expression of these genes.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3048923
PMID: 21266308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 6;6(1):e15976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015976.

Deciphering human heat shock transcription factor 1 regulation via
post-translational modification in yeast.

Batista-Nascimento L(1), Neef DW, Liu PC, Rodrigues-Pousada C, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Stress Laboratory, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica,
Oeiras, Portugal.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) plays an important role in the cellular 
response to proteotoxic stresses. Under normal growth conditions HSF1 is
repressed as an inactive monomer in part through post-translation modifications
that include protein acetylation, sumoylation and phosphorylation. Upon exposure 
to stress HSF1 homotrimerizes, accumulates in nucleus, binds DNA, becomes
hyper-phosphorylated and activates the expression of stress response genes. While
HSF1 and the mechanisms that regulate its activity have been studied for over two
decades, our understanding of HSF1 regulation remains incomplete. As previous
studies have shown that HSF1 and the heat shock response promoter element (HSE)
are generally structurally conserved from yeast to metazoans, we have made use of
the genetically tractable budding yeast as a facile assay system to further
understand the mechanisms that regulate human HSF1 through phosphorylation of
serine 303. We show that when human HSF1 is expressed in yeast its
phosphorylation at S303 is promoted by the MAP-kinase Slt2 independent of a
priming event at S307 previously believed to be a prerequisite. Furthermore, we
show that phosphorylation at S303 in yeast and mammalian cells occurs independent
of GSK3, the kinase primarily thought to be responsible for S303 phosphorylation.
Lastly, while previous studies have suggested that S303 phosphorylation represses
HSF1-dependent transactivation, we now show that S303 phosphorylation also
represses HSF1 multimerization in both yeast and mammalian cells. Taken together,
these studies suggest that yeast cells will be a powerful experimental tool for
deciphering aspects of human HSF1 regulation by post-translational modifications.

PMCID: PMC3017095
PMID: 21253609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;28(12):909-13.

[Effect of microwave irradiation on expression of heat shock proteins family in
primary cultured rat hippocampal neurons].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu MY(1), Deng ZH, Zhou Z, Wei AM, Chen CH, Yu ZP, Wang DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Military Occupational Hygiene, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of microwave irradiation on the expression 
and regulation of heat shock proteins (HSPs) in primary cultured rat hippocampal 
neurons.
METHODS: Neurons were exposed to 90 mW/cm(2) microwave irradiation for 10
minutes. Western blot was used to determine the expression of HSP27, HSP70, HSP90
and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) at 0, 3, 6, 12 and 24 hour respectively. Real-time
RT-PCR was used to determine the mRNA expression of HSF1. DNA-binding activity of
HSF1 was measured by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS: The protein expression of HSP27 was significantly increased by 22%, 36%,
18% at 3, 6, 12 h, respectively (P < 0.05). The protein expression of HSP70 was
significantly increased by 23%, 32%, 26% at 3, 6, 12 h, respectively (P < 0.05, P
< 0.01). The protein expression of HSP90 was significantly increased by 27%, 33% 
at 6, 12 h, respectively (P < 0.05, P < 0.01). The DNA-binding activity of HSF1
was stimulated, however, no significant change of the expression of HSF1 was
observed on both the mRNA and protein levels.
CONCLUSION: The transcriptional activity of HSF1 is activated by microwave
irradiation, which promotes the expression of HSPs. Heat shock response which
contributes to establish a cytoprotective state is induced by microwave
irradiation in primary cultured rat hippocampal neurons.

PMID: 21241601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2011 Apr;158(4):566-76. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2011.01.008. Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Curcumin-induced inhibition of proteasomal activity, enhanced HSP accumulation
and the acquisition of thermotolerance in Xenopus laevis A6 cells.

Khan S(1), Heikkila JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1.

In the present study, curcumin, a phenolic compound with anti-inflammatory,
anti-tumor and anti-amyloid properties, inhibited proteasomal activity and
induced the accumulation of HSPs in the frog model system, Xenopus laevis.
Treatment of A6 kidney epithelial cells with curcumin enhanced ubiquitinated
protein levels and inhibited chymotrypsin-like activity. Furthermore, exposure of
cells to 10-50 µM curcumin for 24h induced HSP30 and HSP70 accumulation. This
phenomenon was controlled at the transcriptional level since pre-treatment of
cells with KNK437, a heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) inhibitor, repressed HSP
accumulation. Additionally, elevation of the incubation temperature from 22 to 30
°C greatly enhanced the curcumin-induced accumulation of HSP30 and HSP70.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that curcumin-induced HSP30 was detectable
primarily in the cytoplasm in a punctate pattern with minimal detrimental effects
on the actin cytoskeleton. Finally, prior exposure of cells to curcumin conferred
a state of thermotolerance since it protected them against a subsequent cytotoxic
thermal challenge. These findings are of importance given the interest in
identifying agents that can upregulate HSP levels with minimal effects on cell
structure or function as a therapeutic treatment of protein folding diseases.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21236354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 18;286(11):9205-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175836. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

BAG3 expression in glioblastoma cells promotes accumulation of ubiquitinated
clients in an Hsp70-dependent manner.

Gentilella A(1), Khalili K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Center for Neurovirology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Disposal of damaged proteins and protein aggregates is a prerequisite for the
maintenance of cellular homeostasis and impairment of this disposal can lead to a
broad range of pathological conditions, most notably in brain-associated
disorders including Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases, and cancer. In this
respect, the Protein Quality Control (PQC) pathway plays a central role in the
clearance of damaged proteins. The Hsc/Hsp70-co-chaperone BAG3 has been described
as a new and critical component of the PQC in several cellular contexts. For
example, the expression of BAG3 in the rodent brain correlates with the
engagement of protein degradation machineries in response to proteotoxic stress. 
Nevertheless, little is known about the molecular events assisted by BAG3. Here
we show that ectopic expression of BAG3 in glioblastoma cells leads to the
activation of an HSF1-driven stress response, as attested by transcriptional
activation of BAG3 and Hsp70. BAG3 overexpression determines an accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins and this event requires the N-terminal region, WW domain
of BAG3 and the association of BAG3 with Hsp70. The ubiquitination mainly occurs 
on BAG3-client proteins and the inhibition of proteasomal activity results in a
further accumulation of ubiquitinated clients. At the cellular level,
overexpression of BAG3 in glioblastoma cell lines, but not in non-glial cells,
results in a remarkable decrease in colony formation capacity and this effect is 
reverted when the binding of BAG3 to Hsp70 is impaired. These observations
provide the first evidence for an involvement of BAG3 in the ubiquitination and
turnover of its partners.

PMCID: PMC3059025
PMID: 21233200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Acta Pol Pharm. 2010 Nov-Dec;67(6):620-4.

Possible role of HSP60 in synergistic action of anthracyclines and sulindac in
HeLa cells.

Gruber BM(1), Krzyszton-Russjan J, Bubko I, Anuszewska EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biopharmaceuticals, National Medicines
Institute, Chelmska St. 30/34, 00-725 Warszawa, Poland. b-gruber@il.waw.pl

As was observed in the earlier studies, doxorubicin (DOX) induced apoptosis in
HeLa cells and that effect was potentiated significantly by sulindac (SUL). The
aim of the current work was to study the effects of DOX and SUL on HSP60, HSF1
and HSP60 expression and the influence of DOX and SUL on HSP60 translocation.
Expression of HSP60 and HSF1 was determined with QRT-PCR; the expression and
localization of HSP60 were evaluated with Western blot. The 24-h cell cultures
were co-incubated with DOX - 1 microM and/or SUL - 50 microM. The significant
induction of HSF1 and HSP60 mRNA level was observed after exposure of the cells
to DOX 1 microM. SUL 50 microM alone caused moderate increase in mRNA level. The 
significant decrease in expression of HSF1 and HSP60 was noted after DOX 1 microM
and SUL 50 microM simultaneous treatment. HSP60 appeared in the higher levels in 
cytosol than in mitochondria No intracellular translocation was noted under
treatment of the cells to DOX and/or SUL. In conclusion, the effects of HSP60 and
HSF1 evoked in the cells depend on the inducer, proapoptotic action of DOX + SUL 
may correlate to the increased expression of HSF1 and HSP60; HSP60 mRNA level and
the regulation of that protein expression depend on the apoptotic inducer; the
role of HSP60 in apoptosis expressed in potential shift between mitochondria and 
cytosol is determined by the apoptotic inducer and the cell type.

PMID: 21229877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Carcinog. 2011 Feb;50(2):143-52. doi: 10.1002/mc.20713. Epub 2010 Dec 10.

P53 is transported into the nucleus via an Hsf1-dependent nuclear localization
mechanism.

Li Q(1), Martinez JD.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

Loss of p53 function can occur through disruption of its ability to localize to
the nucleus. Previously we showed through characterization a set of mutant cell
lines that lacked the ability to import p53 into the nucleus that nuclear
translocation of p53 appeared to be mechanistically different from that of the
SV40 T-antigen (SV40TAg). Here we extend that work by examining nuclear
importation of p53 and SV40TAg using both in vivo and in vitro assays for nuclear
localization. We show that disruption of microtubule polymerization using
colchicine suppresses nuclear localization of p53 but not of SV40TAg. We also
show, for the first time, that the heat shock transcription factor (Hsf1), is
required for establishment of the microtubule network in cells and for nuclear
localization of p53. In contrast, SV40TAg does not interact with polymerized
microtubules suggesting that it is transported into the nucleus through an
alternative mechanism. Interestingly, lacking of Hsf1 expression and suppressing 
Hsf1 by siRNA also made cells more resistant to the cytotoxic effects of
paclitaxel. Hence, loss of Hsf1 activity not only suppressed p53 function, but
also led to reduced sensitivity to killing by drugs that target microtubules.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3735450
PMID: 21229611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 25;108(4):1681-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016424108. Epub 2011 Jan 4.

Impaired hippocampal spinogenesis and neurogenesis and altered affective behavior
in mice lacking heat shock factor 1.

Uchida S(1), Hara K, Kobayashi A, Fujimoto M, Otsuki K, Yamagata H, Hobara T, Abe
N, Higuchi F, Shibata T, Hasegawa S, Kida S, Nakai A, Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University 
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505,
Japan. s-uchida@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

Aberrant transcriptional regulation in the brain is thought to be one of the key 
components of the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders.
Heat shock factors (HSFs) modulate cellular homeostasis through the control of
gene expression. However, the roles of HSFs in brain function have yet to be
elucidated fully. In the present study, we attempted to clarify the role of
HSF1-mediated gene regulation in neuronal and behavioral development using
HSF1-deficient (HSF1(-/-)) mice. We found granule neurons of aberrant morphology 
and impaired neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of HSF1(-/-) mice. In addition,
HSF1(-/-) mice showed aberrant affective behavior, including reduced anxiety and 
sociability but increased depression-like behavior and aggression. Furthermore,
HSF1 deficiency enhanced behavioral vulnerability to repeated exposure to
restraint stress. Importantly, rescuing the HSF1 deficiency in the neonatal but
not the adult hippocampus reversed the aberrant anxiety and depression-like
behaviors. These results indicate a crucial role for hippocampal HSF1 in neuronal
and behavioral development. Analysis of the molecular mechanisms revealed that
HSF1 directly modulates the expression of polysialyltransferase genes, which then
modulate polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) levels in the
hippocampus. Enzymatic removal of PSA from the neonatal hippocampus resulted in
aberrant behavior during adulthood, similar to that observed in HSF1(-/-) mice.
Thus, these results suggest that one role of HSF1 is to control hippocampal
PSA-NCAM levels through the transcriptional regulation of polysialyltransferases,
a process that might be involved in neuronal and behavioral development in mice.

PMCID: PMC3029713
PMID: 21205885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2011 Jan 1;3:476-88.

Multi-confocal fluorescence correlation spectroscopy.

Galland R(1), Gao J, Kloster M, Herbomel G, Destaing O, Balland M, Souchier C,
Usson Y, Derouard J, Wang I, Delon A.

Author information: 
(1)Universite de Grenoble 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Spectrometrie Physique UMR
5588, BP 87, Saint Martin d'Heres, France.

We report a multi-confocal Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (mFCS) technique
that combines a Spatial Light Modulator (SLM), with an Electron Multiplying-CCD
camera (EM-CCD). The SLM is used to produce a series of laser spots, while the
pixels of the EM-CCD play the roles of virtual pinholes. The phase map addressed 
to the SLM, calculated by using the spherical wave approximation, makes it
possible to produce several diffraction limited laser spots. The fastest
acquisition mode leads to a time resolution of 100 microseconds. By using
solutions of sulforhodamine G we demonstrated that the observation volumes are
similar to that of a standard confocal set-up. mFCS experiments have also been
conducted on two stable cell lines: mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing
eGFP-actin and H1299 cells expressing the heat shock factor fusion protein
HSF1-eGFP. In the first case we could recover the diffusion constant of G-actin
within the cytoplasm, although we were also sensitive to interactions with
F-actin. Concerning HSF1, we could clearly observe the modifications of the
number of molecules and of the HSF1 dynamics during heat shock.

PMID: 21196328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancers (Basel). 2011 Mar 7;3(1):1158-81. doi: 10.3390/cancers3011158.

Implication of heat shock factors in tumorigenesis: therapeutical potential.

De Thonel A(1), Mezger V, Garrido C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U866, Dijon, France. valerie.mezger@univ-paris-diderot.fr.

Heat Shock Factors (HSF) form a family of transcription factors (four in mammals)
which were named according to the discovery of their activation by a heat shock. 
HSFs trigger the expression of genes encoding Heat Shock Proteins (HSPs) that
function as molecular chaperones, contributing to establish a cytoprotective
state to various proteotoxic stresses and in pathological conditions. Increasing 
evidence indicates that this ancient transcriptional protective program acts
genome-widely and performs unexpected functions in the absence of experimentally 
defined stress. Indeed, HSFs are able to re-shape cellular pathways controlling
longevity, growth, metabolism and development. The most well studied HSF, HSF1,
has been found at elevated levels in tumors with high metastatic potential and is
associated with poor prognosis. This is partly explained by the above-mentioned
cytoprotective (HSP-dependent) function that may enable cancer cells to adapt to 
the initial oncogenic stress and to support malignant transformation.
Nevertheless, HSF1 operates as major multifaceted enhancers of tumorigenesis
through, not only the induction of classical heat shock genes, but also of
"non-classical" targets. Indeed, in cancer cells, HSF1 regulates genes involved
in core cellular functions including proliferation, survival, migration, protein 
synthesis, signal transduction, and glucose metabolism, making HSF1 a very
attractive target in cancer therapy. In this review, we describe the different
physiological roles of HSFs as well as the recent discoveries in term of
non-cogenic potential of these HSFs, more specifically associated to the
activation of "non-classical" HSF target genes. We also present an update on the 
compounds with potent HSF1-modulating activity of potential interest as
anti-cancer therapeutic agents.

PMCID: PMC3756408
PMID: 24212658  [PubMed]


65. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;30(4):247-54. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1133. Epub 2010 Dec
28.

Two novel SNPs in HSF1 gene are associated with thermal tolerance traits in
Chinese Holstein cattle.

Li QL(1), Ju ZH, Huang JM, Li JB, Li RL, Hou MH, Wang CF, Zhong JF.

Author information: 
(1)Dairy Cattle Research Centre, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Science,
Ji'nan, Shandong, P.R. China.

Heat-shock transcription factors (HSFs) play an important role in regulating heat
stress response. The activation of heat-shock protein (HSP) genes is mediated by 
HSFs, which bind to promoters of HSP genes. In this research, two novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms, T909C and G4693T, and their association with thermal
tolerance were investigated in 951 Chinese Holstein cattle. Linkage
disequilibrium and haplotype construction were analyzed using SHEsis software.
Four haplotypes were constructed, and nine haplotype combinations were found.
Potassium content in erythrocytes (PCE), decreased rate of milk production (R),
rectal temperature (RT), and heat-tolerance coefficient (HTC) were selected for
the thermotolerance index. Association analysis showed that thermal tolerance in 
Chinese Holstein cattle was significantly affected by T909C and G4693T. The PCE
of cows with CC or TC genotype was lower than that of TT at the 909 position
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Cows with TT genotype had lower PCE (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and higher HTC
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) at the 4693 position. Cows with H2H4 haplotype combination had lower
PCE (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), R (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and RT (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) and higher HTC (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) than
those with H1H3 haplotype combination. Bioinformatic analysis predicted that the 
4693 position was located in the microRNA-binding (bta-miR-484) region.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction demonstrated that
4693-T mutation caused the disruption of microRNA target binding, resulting in
the relief of the transcriptional repression, which, in turn, resulted in
increased expression. Thus, the HSF1 gene is useful in dairy cattle thermal
tolerant breeding.

PMID: 21189066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Virulence. 2010 Jul-Aug;1(4):330-2. doi: 10.4161/viru.1.4.12364.

The relevance of heat shock regulation in fungal pathogens of humans.

Brown AJ(1), Leach MD, Nicholls S.

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, UK. al.brown@abdn.ac.uk

Despite being obligately associated with warm-blooded animals, Candida albicans
expresses a bona fide heat shock response that is regulated by the evolutionarily
conserved, essential heat shock transcription factor Hsf1. Hsf1 is thought to
play a fundamental role in thermal homeostasis, adjusting the levels of essential
chaperones to changes in growth temperature, for example in febrile patients.
Hsf1 also regulates the expression of Hsp90, which controls the yeast-hypha
transition in C. albicans, and we argue, might also control morphogenesis in
other fungal pathogens of humans.

PMCID: PMC3073299
PMID: 21178465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Mar;120(1):33-41. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq375. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Acetaminophen-NAPQI hepatotoxicity: a cell line model system genome-wide
association study.

Moyer AM(1), Fridley BL, Jenkins GD, Batzler AJ, Pelleymounter LL, Kalari KR, Ji 
Y, Chai Y, Nordgren KK, Weinshilboum RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Acetaminophen is the leading cause of acute hepatic failure in many developed
nations. Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity is mediated by the reactive metabolite
N-acetyl-p-benzoquinonimine (NAPQI). We performed a "discovery" genome-wide
association study using a cell line-based model system to study the possible
contribution of genomics to NAPQI-induced cytotoxicity. A total of 176
lymphoblastoid cell lines from healthy subjects were treated with increasing
concentrations of NAPQI. Inhibiting concentration 50 values were determined and
were associated with "glutathione pathway" gene single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and genome-wide basal messenger RNA expression, as well as with 1.3
million genome-wide SNPs. A group of SNPs in linkage disequilibrium on chromosome
3 was highly associated with NAPQI toxicity. The p value for rs2880961, the SNP
with the lowest p value, was 1.88 × 10(-7). This group of SNPs mapped to a "gene 
desert," but chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated binding of several
transcription factor proteins including heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and HSF2, at
or near rs2880961. These chromosome 3 SNPs were not significantly associated with
variation in basal expression for any of the genome-wide genes represented on the
Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChip. We have used a cell line-based model system to
identify a SNP signal associated with NAPQI cytotoxicity. If these observations
are validated in future clinical studies, this SNP signal might represent a
potential biomarker for risk of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. The mechanisms
responsible for this association remain unclear.

PMCID: PMC3044203
PMID: 21177773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neuropharmacology. 2011 May;60(6):991-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2010.12.003.
Epub 2010 Dec 16.

Delayed intervention in experimental stroke with TRC051384--a small molecule
HSP70 inducer.

Mohanan A(1), Deshpande S, Jamadarkhana PG, Kumar P, Gupta RC, Chauthaiwale V,
Dutt C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Torrent Research Centre, Torrent Pharmaceuticals
Ltd, PO Bhat, Gandhinagar 382428, Gujarat, India.

Induction of HSPs is a natural response of stressed cells that protects against
many insults including acute ischemia. TRC051384, a novel compound belonging to
substituted 2-propen-1-one class is a potent inducer of heat shock protein 70
(HSP70). The aim of this study was to investigate the ability of TRC051384 in
reducing neuronal injury and disability upon delayed treatments (4 and 8 hours
post ischemia onset) in a rat model of transient cerebral ischemia. Focal
cerebral ischemia was produced in rats by occluding the MCA using the intra
luminal suture technique. Rats subjected to 2 hours focal cerebral ischemia were 
administered by intra-peritoneal route, TRC051384 or vehicle every 2 hours for 48
hours, from 4th hour or 8th hour after onset of ischemia. Progression of infarct 
and edema was assessed up to 48 hours post ischemic insult using magnetic
resonance imaging and the neurological disability and survival studied till 7
days. Here we show for the first time that treatment with TRC051384 significantly
reduces stroke associated neuronal injury (87% reduction in area of penumbra
recruited to infarct, and 25% reduction in brain edema) and disability in a rat
model of transient ischemic stroke even when administered 8 hours post onset of
ischemia. Significant improvement in survival (50% by day 2 and 67.3% by day 7)
was observed with TRC051384 treatment initiated at 4 hours after ischemia onset. 
Induction of HSP70 by TRC051384 involves HSF1 activation and results in elevated 
chaperone and anti-inflammatory activity. These results show that TRC051384 has
the potential to be developed as a novel pharmacological agent for the treatment 
of ischemic stroke.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Protein Pept Lett. 2011 Feb;18(2):167-73.

SIRT1 deacetylase activity and the maintenance of protein homeostasis in response
to stress: an overview.

Monteiro JP(1), Cano MI.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Estadual
Paulista Jélio de Mesquita Filho-UNESP, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

The present review intends to summarize the, yet preliminary, but very important 
emerging data underlining the functions exerted by the nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD+)-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 on protein homeostasis. The main 
focus of the discussion is the cooperation between SIRT1 and the heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1) responsible for activating the transcription of molecular
chaperones, the protein-protective factors that resolve damaged/misfolded and
aggregated proteins generated by heat stress or metabolism. SIRT1, a mammalian
ortholog of the yeast silent information regulator 2, is a stress activated
protein deacetylase that contributes to life-span extension by regulating
different cell survival pathways, including replicative senescence, inflammation 
and resistance to hypoxic and heat stress. Phosphorylation is the major mechanism
controlling the level and function of SIRT1 required for normal cell cycle
progression and cell survival under stress conditions. Phosphorylated SIRT1
deacetylates and coactivates different substrates, including HSF1. Deacetylated
HSF1 binds to the heat shock promoter element found upstream of genes encoding
molecular chaperones. Overexpression of SIRT1 in cultured cells also helps them
to survive exposure to heat stress. Conversely, its down-regulation accelerates
the attenuation of the heat shock response promoting the release of HSF1 from its
cognate promoter element. Very recently, in a mouse model for Alzheimer's
disease, SIRT1 deacetylase activity was also found activating the transcription
of a-secretase, the enzyme responsible for inhibiting the formation of aggregates
of neuronal ß-amyloid plaques. How SIRT1 activity protects cells from the
deleterious effects of damaged/misfolded proteins and the implication of these
findings on age-related pathologies are discussed.

PMID: 21121893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Neurochem. 2011 Feb;116(3):438-48. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07124.x. Epub 
2010 Dec 22.

Fas ligation and tumor necrosis factor a activation of murine astrocytes promote 
heat shock factor-1 activation and heat shock protein expression leading to
chemokine induction and cell survival.

Choi K(1), Ni L, Jonakait GM.

Author information: 
(1)Federated Department of Biological Sciences, New Jersey Institute of
Technology/Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey 07102, USA.

Death-inducing ligands tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) and Fas ligand (FasL)
do not kill cultured astrocytes; instead they induce a variety of chemokines
including macrophage-inflammatory protein-1a/CC chemokine ligand 3 (CCL3),
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (CC CCL-2), macrophage-inflammatory
protein-2/CXC chemokine ligand 2 (CXCL2, a murine homologue of interleukin 8),
and interferon-induced protein of 10 kDa (CXCL10). Induction is enhanced by
protein synthesis inhibition suggesting the existence of endogenous inhibitors.
ERK, NF-<U+03BA>B, heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1) and heat shock proteins were examined for
their possible roles in signal transduction. Inhibition of ERK activation by
PD98059 partially inhibited expression of all but FasL-induced CXCL10. Although
inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B DNA binding inhibited chemokine induction, PD98059 did not
inhibit TNFa-induced NF-<U+03BA>B DNA binding suggesting that ERK serves an
NF-<U+03BA>B-independent pathway. Heat shock itself induced astrocytic chemokine
expression; both TNFa and FasL induced HSF-1 DNA binding and Hsp72 production;
and Hsp72-induced chemokine expression. Inhibition of either HSF-1 binding with
quercetin or heat shock protein synthesis with KNK437 compromised chemokine
induction without compromising cell survival. These data suggest that the
induction of heat shock proteins via HSF-1 contribute to the TNFa- and
FasL-induced expression of chemokines in astrocytes.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2010 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21114495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. BMC Genomics. 2010 Nov 24;11:660. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-660.

Comparative transcriptome profiling analyses during the lag phase uncover YAP1,
PDR1, PDR3, RPN4, and HSF1 as key regulatory genes in genomic adaptation to the
lignocellulose derived inhibitor HMF for Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Ma M(1), Liu ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Bioenergy Research Unit, National Center for Agricultural Utilization
Research, USDA-ARS, Peoria, IL USA.

BACKGROUND: The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is able to adapt and in situ
detoxify lignocellulose derived inhibitors such as furfural and HMF. The length
of lag phase for cell growth in response to the inhibitor challenge has been used
to measure tolerance of strain performance. Mechanisms of yeast tolerance at the 
genome level remain unknown. Using systems biology approach, this study
investigated comparative transcriptome profiling, metabolic profiling, cell
growth response, and gene regulatory interactions of yeast strains and selective 
gene deletion mutations in response to HMF challenges during the lag phase of
growth.
RESULTS: We identified 365 candidate genes and found at least 3 significant
components involving some of these genes that enable yeast adaptation and
tolerance to HMF in yeast. First, functional enzyme coding genes such as ARI1,
ADH6, ADH7, and OYE3, as well as gene interactions involved in the
biotransformation and inhibitor detoxification were the direct driving force to
reduce HMF damages in cells. Expressions of these genes were regulated by YAP1
and its closely related regulons. Second, a large number of PDR genes, mainly
regulated by PDR1 and PDR3, were induced during the lag phase and the PDR gene
family-centered functions, including specific and multiple functions involving
cellular transport such as TPO1, TPO4, RSB1, PDR5, PDR15, YOR1, and SNQ2,
promoted cellular adaptation and survival in order to cope with the inhibitor
stress. Third, expressed genes involving degradation of damaged proteins and
protein modifications such as SHP1 and SSA4, regulated by RPN4, HSF1, and other
co-regulators, were necessary for yeast cells to survive and adapt the HMF
stress. A deletion mutation strain <U+0394>rpn4 was unable to recover the growth in the 
presence of HMF.
CONCLUSIONS: Complex gene interactions and regulatory networks as well as
co-regulations exist in yeast adaptation and tolerance to the lignocellulose
derived inhibitor HMF. Both induced and repressed genes involving diversified
functional categories are accountable for adaptation and energy rebalancing in
yeast to survive and adapt the HMF stress during the lag phase of growth.
Transcription factor genes YAP1, PDR1, PDR3, RPN4, and HSF1 appeared to play key 
regulatory rules for global adaptation in the yeast S. cerevisiae.

PMCID: PMC3091778
PMID: 21106074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):2785-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.158220. Epub 2010 
Nov 22.

Neuroprotective drug riluzole amplifies the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)- and
glutamate transporter 1 (GLT1)-dependent cytoprotective mechanisms for neuronal
survival.

Liu AY(1), Mathur R, Mei N, Langhammer CG, Babiarz B, Firestein BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Division of Life Sciences,
Rutgers State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.
liu@biology.rutgers.edu

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) mediates the cellular response to stress to increase
the production of heat shock protein (HSP) chaperones for proper protein folding,
trafficking, and degradation; failure of this homeostatic mechanism likely
contributes to neurodegeneration. We show that the neuroprotective drug riluzole 
increased the amount of HSF1 in NG108-15 neuroprogenitor cells by slowing the
specific turnover of HSF1 and supporting a more robust and sustained activation
of HSF1. Using Hsp70-luciferase as a functional readout of the activity of HSF1, 
we show that riluzole amplified the heat shock induction of the reporter gene
with an optimal increase at 1 µM. Immunocytochemical staining and Western blot
quantitation of HSP70 in NG108-15 neuroprogenitor cells and embryonic spinal cord
neurons provided corroborative evidence that riluzole amplified the
HSF1-dependent regulation of HSP70 expression. Parallel studies on the GLT1
glutamate transporter showed that riluzole increased GLT1-reporter and GLT1
protein expression and that the increase was enhanced by heat shock and
coincident with the increased expression of HSP70 and HSP90. This result is
consistent with the anti-glutamatergic profile of riluzole and the presence of
multiple heat shock elements on the GLT1 gene promoter, suggesting that riluzole 
may modulate GLT1 expression through HSF1. The increased HSP chaperones and GLT1 
transporter blunted glutamate-induced and N-methyl D-aspartate receptor-mediated 
excitotoxic death. In summary, we show that riluzole increased the amount and
activity of HSF1 to boost the expression of HSPs and GLT1 for neuroprotection
under stress.

PMCID: PMC3024774
PMID: 21098017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 9;5(11):e13830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013830.

Protein kinase A binds and activates heat shock factor 1.

Murshid A(1), Chou SD, Prince T, Zhang Y, Bharti A, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Many inducible transcription factors are regulated through batteries 
of posttranslational modifications that couple their activity to inducing
stimuli. We have studied such regulation of Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), a key
protein in control of the heat shock response, and a participant in
carcinogenisis, neurological health and aging. As the mechanisms involved in the 
intracellular regulation of HSF1 in good health and its dysregulation in disease 
are still incomplete we are investigating the role of posttranslational
modifications in such regulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In a proteomic study of HSF1 binding partners, we
have discovered its association with the pleiotropic protein kinase A (PKA). HSF1
binds avidly to the catalytic subunit of PKA, (PKAca) and becomes phosphorylated 
on a novel serine phosphorylation site within its central regulatory domain
(serine 320 or S320), both in vitro and in vivo. Intracellular PKAca levels and
phosphorylation of HSF1 at S320 were both required for HSF1 to be localized to
the nucleus, bind to response elements in the promoter of an HSF1 target gene
(hsp70.1) and activate hsp70.1 after stress. Reduction in PKAca levels by small
hairpin RNA led to HSF1 exclusion from the nucleus, its exodus from the hsp70.1
promoter and decreased hsp70.1 transcription. Likewise, null mutation of HSF1 at 
S320 by alanine substitution for serine led to an HSF1 species excluded from the 
nucleus and deficient in hsp70.1 activation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings of PKA regulation of HSF1 through S320
phosphorylation add to our knowledge of the signaling networks converging on this
factor and may contribute to elucidating its complex roles in the stress response
and understanding HSF1 dysregulation in disease.

PMCID: PMC2976705
PMID: 21085490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 21;286(3):1737-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.179440. Epub 2010 
Nov 15.

KRIBB11 inhibits HSP70 synthesis through inhibition of heat shock factor 1
function by impairing the recruitment of positive transcription elongation factor
b to the hsp70 promoter.

Yoon YJ(1), Kim JA, Shin KD, Shin DS, Han YM, Lee YJ, Lee JS, Kwon BM, Han DC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Korea.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master switch for heat shock protein (HSP)
expression in eukaryotes. A synthetic chemical library was screened to identify
inhibitors of HSF1 using a luciferase reporter under the control of a heat shock 
element. A compound named KRIBB11
(N(2)-(1H-indazole-5-yl)-N(6)-methyl-3-nitropyridine-2,6-diamine) was identified 
for its activity in abolishing the heat shock-induced luciferase activity with an
IC(50) of 1.2 µmol/liter. When the cells were exposed to heat shock in the
presence of KRIBB11, the induction of HSF1 downstream target proteins such as
HSP27 and HSP70 was blocked. In addition, treatment of HCT-116 cells with KRIBB11
induced growth arrest and apoptosis. Markers of apoptosis, such as cleaved
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, were detected after KRIBB11 treatment.
Biotinyl-KRIBB11 was synthesized as an affinity probe for the identification of
KRIBB11 target proteins. Using affinity chromatography and competition assays,
KRIBB11 was shown to associate with HSF1 in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
analysis showed that KRIBB11 inhibited HSF1-dependent recruitment of p-TEFb
(positive transcription elongation factor b) to the hsp70 promoter. Finally,
intraperitoneal treatment of nude mice with KRIBB11 at 50 mg/kg resulted in a
47.4% (p < 0.05) inhibition of tumor growth without body weight loss.
Immunoblotting assays showed that the expression of HSP70 was lower in
KRIBB11-treated tumor tissue than in control tissues. Because HSPs are expressed 
at high levels in a wide range of tumors, these results strengthen the rationale 
for targeting HSF1 in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3023468
PMID: 21078672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:875824. doi: 10.1155/2011/875824. Epub 2010 Nov 7.

The role of HDAC6 in cancer.

Aldana-Masangkay GI(1), Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), a member of the HDAC family whose major substrate 
is a-tubulin, has become a target for drug development to treat cancer due to its
major contribution in oncogenic cell transformation. Overexpression of HDAC6
correlates with tumorigenesis and improved survival; therefore, HDAC6 may be used
as a marker for prognosis. Previous work demonstrated that in multiple myeloma
cells, inhibition of HDAC6 results in apoptosis. Furthermore, HDAC6 is required
for the activation of heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), an activator of heat-shock
protein encoding genes (HSPs) and CYLD, a cylindromatosis tumor suppressor gene. 
HDAC6 contributes to cancer metastasis since its upregulation increases cell
motility in breast cancer MCF-7 cells and its interaction with cortactin
regulates motility. HDAC6 also affects transcription and translation by
regulating the heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and stress granules (SGs),
respectively. This review will discuss the role of HDAC6 in the pathogenesis and 
treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2975074
PMID: 21076528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Genet Genomics. 2011 Jan;285(1):67-77. doi: 10.1007/s00438-010-0588-6. Epub
2010 Nov 12.

hsf1 (+) extends chronological lifespan through Ecl1 family genes in fission
yeast.

Ohtsuka H(1), Azuma K, Murakami H, Aiba H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, Graduate School of Bioagricultural
Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

The heat shock factor (HSF), a protein evolutionarily conserved from yeasts to
human, regulates the expression of a set of proteins called heat shock proteins
(HSPs), many of which function as molecular chaperones. In Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, the HSF binds to the 5' upstream region of YGR146C and activates its 
transcription. YGR146C encodes a functional homolog of ecl1 (+), ecl2 (+), and
ecl3 (+) of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. At present, these Ecl1 family genes, which
are extenders of chronological lifespan, have been identified only in fungi
groups. Based on ChIP analysis, we identified that Hsf1 binds to the upstream DNA
region of ecl2 (+) after heat shock in S. pombe. In Caenorhabditis elegans, heat 
shock factor HSF-1 is known to regulate aging and required for the elongation of 
longevity by dietary restriction. We found that heat shock factor Hsf1 extends
chronological lifespan of S. pombe when overexpressed. Moreover, we show that the
extension of chronological lifespan by the overproduction of Hsf1 mainly depends 
on ecl2 (+) among Ecl1 family genes. From these results, we suggest that HSF is a
conserved regulator of lifespan, at least in yeast and nematode, and Ecl1 family 
genes such as YGR146C and ecl2 (+) are the direct targets of Hsf1 and mediate
lifespan extension by Hsf1.

PMID: 21072667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2010 Oct 20;4:103-7. doi: 10.4137/GRSB.S4546.

Overexpression of Colligin 2 in Glioma Vasculature is Associated with
Overexpression of Heat Shock Factor 2.

Mustafa DA(1), Sieuwerts AM, Zheng PP, Kros JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology.

In previous studies we found expression of the protein colligin 2 (heat shock
protein 47 (HSP47), SERPINH1) in glioma neovasculature while not in normal brain 
tissue. Generally, the regulation of heat shock gene expression in eukaryotes is 
mediated by heat shock factors (HSF). In mammals, three heat shock transcription 
factors, HSF-1, -2, and -4, have been isolated. Here we investigated the relation
between the expression of colligin 2 and these heat shock factors at the mRNA
level using real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) in different grades of 
astrocytic tumorigenesis, viz., low-grade glioma and glioblastoma. Endometrium
samples, representing physiological angiogenesis, were included as controls.
Since colligin 2 is a chaperon for collagens, the gene expression of collagen I
(COL1A1) was also investigated. The blood vessel density of the samples was
monitored by expression of the endothelial marker CD31 (PECAM1). Because
NG2-immunopositive pericytic cells are involved in glioma neovascularization, the
expression of NG2 (CSPG4) was also measured.We demonstrate overexpression of HSF2
in both stages of glial tumorigenesis (reaching significance only in low-grade
glioma) and also minor elevated levels of HSF1 as compared to normal brain. There
were no differences in expression of HSF4 between low-grade glioma and normal
brain while HSF4 was downregulated in glioblastoma. In the endometrium samples,
none of the HSFs were upregulated. In the low-grade gliomas SERPINH appeared to
be slightly overexpressed with a parallel 4-fold upregulation of COL1A1, while in
glioblastoma there was over 5-fold overexpression of SERPINH1 and more than
150-fold overexpression of COL1A1. In both the lowgrade gliomas and the
glioblastomas overexpression of CSPG4 was found and overexpression of PECAM1 was 
only found in the latter. Our data suggest that the upregulated expression of
colligin 2 in glioma is accompanied by upregulation of COL1A1, CSPG4, HSF2 and to
a lesser extent, HSF1. Further studies will unravel the association of these
factors with colligin 2 expression, possibly leading to keys for therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC2976072
PMID: 21072323  [PubMed]


78. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2011 May;16(3):275-85. doi: 10.1007/s12192-010-0239-1.
Epub 2010 Oct 30.

HSFs and regulation of Hsp70.1 (Hspa1b) in oocytes and preimplantation embryos:
new insights brought by transgenic and knockout mouse models.

Le Masson F(1), Christians E.

Author information: 
(1)Université Toulouse 3, UPS, UMR 5547, Centre de Biologie du Développement, 118
route de Narbonne (Bat 4R3B3), Toulouse Cedex 09, France.

Gene encoding heat shock protein (Hsps) are induced following a thermal stress
thanks to the activation of heat shock transcription factor (HSF) which interacts
with heat shock elements (HSE) located within the sequence of Hsp promoters. This
cellular and protective response (heat shock response (HSR)) is well known and
evolutionarily conserved. Nevertheless, HSR does not function in all the cells
produced during the life of a multicellular organism, e.g., early mouse embryos. 
Taking advantage of mouse transgenic and knockout models, we investigated the
roles of trans (HSF 1 and 2) and cis (HSE) regulatory elements in the control of 
Hsp70.1 (Hspa1b) through several developmental steps from oocytes to blastocysts.
Our studies confirm that, even in absence of any stress, HSF1 regulates Hsp70.1
in oocytes and early embryos. Our data emphasize the role of maternal and
paternal HSFs in the developmentally regulated expression of Hsp70.1 observed
when the zygotic genome activation occurs. Furthermore, in this unstressed
developmental condition, affinity and binding to HSEs might be more permissive
than in the stress response. Finally, submitting blastocyst to different stress
conditions, we show that HSF2 is differentially required for Hsp expression and
cell survival. Taken together, our findings indicate that the role of heat shock 
trans and cis regulatory elements evolve along the successive steps of early
embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC3077227
PMID: 21053113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Dec;60(3):187-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.09.009. Epub 
2010 Oct 8.

Silencing HSF1 by short hairpin RNA decreases cell proliferation and enhances
sensitivity to hyperthermia in human melanoma cell lines.

Nakamura Y(1), Fujimoto M, Hayashida N, Takii R, Nakai A, Muto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,
Ube, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is a major transactivator of
genes coding for heat shock proteins (Hsps). Recent studies demonstrate that HSF1
is involved in tumor initiation, maintenance, and progression by regulating the
expression of Hsps and other molecular targets. However, the role of HSF1 in
melanoma is largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to analyze the role of HSF1 in melanoma.
METHODS: We used short hairpin RNA (shRNA) to silence HSF1 in the human melanoma 
MeWo cell line and investigated its effect on cell proliferation and in the
efficacy of chemotherapy, hyperthermia and thermochemotherapy.
RESULTS: We found that proliferation of MeWo cells treated with HSF1 shRNA was
markedly reduced, and this was associated with a G1 block of the cell cycle,
whereas HSF1 shRNA treatment of normal human keratinocyte HaCat cells had no
effect on proliferation. Suppression of cell proliferation by silencing HSF1 was 
also observed in other melanoma cell lines, HMV-I and HMV-II. Furthermore,
silencing HSF1 enhanced the sensitivity of MeWo cells to heat shock, yet did not 
affect their sensitivity to treatment with dacarbazine.
CONCLUSION: These findings show that HSF1 is required for normal growth and
survival of melanoma cells under heat shock conditions, and suggests that HSF1 is
a promising therapeutic target in melanoma.

Copyright © 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21044828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Neurochem. 2010 Dec;115(6):1434-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07047.x. Epub
2010 Nov 11.

CSF transthyretin neuroprotection in a mouse model of brain ischemia.

Santos SD(1), Lambertsen KL, Clausen BH, Akinc A, Alvarez R, Finsen B, Saraiva
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Unit, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology - IBMC, 
Porto, Portugal.

Brain injury caused by ischemia is a major cause of human mortality and
physical/cognitive disability worldwide. Experimentally, brain ischemia can be
induced surgically by permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. Using this
model, we studied the influence of transthyretin in ischemic stroke.
Transthyretin (TTR) is normally responsible for the transport of thyroid hormones
and retinol in the blood and CSF. We found that TTR null mice (TTR(-/-) ) did not
show significant differences in cortical infarction 24 h after permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion compared with TTR(+/+) control littermates. However,
TTR null mice, heterozygous for the heat-shock transcription factor 1 (TTR(-/-)
HSF1(+/-) mice), which compromised the stress response, showed a significant
increase in cortical infarction, cerebral edema and the microglial-leukocyte
response compared with TTR(+/+) HSF1(+/-) mice. Unexpectedly, we observed novel
TTR distribution throughout the infarct, localized to disintegrated ß-tubulin
III(+) neurons and cell debris. Specific elimination of TTR synthesis in the
liver by RNAi had no effect on TTR distribution in the infarct, indicating that
the observed TTR infiltration derived from CSF and not from the serum. This
finding is corroborated by results from 'in situ' hybridization and real time PCR
that excluded the presence of transthyretin mRNA in the infarct and peri-infarct 
areas. Our data suggest that in conditions of a compromised heat-shock response, 
CSF TTR contributes to control neuronal cell death, edema and inflammation,
thereby influencing the survival of endangered neurons in cerebral ischemia.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2010 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21044072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Aging Cell. 2011 Feb;10(1):39-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00640.x. Epub
2010 Nov 15.

Pyruvate imbalance mediates metabolic reprogramming and mimics lifespan extension
by dietary restriction in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Mouchiroud L(1), Molin L, Kasturi P, Triba MN, Dumas ME, Wilson MC, Halestrap AP,
Roussel D, Masse I, Dallière N, Ségalat L, Billaud M, Solari F.

Author information: 
(1)UMR5201, CNRS, Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, 28 Rue Laennec, Lyon
69373, France.

Dietary restriction (DR) is the most universal intervention known to extend
animal lifespan. DR also prevents tumor development in mammals, and this effect
requires the tumor suppressor PTEN. However, the metabolic and cellular processes
that underly the beneficial effects of DR are poorly understood. We identified
slcf-1 in an RNAi screen for genes that extend Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan in
a PTEN/daf-18-dependent manner. We showed that slcf-1 mutation, which increases
average lifespan by 40%, mimics DR in worms fed ad libitum. An NMR-based
metabolomic characterization of slcf-1 mutants revealed lower lipid levels
compared to wild-type animals, as expected for dietary-restricted animals, but
also higher pyruvate content. Epistasis experiments and metabolic measurements
support a model in which the long lifespan of slcf-1 mutants relies on increased 
mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism coupled to an adaptive response to oxidative
stress. This response requires DAF-18/PTEN and the previously identified DR
effectors PHA-4/FOXA, HSF-1/HSF1, SIR-2.1/SIRT-1, and AMPK/AAK-2. Overall, our
data show that pyruvate homeostasis plays a central role in lifespan control in
C. elegans and that the beneficial effects of DR results from a hormetic
mechanism involving the mitochondria. Analysis of the SLCF-1 protein sequence
predicts that slcf-1 encodes a plasma membrane transporter belonging to the
conserved monocarboxylate transporter family. These findings suggest that
inhibition of this transporter homolog in mammals might also promote a DR
response.

PMID: 21040400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Aging Cell. 2011 Feb;10(1):66-79. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00646.x.

Age-related changes in mesenchymal stem cells derived from rhesus macaque bone
marrow.

Yu JM(1), Wu X, Gimble JM, Guan X, Freitas MA, Bunnell BA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Covington, 
LA 70433, USA.

The regeneration potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) diminishes with
advanced age and this diminished potential is associated with changes in cellular
functions. This study compared MSCs isolated from the bone marrow of rhesus
monkeys (rBMSCs) in three age groups: young (< 5 years), middle (8-10 years), and
old (> 12 years). The effects of aging on stem cell properties and indicators of 
stem cell fitness such as proliferation, differentiation, circadian rhythms,
stress response proteins, miRNA expression, and global histone modifications in
rBMSCs were analyzed. rBMSCs demonstrated decreased capacities for proliferation 
and differentiation as a function of age. The production of heat shock protein 70
(HSP70) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) were also reduced with increasing age. The
level of a core circadian protein, Rev-erb a, was significantly increased in
rBMSCs from old animals. Furthermore, analysis of miRNA expression profiles
revealed an up-regulation of mir-766 and mir-558 and a down-regulation of
mir-let-7f, mir-125b, mir-222, mir-199-3p, mir-23a, and mir-221 in old rBMSCs
compare to young rBMSCs. However, there were no significant age-related changes
in the global histone modification profiles of the four histone core proteins:
H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 on rBMSCs. These changes represent novel insights into the
aging process and could have implications regarding the potential for autologous 
stem cells therapy in older patients.

PMCID: PMC4339051
PMID: 20969724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 1;5(10). pii: e13096. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013096.

PP2A mediated AMPK inhibition promotes HSP70 expression in heat shock response.

Wang T(1), Yu Q, Chen J, Deng B, Qian L, Le Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Under stress, AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) plays a central
role in energy balance, and the heat shock response is a protective mechanism for
cell survival. The relationship between AMPK activity and heat shock protein
(HSP) expression under stress is unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that heat stress induced
dephosphorylation of AMPKa subunit (AMPKa) in various cell types from human and
rodent. In HepG2 cells, the dephosphorylation of AMPKa under heat stress in turn 
caused dephosphorylation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and upregulation of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, two downstream targets of AMPK, confirming the
inhibition of AMPK activity by heat stress. Treatment of HepG2 cells with
phosphatase 2A (PP2A) inhibitor okadaic acid or inhibition of PP2A expression by 
RNA interference efficiently reversed heat stress-induced AMPKa
dephosphorylation, suggesting that heat stress inhibited AMPK through activation 
of PP2A. Heat stress- and other HSP inducer (CdCl(2), celastrol, MG132)-induced
HSP70 expression could be inhibited by AICAR, an AMPK specific activator.
Inhibition of AMPKa expression by RNA interference reversed the inhibitory effect
of AICAR on HSP70 expression under heat stress. These results indicate that AMPK 
inhibition under stress contribute to HSP70 expression. Mechanistic studies
showed that activation of AMPK by AICAR had no effect on heat stress-induced HSF1
nuclear translocation, phosphorylation and binding with heat response element in 
the promoter region of HSP70 gene, but significantly decreased HSP70 mRNA
stability.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results demonstrate that during heat shock
response, PP2A mediated AMPK inhibition upregulates HSP70 expression at least
partially through stabilizing its mRNA, which suggests a novel mechanism for HSP 
induction under stress.

PMCID: PMC2948495
PMID: 20957029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Infect Immun. 2011 Jan;79(1):177-84. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00742-09. Epub 2010 Oct 18.

Heat shock factor 1 protects mice from rapid death during Listeria monocytogenes 
infection by regulating expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha during fever.

Murapa P(1), Ward MR, Gandhapudi SK, Woodward JG, D'Orazio SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
Kentucky, 800 Rose Street-MS401, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a stress-induced transcription factor that promotes
expression of genes that protect mammalian cells from the lethal effects of
severely elevated temperatures (>42°C). However, we recently showed that HSF1 is 
activated at a lower temperature (39.5°C) in T cells, suggesting that HSF1 may be
important for preserving T cell function during pathogen-induced fever responses.
To test this, we examined the role of HSF1 in clearance of Listeria
monocytogenes, an intracellular bacterial pathogen that elicits a strong CD8(+) T
cell response in mice. Using temperature transponder microchips, we showed that
the core body temperature increased approximately 2°C in L.
monocytogenes-infected mice and that the fever response was maintained for at
least 24 h. HSF1-deficient mice cleared a low-dose infection with slightly slower
kinetics than did HSF1(+/+) littermate controls but were significantly more
susceptible to challenges with higher doses of bacteria. Surprisingly,
HSF1-deficient mice did not show a defect in CD8(+) T cell responses following
sublethal infection. However, when HSF1-deficient mice were challenged with high 
doses of L. monocytogenes, increased levels of serum tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNF-a) and gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) compared to those of littermate control mice
were observed, and rapid death of the animals occurred within 48 to 60 h of
infection. Neutralization of TNF-a enhanced the survival of HSF1-deficient mice. 
These results suggest that HSF1 is needed to prevent the overproduction of
proinflammatory cytokines and subsequent death due to septic shock that can
result following high-dose challenge with bacterial pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3019880
PMID: 20956571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Integr Biol (Camb). 2011 Jan;3(1):48-56. doi: 10.1039/c0ib00067a. Epub 2010 Oct
15.

Cell-based sensors for quantifying the physiological impact of microsystems.

Desai SP(1), Voldman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Microsystems are increasingly used in the manipulation, patterning and sorting of
cells. Critical to the widespread adoption of these new technologies is
development of an understanding of their impact on cellular physiology. Here we
show the integration of a cell-based sensor, a microfabricated electrical
screening platform, and quantitative imaging to enable the first large-scale
physiological screens of the impact of microsystems on cells. To perform
physiological screening, we developed a cell-based sensor that reports on
stress-mediated transcription (via Heat Shock Factor 1 induced expression of
GFP). This cell-based sensor was quantitatively characterized using automated
imaging. The integration of this quantitative physiological sensor with a
microfabricated system enabled the execution of multiplexed screens across
electric field strength, frequency, and application duration. Voltage sweeps
indicate increasing physiological stress with increasing voltage due to Joule
heating, while frequency sweeps indicate increased stress at lower frequencies
(<500 kHz) compared with higher frequencies (>1 MHz) due to generation of
reactive species at lower frequencies. Combined voltage and frequency sweeps
enable the generation of complex maps of physiological state.

PMCID: PMC3226760
PMID: 20949196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Science. 2010 Oct 15;330(6002):379-85. doi: 10.1126/science.1195262.

Temperature as a universal resetting cue for mammalian circadian oscillators.

Buhr ED(1), Yoo SH, Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Physiology, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
IL 60208-3520, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 Dec;11(12):788.
    Science. 2010 Oct 15;330(6002):329-30.

Environmental temperature cycles are a universal entraining cue for all circadian
systems at the organismal level with the exception of homeothermic vertebrates.
We report here that resistance to temperature entrainment is a property of the
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) network and is not a cell-autonomous property of
mammalian clocks. This differential sensitivity to temperature allows the SCN to 
drive circadian rhythms in body temperature, which can then act as a universal
cue for the entrainment of cell-autonomous oscillators throughout the body.
Pharmacological experiments show that network interactions in the SCN are
required for temperature resistance and that the heat shock pathway is integral
to temperature resetting and temperature compensation in mammalian cells. These
results suggest that the evolutionarily ancient temperature resetting response
can be used in homeothermic animals to enhance internal circadian
synchronization.

PMCID: PMC3625727
PMID: 20947768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Science. 2010 Oct 15;330(6002):329-30. doi: 10.1126/science.1197747.

Circadian rhythms. Temperatures to communicate by.

Edery I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
edery@cabm.rutgers.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2010 Oct 15;330(6002):379-85.

PMID: 20947752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. FEBS J. 2010 Oct;277(20):4112-25.

The heat shock factor family and adaptation to proteotoxic stress.

Fujimoto M(1), Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

The heat shock response was originally characterized as the induction of a set of
major heat shock proteins encoded by heat shock genes. Because heat shock
proteins act as molecular chaperones that facilitate protein folding and suppress
protein aggregation, this response plays a major role in maintaining protein
homeostasis. The heat shock response is regulated mainly at the level of
transcription by heat shock factors (HSFs) in eukaryotes. HSF1 is a master
regulator of the heat shock genes in mammalian cells, as is HSF3 in avian cells. 
HSFs play a significant role in suppressing protein misfolding in cells and in
ameliorating the progression of Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila and mouse
models of protein-misfolding disorders, by inducing the expression of heat shock 
genes. Recently, numerous HSF target genes were identified, such as the classical
heat shock genes and other heat-inducible genes, called nonclassical heat shock
genes in this study. Importance of the expression of the nonclassical heat shock 
genes was evidenced by the fact that mouse HSF3 and chicken HSF1 play a
substantial role in the protection of cells from heat shock without inducing
classical heat shock genes. Furthermore, HSF2 and HSF4, as well as HSF1, shown to
have roles in development, were also revealed to be necessary for the expression 
of certain nonclassical heat shock genes. Thus, the heat shock response regulated
by the HSF family should consist of the induction of classical as well as of
nonclassical heat shock genes, both of which might be required to maintain
protein homeostasis.

PMID: 20945528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Jan;347(1-2):21-8. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0608-1. Epub
2010 Oct 13.

Heat shock transcription factor-1 inhibits H2O2-induced apoptosis via
down-regulation of reactive oxygen species in cardiac myocytes.

Zhang L(1), Jiang H, Gao X, Zou Y, Liu M, Liang Y, Yu Y, Zhu W, Chen H, Ge J.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, China.

Heat shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1) protects against cardiac diseases such
as ischemia/reperfusion injury and myocardial infarction. However, the mechanisms
have not yet been fully characterized. In this study, we investigated the effects
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase-1 (ASK1) 
in HSF1-regulated cardiomyocyte protection. Cultured cardiomyocytes of neonatal
rats were transfected with HSF1, ASK1 or both of them before exposure to
H(2)O(2), and the ROS generation, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity and
apoptosis were examined. H(2)O(2) significantly increased intracellular ROS
generation and apoptotic cells as expected, and all these cellular events were
greatly inhibited by overexpression of HSF1. However, H(2)O(2)-induced increases 
in JNK phosphorylation and cell apoptosis were largely enhanced by ASK1
overexpression whereas the similar transfection did not affect the ROS generation
in the cells. Moreover, inhibition of H(2)O(2)-increased ROS generation, JNK
phosphorylation, and cellular apoptosis by overexpression of HSF1 tended to be
disappeared, when the cells were co-transfected with ASK1. These results suggest 
that HSF1 protects cardiomyocytes from apoptosis under oxidative stress via
down-regulation of intracellular ROS generation and inhibition of JNK
phosphorylation. Although ASK1 itself has no effect on intracellular ROS
generation, it may affect the inhibitory effects of HSF1 on ROS generation, JNK
activity, and cardiomyocyte injury.

PMID: 20941531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 15;650(2-3):487-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.09.059. 
Epub 2010 Oct 15.

eNOS/Hsp70 interaction on rosuvastatin cytoprotective effect in neonatal
obstructive nephropathy.

Manucha W(1), Kurbán F, Mazzei L, Benardón ME, Bocanegra V, Tosi MR, Vallés P.

Author information: 
(1)Área de Fisiopatología, Departamento de Patología, Facultad de Ciencias
Médicas, Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina.

There is growing evidence that statins may exert renoprotective effects beyond
cholesterol reduction. The cholesterol-independent or "pleiotropic" effects of
statins include the upregulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS).
Here we determined whether eNOS associated with Hsp70 expression is involved in
rosuvastatin resistance to obstruction-induced oxidative stress and cell death.
Neonatal rats subjected to unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) within two days 
of birth and controls were treated daily with vehicle or rosuvastatin (10
mg/kg/day) for 14 days. Decreased endogenous nitric oxide (NO) and lower mRNA and
protein eNOS expression associated with downregulation of heat shock factor 1
(Hsf1) mRNA and Hsp70 protein levels were observed in the obstructed kidney
cortex. Increased nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADHP) oxidase
activity and apoptosis induction, regulated by mitochondrial signal pathway
through an increased pro-apoptotic Bax/BcL(2) ratio and caspase 3 activity, were 
demonstrated. Conversely, in cortex membrane fractions from rosuvastatin-treated 
UUO rats, marked upregulation of eNOS expression at transcriptional and
posttranscriptional levels linked to increased Hsf1 mRNA expression and enhanced 
mRNA and protein Hsp70 expression, were observed. Consequently, there was an
absence of apoptotic response and transiently decreased NADPH oxidase activity.
In addition, interaction between eNOS and Hsp70 was determined by
communoprecipitation in cortex membrane fractions, showing an increased ratio of 
both proteins, after rosuvastatin treatment in obstructed kidney. In summary, our
data demonstrate that the effect of rosuvastatin on eNOS interacting with Hsp70, 
results in the capacity of both to prevent mitochondrial apoptotic pathway and
oxidative stress in neonatal early kidney obstruction.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20940012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):39096-107. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.131102. Epub
2010 Oct 6.

O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) regulates stress-induced heat shock 
protein expression in a GSK-3beta-dependent manner.

Kazemi Z(1), Chang H, Haserodt S, McKen C, Zachara NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

To investigate the mechanisms by which O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine
modification of nucleocytoplasmic proteins (O-GlcNAc) confers stress tolerance to
multiple forms of cellular injury, we explored the role(s) of O-GlcNAc in the
regulation of heat shock protein (HSP) expression. Using a cell line in which
deletion of the O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT; the enzyme that adds O-GlcNAc) can be 
induced by 4-hydroxytamoxifen, we screened the expression of 84 HSPs using
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR. In OGT null cells the stress-induced
expression of 18 molecular chaperones, including HSP72, were reduced. GSK-3ß
promotes apoptosis through numerous pathways, including phosphorylation of heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1) at Ser(303) (Ser(P)(303) HSF1), which inactivates HSF1 and 
inhibits HSP expression. In OGT null cells we observed increased Ser(P)(303)
HSF1; conversely, in cells in which O-GlcNAc levels had been elevated, reduced
Ser(P)(303) HSF1 was detected. These data, combined with those showing that
inhibition of GSK-3ß in OGT null cells recovers HSP72 expression, suggests that
O-GlcNAc regulates the activity of GSK-3ß. In OGT null cells, stress-induced
inactivation of GSK-3ß by phosphorylation at Ser(9) was ablated providing a
molecular basis for these findings. Together, these data suggest that
stress-induced GlcNAcylation increases HSP expression through inhibition of
GSK-3ß.

PMCID: PMC2998145
PMID: 20926391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 5;402(1):59-65. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.09.111. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

A Novel mouse model of enhanced proteostasis: Full-length human heat shock factor
1 transgenic mice.

Pierce A(1), Wei R, Halade D, Yoo SE, Ran Q, Richardson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, United States.
piercea2@uthscsa.edu

The heat shock response (HSR) is controlled by the master transcriptional
regulator heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 maintains proteostasis and resistance 
to stress through production of heat shock proteins (HSPs). No transgenic model
exists that overexpresses HSF1 in tissues of the central nervous system (CNS). We
generated a transgenic mouse overexpressing full-length non-mutant HSF1 and
observed a 2-4-fold increase in HSF1 mRNA and protein expression in all tissues
studied of HSF1 transgenic (HSF1(+/0)) mice compared to wild type (WT)
littermates, including several regions of the CNS. Basal expression of HSP70 and 
90 showed only mild tissue-specific changes; however, in response to forced
exercise, the skeletal muscle HSR was more elevated in HSF1(+/0) mice compared to
WT littermates and in fibroblasts following heat shock, as indicated by levels of
inducible HSP70 mRNA and protein. HSF1(+/0) cells elicited a significantly more
robust HSR in response to expression of the 82 repeat polyglutamine-YFP fusion
construct (Q82YFP) and maintained proteasome-dependent processing of Q82YFP
compared to WT fibroblasts. Overexpression of HSF1 was associated with fewer, but
larger Q82YFP aggregates resembling aggresomes in HSF1(+/0) cells, and increased 
viability. Therefore, our data demonstrate that tissues and cells from mice
overexpressing full-length non-mutant HSF1 exhibit enhanced proteostasis.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20920476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2011 May;52(4):287-95. doi: 10.1002/em.20619. Epub 2010 Sep 
24.

Divergent effects of oxidatively induced modification to the C8 of
2'-deoxyadenosine on transcription factor binding:
8,5'(S)-cyclo-2'-deoxyadenosine inhibits the binding of multiple sequence
specific transcription factors, while 8-oxo-2'-deoxyadenosine increases binding
of CREB and NF-kappa B to DNA.

Abraham J(1), Brooks PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Neurobiology, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.

DNA is exposed to endogenous and environmental factors that can form stable
lesions. If not repaired, these lesions can lead to transcription/replication
blocking or mutagenic bypass. Our previous work has focused on 8,5'-cyclopurine
2'-deoxyribonucleosides, a unique class of oxidatively induced DNA lesions that
are specifically repaired by the NER pathway (see Brooks PJ [2008]: DNA Repair
7:1168-1179). Here we used EMSA to monitor the ability of sequence-specific
transcription factors, HSF1, CREB, and NF-kappaB and "architectural"
transcription factor, HMGA, to bind to their target sequences when 8,
5'(S)-cyclo-2'-deoxyadenosine (cyclo-dAdo) is present within their recognition
sequences. For comparison, we also tested the effect of
8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyadenosine (8-oxo-dAdo) in the same recognition
sequences. The presence of a cyclo-dAdo lesion in the target sequence essentially
eliminated the binding activity of HSF1, CREB, and NF-kappa B whereas HMGA
retained some of its binding activity. In contrast, 8-oxo-dAdo had no obvious
effect on the binding activity of HSF1 and HMGA in comparison to lesion-free DNA.
Notably, though, CREB and NF<U+03BA>B binding increased when an 8-oxo-dAdo lesion was
present in their target sequence. Competition EMSA showed about 2-3-fold
increased affinity of both proteins for the 8-oxo-dAdo containing target sequence
compared to lesion-free DNA. Molecular modeling of the lesions in the NF-kappaB
sequence indicated that 8-oxo-dAdo may form an additional hydrogen bond with the 
protein, thereby strengthening the binding of NF-kappa B to its DNA target. The
cyclo-dAdo lesion, in contrast, distorted the DNA structure, providing an
explanation for the inhibition of NF-kappaB binding.

Published 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20872830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 Feb;68(3):475-88. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0459-7. Epub
2010 Sep 12.

Arsenite stabilizes HIF-1a protein through p85a-mediated up-regulation of
inducible Hsp70 protein expression.

Guo W(1), Yang Z, Xia Q, Liu J, Yu Y, Li J, Zuo Z, Zhang D, Li X, Shi X, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, 57 Old Forge Road, Tuxedo, NY 10987, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) has been reported to regulate over 100 gene 
expressions in response to hypoxia and other stress conditions. In the present
study, we found that arsenite could induce HIF-1a protein accumulation in both
mouse epidermal Cl41 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Knockout of
p85a, a regulatory subunit of PI-3K, in MEFs (p85a(-/-)) dramatically decreased
the arsenite-induced HIF-1a accumulation, indicating that p85a is crucial for
arsenite effects on the stabilization of HIF-1a protein. Our further studies
suggest that arsenite could induce inducible Hsp70 expression, and transfection
of inducible Hsp70 into p85a(-/-) MEFs could restore HIF-1a protein accumulation.
Moreover, the results using EMSA and Supershift assays indicate that p85a is
crucial for arsenite-induced activation of the heat-shock transcription factor 1 
(HSF-1), which is responsible for transcription of inducible Hsp70. Taken
together, p85a-mediated HIF-1a stabilization upon arsenite exposure is
specifically through HSF-1 activation and subsequent up-regulation of the
inducible Hsp70 expression.

PMCID: PMC3758129
PMID: 20835880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. EMBO J. 2010 Oct 20;29(20):3459-69. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.225. Epub 2010 Sep
10.

Heat shock factor 1 ameliorates proteotoxicity in cooperation with the
transcription factor NFAT.

Hayashida N(1), Fujimoto M, Tan K, Prakasam R, Shinkawa T, Li L, Ichikawa H,
Takii R, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is an important regulator of protein
homeostasis (proteostasis) by controlling the expression of major heat shock
proteins (Hsps) that facilitate protein folding. However, it is unclear whether
other proteostasis pathways are mediated by HSF1. Here, we identified novel
targets of HSF1 in mammalian cells, which suppress the aggregation of
polyglutamine (polyQ) protein. Among them, we show that one of the nuclear factor
of activated T cells (NFAT) proteins, NFATc2, significantly inhibits polyQ
aggregation in cells and is required for HSF1-mediated suppression of polyQ
aggregation. NFAT deficiency accelerated disease progression including
aggregation of a mutant polyQ-huntingtin protein and shortening of lifespan in
R6/2 Huntington's disease mice. Furthermore, we found that HSF1 and NFAT
cooperatively induce the expression of the scaffold protein PDZK3 and
aB-crystallin, which facilitate the degradation of polyQ protein. These results
show the first mechanistic basis for the observation that HSF1 has a much more
profound effect on proteostasis than individual Hsp or combination of different
Hsps, and suggest a new pathway for ameliorating protein-misfolding diseases.

PMCID: PMC2964172
PMID: 20834230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2010 Oct 15;20(20):5997-6000. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.08.081. Epub 2010 Aug 22.

Radiosensitization of cancer cells by hydroxychalcones.

Pruitt R(1), Sasi N, Freeman ML, Sekhar KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Radiation sensitization is significantly increased by proteotoxic stress, such as
a heat shock. We undertook an investigation, seeking to identify natural products
that induced proteotoxic stress and then determined if a compound exhibited
radiosensitizing properties. The hydroxychalcones, 2',5'-dihydroxychalcone
(D-601) and 2,2'-dihydroxychalcone (D-501), were found to activate heat shock
factor 1 (Hsf1) and exhibited radiation sensitization properties in colon and
pancreatic cancer cells. The radiosensitization ability of D-601 was blocked by
pretreatment with a-napthoflavone (ANF), a specific inhibitor of cytochrome P450 
1A2 (CYP1A2), suggesting that the metabolite of D-601 is essential for
radiosensitization. The study demonstrated the ability of hydroxychalcones to
radiosensitize cancer cells and provides new leads for developing novel radiation
sensitizers.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2946792
PMID: 20826087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Metabolism. 2011 Jun;60(6):789-98. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.07.029. Epub 2010 
Sep 3.

Constitutively active heat shock factor 1 enhances glucose-driven insulin
secretion.

Uchiyama T(1), Tomono S, Utsugi T, Ohyama Y, Nakamura T, Tomura H, Kawazu S,
Okajima F, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction and Department of Cell Biology, Institute
for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Gunma
371-8512, Japan. uchiyat@med.gunma-u.ac.jp

Weak pancreatic ß-cell function is a cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Glucokinase regulates insulin secretion via phosphorylation of glucose. The
present study focused on a system for the self-protection of pancreatic cell by
expressing heat shock factor (HSF) and heat shock protein (HSP) to improve
insulin secretion without inducing hypoglycemia. We previously generated a
constitutively active form of human HSF1 (CA-hHSF1). An adenovirus expressing
CA-hHSF1 using the cytomegalovirus promoter was generated to infect mouse
insulinoma cells (MIN6 cells). An adenovirus expressing CA-hHSF1 using a human
insulin promoter (Ins-CA-hHSF1) was also generated to infect rats. We
investigated whether CA-hHSF1 induces insulin secretion in MIN6 cells and whether
Ins-CA-hHSF1 can improve blood glucose and serum insulin levels in healthy Wister
rats and type 2 diabetes mellitus model rats. CA-hHSF1 expression increased
insulin secretion 1.27-fold compared with the overexpression of wild-type hHSF1
in MIN6 cells via induction of HSP90 expression and subsequent activation of
glucokinase. This mechanism is associated with activation of both glucokinase and
neuronal nitric oxide synthase. Ins-CA-hHSF1 improved blood glucose levels in
neonatal streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Furthermore, Ins-CA-hHSF1 reduced 
oral glucose tolerance testing results in healthy Wister rats because of an
insulin spike at 15 minutes; however, it did not induce hypoglycemia. CA-hHSF1
induced insulin secretion both in vitro and in vivo. These findings suggest that 
gene therapy with Ins-CA-hHSF1 will be able to be used to treat patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus and impaired glucose tolerance without causing
hypoglycemia at fasting.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20817212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Fungal Genet Biol. 2011 Mar;48(3):297-305. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2010.08.010. Epub
2010 Sep 9.

Activation of the heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 is essential for the full 
virulence of the fungal pathogen Candida albicans.

Nicholls S(1), MacCallum DM, Kaffarnik FA, Selway L, Peck SC, Brown AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical
Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

The evolutionarily conserved heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 plays a central
role in thermal adaptation in the major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida
albicans. Hsf1 becomes hyperphosphorylated in response to heat shock and
activates the transcription of genes with heat shock elements (HSEs) in their
promoters, these genes contributing to thermal adaptation. However, the relevance
of Hsf1 activation to C. albicans virulence is not clear as this pathogen is
thought to be obligately associated with warm blooded animals, and this issue has
not been tested because HSF1 is essential for viability in C. albicans. In this
study, we demonstrate that the HSE regulon is active in C. albicans cells
infecting the kidney. We also show the CE2 region of Hsf1 is required for
activation and that the phosphorylation of specific residues in this domain
contributes to Hsf1 activation. C. albicans HSF1 mutants that lack this CE2
region are viable. However, they are unable to activate HSE-containing genes in
response to heat shock, and they are thermosensitive. Using this HSF1 CE2
deletion mutant we demonstrate that Hsf1 activation, and hence thermal
adaptation, contributes significantly to the virulence of C. albicans.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3032048
PMID: 20817114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2011 Jan;16(1):81-90. doi: 10.1007/s12192-010-0223-9.
Epub 2010 Aug 31.

Expression of heat shock protein-coding genes associated with anhydrobiosis in an
African chironomid Polypedilum vanderplanki.

Gusev O(1), Cornette R, Kikawada T, Okuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Anhydrobiosis Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
1-2 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8634, Japan.

In order to survive in extreme environments, organisms need to develop special
adaptations both on physiological and molecular levels. The sleeping chironomid
Polypedilum vanderplanki, inhabiting temporary water pools in semi-arid regions
of Africa, is the only insect to have evolutionarily acquired the ability to
withstand prolonged complete desiccation at larval stage, entering a state called
anhydrobiosis. Even after years in a dry state, larvae are able to revive within 
a short period of time, completely restoring metabolism. Because of the possible 
involvement of stress proteins in the preservation of biomolecules during the
anhydrobiosis of the sleeping chironomid, we have analyzed the expression of
genes encoding six heat shock proteins (Pv-hsp90, Pv-hsp70, Pv-hsc70, Pv-hsp60,
Pv-hsp20, and Pv-p23) and one heat shock factor (Pv-hsf1) in dehydrating,
rehydrating, and heat-shocked larvae. All examined genes were significantly
up-regulated in the larvae upon dehydration and several patterns of expression
were detected. Gene transcript of Pv-hsf1 was up-regulated within 8 h of
desiccation, followed by large shock proteins expression reaching peak at 24-48 h
of desiccation. Heat-shock-responsive Pv-hsp70 and Pv-hsp60 showed a two-peak
expression: in dehydrating and rehydrating larvae. Both small alpha-crystallin
heat shock proteins (sHSP) transcripts were accumulated in the desiccated larvae,
but showed different expression profiles. Both sHSP-coding genes were found to be
heat-inducible, and Pv-hsp20 was up-regulated in the larvae at the early stage of
desiccation. In contrast, expression of the second transcript, corresponding to
Pv-p23, was limited to the late stages of desiccation, suggesting possible
involvement of this protein in the glass-state formation in anhydrobiotic larvae.
We discuss possible roles of proteins encoded by these stress genes during the
different stages of anhydrobiosis in P. vanderplanki.

PMCID: PMC3024092
PMID: 20809134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci Res. 2010 Nov 1;88(14):3102-10. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22476.

Aberrant stress-induced Hsp70 expression in immune cells in multiple sclerosis.

Cwiklinska H(1), Mycko MP, Szymanska B, Matysiak M, Selmaj KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), a prominent member of the heat shock protein
family, is a stress-induced chaperone, contributing to the "protein triage"
mechanism. However, we and others have previously shown that chaperonin activity 
of Hsp70 also promotes immune recognition of protein/peptide antigens, including 
myelin autoantigens. Hsp70 has been strikingly elevated in multiple sclerosis
(MS) lesions. In a search for the mechanism of Hsp70 up-regulation in MS, we
analyzed Hsp70 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from MS
patients (n = 49), healthy controls (n = 40), and patients with rheumatoid
arthritis, (RA; n = 13). Hsp70 was detected by Western blot, and Hsp70 levels
were quantified by ELISA. We found that Hsp70 was expressed at low levels in ex
vivo PBMCs. However, after heat shock, Hsp70 was up-regulated significantly more 
(up to sixfold) in MS patients compared with healthy controls. This significant
overproduction of Hsp70 was also seen following another stress condition, LPS
stimulation. Hsp70 is a product of several independent genes, and we found the
HSPA1B gene product to be the major form responsible for Hsp70 protein
overexpression in PBMCs. Hsp70 overexpression was preceded by increased nuclear
presence of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 activation depends on
phosphorylation, and we found that inhibition of the A group of protein kinase C 
isoenzymes significantly reduced inducible Hsp70 production. These results
indicate that immune cells from MS patients are more prone to Hsp70 induction
under stress conditions, suggesting a possible link between Hsp70 overexpression 
and development of autoimmunity.

PMID: 20806409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Exp Pathol. 2010 Dec;91(6):515-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2613.2010.00735.x.
Epub 2010 Aug 27.

aB-crystallin (HspB5) in familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy.

Magalhães J(1), Santos SD, Saraiva MJ.

Author information: 
(1)IBMC, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal.

The small heat shock protein aB-crystallin (HspB5) is known to be overexpressed
in several neurodegenerative disorders. In familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy
(FAP), a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by extracellular deposition of 
mutated transthyretin (TTR), activation of heat shock factor 1 -HSF1- by
extracellular TTR deposition has been shown as well as induction of the
expression of heat shock proteins, HSP27 and HSP70. Here we investigate the
expression of aB-crystallin in FAP. We first detected aB-crystallin in aggregates
extracted from tissues of both FAP patients and transgenic mice for the human
V30M mutant TTR; however, subsequent studies by confocal fluorescence microscopy 
did not confirm the association of aB-crystallin with TTR aggregates; thus the
presence of aB-crystallin in aggregate extracts might derive from the extraction 
procedure. Increased levels of aB-crystallin were observed by
immunohistochemistry in human FAP skin, as compared to normal skin. Furthermore, 
skin, stomach and dorsal root ganglia from V30M transgenic mice showed increased 
expression of aB-crystallin as compared to controls without deposition. A human
neuroblastoma cell line incubated with TTR aggregates displayed increased
expression of aB-crystallin. Overall, these results show that extracellular TTR
deposits induce an intracellular response of aB-crystallin. This small heat shock
protein (HSP), which is important for anti-apoptotic and chaperone properties,
may have a protective role in FAP.

© 2010 The Authors. International Journal of Experimental Pathology © 2010
International Journal of Experimental Pathology.

PMCID: PMC3010550
PMID: 20804537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 5;285(45):34469-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.157552. Epub 2010
Aug 27.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 localizes to sex chromatin during meiotic
repression.

Akerfelt M(1), Vihervaara A, Laiho A, Conter A, Christians ES, Sistonen L,
Henriksson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Åbo Akademi University, FI-20521 Turku, Finland.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is an important transcription factor in cellular
stress responses, cancer, aging, and developmental processes including
gametogenesis. Disruption of Hsf1, together with another HSF family member, Hsf2,
causes male sterility and complete lack of mature sperm in mice, but the specific
role of HSF1 in spermatogenesis has remained unclear. Here, we show that HSF1 is 
transiently expressed in meiotic spermatocytes and haploid round spermatids in
mouse testis. The Hsf1(-/-) male mice displayed regions of seminiferous tubules
containing only spermatogonia and increased morphological abnormalities in sperm 
heads. In search for HSF1 target genes, we identified 742 putative promoters in
mouse testis. Among them, the sex chromosomal multicopy genes that are expressed 
in postmeiotic cells were occupied by HSF1. Given that the sex chromatin mostly
is repressed during and after meiosis, it is remarkable that HSF1 directly
regulates the transcription of sex-linked multicopy genes during postmeiotic
repression. In addition, our results show that HSF1 localizes to the sex body
prior to the meiotic divisions and to the sex chromocenter after completed
meiosis. To the best of our knowledge, HSF1 is the first known transcription
factor found at the repressed sex chromatin during meiosis.

PMCID: PMC2966061
PMID: 20802198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Can J Neurol Sci. 2010 Jul;37(4):504-11.

Abrogating HSP response augments cell death induced by As2O3 in glioma cell
lines.

Song X(1), Chen Z, Wu C, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, 1st Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Nangang District, Harbin, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVES: We previously reported that Arsenic trioxide (ATO) can inhibit glioma
growth both in vitro and in vivo. While the use of ATO alone for solid tumor
treatment sometimes was found to be ineffective which may be due to the
protective pathways including heat shock proteins (HSPs) response induced by ATO.
In this study, we modified HSPs expression to investigate whether HSPs had some
effect on ATO induced glioma cell death.
METHODS: Trypan bule exclusion assay, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP)
Assay, and SubG1 detection were used to evaluate cell viability and western-blot 
was employed to detect HSPs and some apoptosis markers expression induced by ATO.
Heat pre-treatment, HSPs inhibitor, or Heat Shock factor-1 (HSF1) knockdown by
SiRNA was employed to modify HSPs levels.
RESULTS: It was showed that KNK437 (HSPs inhibitor) or HSF1 knockdown
significantly enhanced cell death, MMP disruption, JNK phosphorylation and
caspase-3 cleavage induced by ATO, which was accompanied by abrogation of HSPs
induction, while heat pre-treatment with clear HSPs induction had strong
protection on the effects mentioned above.
CONCLUSION: Those data suggested that HSPs play protective roles on ATO induced
cell death in glioma. Inhibition of HSPs may have a synergistic effect with ATO
on glioma treatment.

PMID: 20724260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. ASN Neuro. 2010 Aug 11;2(4):e00040. doi: 10.1042/AN20100015.

Inhibiting heat-shock protein 90 reverses sensory hypoalgesia in diabetic mice.

Urban MJ(1), Li C, Yu C, Lu Y, Krise JM, McIntosh MP, Rajewski RA, Blagg BS,
Dobrowsky RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, The University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS
66045, U.S.A.

Comment in
    ASN Neuro. 2010;2(4):e00042.

Increasing the expression of Hsp70 (heat-shock protein 70) can inhibit sensory
neuron degeneration after axotomy. Since the onset of DPN (diabetic peripheral
neuropathy) is associated with the gradual decline of sensory neuron function, we
evaluated whether increasing Hsp70 was sufficient to improve several indices of
neuronal function. Hsp90 is the master regulator of the heat-shock response and
its inhibition can up-regulate Hsp70. KU-32
(N-{7-[(2R,3R,4S,5R)-3,4-dihydroxy-5-methoxy-6,6-dimethyl-tetrahydro-2H-pyran-2-y
loxy]-8-methyl-2-oxo-2H-chromen-3-yl}acetamide) was developed as a novel,
novobiocin-based, C-terminal inhibitor of Hsp90 whose ability to increase Hsp70
expression is linked to the presence of an acetamide substitution of the
prenylated benzamide moiety of novobiocin. KU-32 protected against
glucose-induced death of embryonic DRG (dorsal root ganglia) neurons cultured for
3 days in vitro. Similarly, KU-32 significantly decreased neuregulin 1-induced
degeneration of myelinated Schwann cell DRG neuron co-cultures prepared from WT
(wild-type) mice. This protection was lost if the co-cultures were prepared from 
Hsp70.1 and Hsp70.3 KO (knockout) mice. KU-32 is readily bioavailable and was
administered once a week for 6 weeks at a dose of 20 mg/kg to WT and Hsp70 KO
mice that had been rendered diabetic with streptozotocin for 12 weeks. After 12
weeks of diabetes, both WT and Hsp70 KO mice developed deficits in NCV (nerve
conduction velocity) and a sensory hypoalgesia. Although KU-32 did not improve
glucose levels, HbA1c (glycated haemoglobin) or insulin levels, it reversed the
NCV and sensory deficits in WT but not Hsp70 KO mice. These studies provide the
first evidence that targeting molecular chaperones reverses the sensory
hypoalgesia associated with DPN.

PMCID: PMC2919983
PMID: 20711301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;42(11):1856-63. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.07.021. Epub 2010 Aug 6.

Activation of heat shock factor 1 plays a role in pyrrolidine
dithiocarbamate-mediated expression of the co-chaperone BAG3.

Song S(1), Kole S, Precht P, Pazin MJ, Bernier M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. songs2@mail.nih.gov

Adaptive responses to physical and inflammatory stressors are mediated by
transcription factors and molecular chaperones. The transcription factor heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1) has been implicated in extending lifespan in part by
increasing expression of heat shock response genes. Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
(PDTC) is a small thiol compound that exerts in vivo and in vitro
anti-inflammatory properties through mechanisms that remain unclear. Here we
report that PDTC induced the release of monomeric HSF1 from the molecular
chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), with concomitant increase in HSF1 trimer
formation, translocation to the nucleus, and binding to promoter of target genes 
in human HepG2 cells. siRNA-mediated silencing of HSF1 blocked BAG3 gene
expression by PDTC. The protein levels of the co-chaperone BAG3 and its
interaction partner Hsp72 were stimulated by PDTC in a dose-dependent fashion,
peaking at 6h. Inhibition of Hsp90 function by geldanamycin derivatives and
novobiocin elicited a pattern of HSF1 activation and BAG3 expression that was
similar to PDTC. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed that PDTC and the
inhibitor 17-dimethylaminoethylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin enhanced the
binding of HSF1 to the promoter of several target genes, including BAG3, HSPA1A, 
HSPA1B, FKBP4, STIP1 and UBB. Cell treatment with PDTC increased significantly
the level of Hsp90a thiol oxidation, a posttranslational modification known to
inhibit its chaperone function. These results unravel a previously unrecognized
mechanism by which PDTC and related compounds could confer cellular protection
against inflammation through HSF1-induced expression of heat shock response
genes.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2950225
PMID: 20692357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 29;5(7):e11850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011850.

The identification of protein kinase C iota as a regulator of the Mammalian heat 
shock response using functional genomic screens.

Boellmann F(1), Thomas RS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Biology and Bioinformatics, The Hamner Institutes for
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: The heat shock response is widely used as a surrogate of the general 
protein quality control system within the cell. This system plays a significant
role in aging and many protein folding diseases as well as the responses to other
physical and chemical stressors.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, a broad-based functional genomics
approach was taken to identify potential regulators of the mammalian heat shock
response. In the primary screen, a total of 13724 full-length genes in mammalian 
expression vectors were individually co-transfected into human embryonic kidney
cells together with a human HSP70B promoter driving firefly luciferase. A subset 
of the full-length genes that showed significant activation in the primary screen
were then evaluated for their ability to hyper-activate the HSP70B under heat
shock conditions. Based on the results from the secondary assay and gene
expression microarray analyses, eight genes were chosen for validation using
siRNA knockdown. Of the eight genes, only PRKCI showed a statistically
significant reduction in the heat shock response in two independent siRNA
duplexes compared to scrambled controls. Knockdown of the PRKCI mRNA was
confirmed using quantitative RT-PCR. Additional studies did not show a direct
physical interaction between PRKCI and HSF1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The results suggest that PRKCI is an indirect
co-regulator of HSF1 activity and the heat shock response. Given the underlying
role of HSF1 in many human diseases and the response to environmental stressors, 
PRKCI represents a potentially new candidate for gene-environment interactions
and therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2912283
PMID: 20686607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2011 Jan;16(1):1-14. doi: 10.1007/s12192-010-0215-9. Epub
2010 Aug 2.

Decarbonylated cyclophilin A Cpr1 protein protects Saccharomyces cerevisiae
KNU5377Y when exposed to stress induced by menadione.

Kim IS(1), Jin I, Yoon HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 702-701,
Republic of Korea. 92kis@hanmail.net

Cyclophilins are conserved cis-trans peptidyl-prolyl isomerase that are
implicated in protein folding and function as molecular chaperones. The
accumulation of Cpr1 protein to menadione in Saccharomyces cerevisiae KNU5377Y
suggests a possibility that this protein may participate in the mechanism of
stress tolerance. Stress response of S. cerevisiae KNU5377Y cpr1<U+0394> mutant strain
was investigated in the presence of menadione (MD). The growth ability of the
strain was confirmed in an oxidant-supplemented medium, and a relationship was
established between diminishing levels of cell rescue enzymes and MD sensitivity.
The results demonstrate the significant effect of CPR1 disruption in the cellular
growth rate, cell viability and morphology, and redox state in the presence of MD
and suggest the possible role of Cpr1p in acquiring sensitivity to MD and its
physiological role in cellular stress tolerance. The in vivo importance of Cpr1p 
for antioxidant-mediated reactive oxygen species (ROS) neutralization and
chaperone-mediated protein folding was confirmed by analyzing the expression
changes of a variety of cell rescue proteins in a CPR1-disrupted strain. The
cpr1<U+0394> to the exogenous MD showed reduced expression level of antioxidant enzymes,
molecular chaperones, and metabolic enzymes such as nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)- or adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-generating
systems. More importantly, it was shown that cpr1<U+0394> mutant caused imbalance in the
cellular redox homeostasis and increased ROS levels in the cytosol as well as
mitochondria and elevated iron concentrations. As a result of excess ROS
production, the cpr1<U+0394> mutant provoked an increase in oxidative damage and a
reduction in antioxidant activity and free radical scavenger ability. However,
there was no difference in the stress responses between the wild-type and the
cpr1<U+0394> mutant strains derived from S. cerevisiae BY4741 as a control strain under 
the same stress. Unlike BY4741, KNU5377Y Cpr1 protein was decarbonylated during
MD stress. Decarbonylation of Cpr1 protein in KNU5377Y strain seems to be caused 
by a rapid and efficient gene expression program via stress response factors
Hsf1, Yap1, and Msn2. Hence, the decarbonylated Cpr1 protein may be critical in
cellular redox homeostasis and may be a potential chaperone to menadione.

PMCID: PMC3024093
PMID: 20680535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Int J Hyperthermia. 2010;26(7):681-5. doi: 10.3109/02656736.2010.490254.

Heat shock proteins in breast cancer progression--a suitable case for treatment?

Calderwood SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu

Heat shock proteins (HSP) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), key factors in the heat
shock response (HSR) have been implicated in the etiology of breast cancer. At
least two members of the HSP family, Hsp27 and Hsp70 undergo significant
increases in cellular concentration during the transformation of mammary cells.
These changes result in HSP-mediated inhibition of tumour cell inactivation
through blockade of the apoptosis and replicative senescence pathways. The
increases in HSP thus mediate two of the common hallmarks of cancer and favour
cell birth over cell death. In addition, Hsp90 plays a role in facilitating
transformation by stabilising the mutated and over-expressed oncoproteins found
in breast tumours, and permitting the activation of growth stimulatory and
transforming pathways in the absence of growth factors. HSF1 appears to play a
similar role as a facilitator of transformation in mammary carcinoma. Induction
of some facets of the HSR in breast cancer cells therefore leads to growth
stimulation and inhibits cell death. Pharmacological targeting of HSP and HSF1 is
therefore indicated and in the case of Hsp90, inhibitory drugs are undergoing
clinical trial for treatment of breast carcinoma and other cancers.

PMCID: PMC3123897
PMID: 20653417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Endocrinology. 2010 Sep;151(9):4455-66. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0323. Epub 2010 Jul 
14.

Involvement of RAGE, NADPH oxidase, and Ras/Raf-1 pathway in glycated LDL-induced
expression of heat shock factor-1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in
vascular endothelial cells.

Sangle GV(1), Zhao R, Mizuno TM, Shen GX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada
R3E 3P4.

Atherothrombotic cardiovascular diseases are the predominant causes of mortality 
of diabetic patients. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is the major
physiological inhibitor for fibrinolysis, and it is also implicated in
inflammation and tissue remodeling. Increased levels of PAI-1 and glycated
low-density lipoprotein (glyLDL) were detected in patients with diabetes.
Previous studies in our laboratory demonstrated that heat shock factor-1 (HSF1)
is involved in glyLDL-induced PAI-1 overproduction in vascular endothelial cells 
(EC). The present study investigated transmembrane signaling mechanisms involved 
in glyLDL-induced HSF1 and PAI-1 up-regulation in cultured human vascular EC and 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Receptor for advanced glycation end
products (RAGE) antibody prevented glyLDL-induced increase in the abundance of
PAI-1 in EC. GlyLDL significantly increased the translocation of V-Ha-Ras Harvey 
rat sarcoma viral oncogene homologue (H-Ras) from cytoplasm to membrane compared 
with LDL. Farnesyltransferase inhibitor-277 or small interference RNA against
H-Ras inhibited glyLDL-induced increases in HSF1 and PAI-1 in EC. Treatment with 
diphenyleneiodonium, a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase (NOX) 
inhibitor, blocked glyLDL-induced translocation of H-Ras, elevated abundances of 
HSF1 and PAI-1 in EC, and increased release of hydrogen peroxide from EC. Small
interference RNA for p22(phox) prevented glyLDL-induced expression of NOX2, HSF1,
and PAI-1 in EC. GlyLDL significantly increased V-raf-1 murine leukemia viral
oncogene homolog 1 (Raf-1) phosphorylation. Treatment with Raf-1 inhibitor
blocked glyLDL-induced increase of PAI-1 mRNA in EC. The levels of RAGE, H-Ras,
NOX4, HSF1, and PAI-1 were increased in hearts of streptozotocin-diabetic mice
and positively correlated with plasma glucose. The results suggest that RAGE,
NOX, and H-Ras/Raf-1 are implicated in the up-regulation of HSF1 or PAI-1 in
vascular EC under diabetes-associated metabolic stress.

PMID: 20630999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 16;29(37):5204-13. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.277. Epub 2010 Jul
12.

Heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 has a critical role in human epidermal
growth factor receptor-2-induced cellular transformation and tumorigenesis.

Meng L(1), Gabai VL, Sherman MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.

The heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 was recently shown to have a key role in
the development of tumors associated with activation of Ras or inactivation of
p53. Here, we show that HSF1 is required for the cell transformation and
tumorigenesis induced by the human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2)
oncogene responsible for aggressive breast tumors. Upon expression of HER2,
untransformed human mammary epithelial MCF-10A cells underwent neoplastic
transformation, formed foci in culture and tumors in nude mouse xenografts.
However, expression of HER2 in MCF-10A cells with knockdown of HSF1 did not cause
either foci formation or tumor growth in xenografts. The antitumorigenic effect
of downregulation of HSF1 was associated with HER2-induced accumulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 and decrease in the mitotic regulator
survivin, which resulted in growth inhibition and cell senescence. In fact,
either knockout of p21 or overexpression of survivin alleviated these effects of 
HSF1 knockdown. The proliferation of certain human HER2-positive breast cancer
lines also requires HSF1, as its knockdown led to upregulation of p21 and/or
decrease in survivin, precipitating growth arrest. Similar effects were observed 
with a small-molecular-weight inhibitor of the heat-shock response NZ28. The
effects of HSF1 knockdown on the growth arrest and senescence of HER2-expressing 
cells were associated with downregulation of heat-shock protein (Hsp)72 and
Hsp27. Therefore, HSF1 is critical for proliferation of HER2-expressing cells,
most likely because it maintains the levels of HSPs, which in turn control
regulators of senescence p21 and survivin.

PMCID: PMC2940982
PMID: 20622894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;42(10):1698-707. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.06.024. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

The inhibition of CMV promoter by heat shock factor 4b is regulated by Daxx.

Zhang J(1), Hu YZ, Xueli L, Li S, Wang M, Kong X, Li T, Shen P, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Henan University School
of Medicine, Kaifeng, China.

Heat shock factor 4 (Hsf4b) has been identified as a novel cataractogenic protein
whose mutation has been closely associated with hereditary cataracts in humans
and animals. It acts both as a transcription activator and a transcription
inhibitor in the regulation of its downstream targets during lens development.
However, the signaling factors that regulate Hsf4b transcription activity are
still not completely defined. Here, we found that Hsf4b, not Hsf4a (another
isoform of Hsf4), acts as the inhibitor of CMV promoter as well as the activator 
of Hsp25 in the Hsf4-/- mouse lens epithelial cell line (mLEC/hsf4-/-). Hsf4b
inhibits CMV-promoter activity by directly binding to TTCC (HSE motif) at
173-176bps in the CMV promoter. The phosphorylation of Hsf4b/S299 in the PDSM
motif, which is absent in Hsf4a, participates in the negative regulation of the
CMV promoter. The transcriptional inhibition of Hsf4b is associated with
transcriptional inhibitor Daxx. Hsf4b can interact and co-localize with Daxx in
the nucleus, and their association is regulated by the phosphorylation of
Hsf4b/S299. In addition, we found that Hsf4a and Hsf1 were also associated with
Daxx. However, in contrast to activating Hsf1, Daxx can repress Hsf4b-induced
expression of Hsp25 in the mLEC/hsf4-/- cell line. Our results demonstrate that
the transcription-inhibitory function of Hsf4b is regulated by the
phosphorylation of Hsf4b/S299 and phosphorylation-dependent association with
Daxx.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20620219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 20;285(34):26058-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.100271. Epub
2010 Jun 21.

p27 suppresses arsenite-induced Hsp27/Hsp70 expression through inhibiting
JNK2/c-Jun- and HSF-1-dependent pathways.

Liu J(1), Zhang D, Mi X, Xia Q, Yu Y, Zuo Z, Guo W, Zhao X, Cao J, Yang Q, Zhu A,
Yang W, Shi X, Li J, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, Tuxedo, New York 10987, USA.

p27 is an atypical tumor suppressor that can regulate the activity of
cyclin-dependent kinases and G(0)-to-S phase transitions. More recent studies
reveal that p27 may also exhibit its tumor-suppressive function through
regulating many other essential cellular events. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying these anticancer effects of p27 are largely unknown. In
this study, we found that depletion of p27 expression by either gene knock-out or
knockdown approaches resulted in up-regulation of both Hsp27 and Hsp70 expression
at mRNA- and promoter-derived transcription as well as protein levels upon
arsenite exposure, indicating that p27 provides a negative signal for regulating 
the expression of Hsp27 and Hsp70. Consistently, arsenite-induced activation of
JNK2/c-Jun and HSF-1 pathways was also markedly elevated in p27 knock-out
(p27(-/-)) and knockdown (p27 shRNA) cells. Moreover, interference with the
expression or function of JNK2, c-Jun, and HSF-1, but not JNK1, led to dramatic
inhibition of arsenite-induced Hsp27 and Hsp70 expression. Collectively, our
results demonstrate that p27 suppresses Hsp27 and Hsp70 expression at the
transcriptional level specifically through JNK2/c-Jun- and HSF-1-dependent
pathways upon arsenite exposure, which provides additional important molecular
mechanisms for the tumor-suppressive function of p27.

PMCID: PMC2924005
PMID: 20566634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochemistry. 2010 Jul 27;49(29):6263-75. doi: 10.1021/bi100517x.

Mechanisms of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal induced pro- and anti-apoptotic signaling.

Chaudhary P(1), Sharma R, Sharma A, Vatsyayan R, Yadav S, Singhal SS, Rauniyar N,
Prokai L, Awasthi S, Awasthi YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas
Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas 76107, USA.

In recent years, 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE) has emerged as an important second
messenger in cell cycle signaling. Here, we demonstrate that 4-HNE induces
signaling for apoptosis via both the Fas-mediated extrinsic and the p53-mediated 
intrinsic pathways in HepG2 cells. 4-HNE induces a Fas-mediated DISC independent 
apoptosis pathway by activating ASK1, JNK, and caspase-3. Parallel treatment of
4-HNE to HepG2 cells also induces apoptosis by the p53 pathway through activation
of Bax, p21, JNK, and caspase-3. Exposure of HepG2 cells to 4-HNE leads to the
activation of both Fas and Daxx, promotes the export of Daxx from the nucleus to 
cytoplasm, and facilitates Fas-Daxx binding. Depletion of Daxx by siRNA results
in the potentiation of apoptosis, indicating that Fas-Daxx binding in fact is
inhibitory to Fas-mediated apoptosis in cells. 4-HNE-induced translocation of
Daxx is also accompanied by the activation and nuclear accumulation of HSF1 and
up-regulation of heat shock protein Hsp70. All these effects of 4-HNE in cells
can be attenuated by ectopic expression of hGSTA4-4, the isozyme of glutathione
S-transferase with high activity for 4-HNE. Through immunoprecipitation and
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, we have demonstrated the covalent
binding of 4-HNE to Daxx. We also demonstrate that 4-HNE modification induces
phosphorylation of Daxx at Ser668 and Ser671 to facilitate its cytoplasmic
export. These results indicate that while 4-HNE exhibits toxicity through several
mechanisms, in parallel it evokes signaling for defense mechanisms to
self-regulate its toxicity and can simultaneously affect multiple signaling
pathways through its interactions with membrane receptors and transcription
factors/repressors.

PMCID: PMC2957295
PMID: 20565132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Dec;67(23):4035-48. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0430-7. Epub 
2010 Jun 18.

Co-chaperones are limiting in a depleted chaperone network.

Heldens L(1), Dirks RP, Hensen SM, Onnekink C, van Genesen ST, Rustenburg F,
Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry 271, Radboud University Nijmegen, P.O.
Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

To probe the limiting nodes in the chaperoning network which maintains cellular
proteostasis, we expressed a dominant negative mutant of heat shock factor 1
(dnHSF1), the regulator of the cytoplasmic proteotoxic stress response.
Microarray analysis of non-stressed dnHSF1 cells showed a two- or more fold
decrease in the transcript level of 10 genes, amongst which are the
(co-)chaperone genes HSP90AA1, HSPA6, DNAJB1 and HSPB1. Glucocorticoid signaling,
which requires the Hsp70 and the Hsp90 folding machines, was severely impaired by
dnHSF1, but fully rescued by expression of DNAJA1 or DNAJB1, and partially by
ST13. Expression of DNAJB6, DNAJB8, HSPA1A, HSPB1, HSPB8, or STIP1 had no effect 
while HSP90AA1 even inhibited. PTGES3 (p23) inhibited only in control cells. Our 
results suggest that the DNAJ co-chaperones in particular become limiting in a
depleted chaperoning network. Our results also suggest a difference between the
transcriptomes of cells lacking HSF1 and cells expressing dnHSF1.

PMCID: PMC2981734
PMID: 20556630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(15):e154. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq529. Epub 2010 Jun
11.

Knocking down gene function with an RNA aptamer expressed as part of an intron.

Wang S(1), Zhao X, Suran R, Vogt VM, Lis JT, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Albany, State University of
New York, Albany, NY 12222, USA.

We developed a powerful expression system to produce aptamers and other types of 
functional RNA in yeast to examine their effects. Utilizing the intron homing
process, the aptamer-coding sequences were integrated into hundreds of rRNA
genes, and the aptamers were transcribed at high levels by RNA polymerase I
without any additional promoter being introduced into the cell. We used this
system to express an aptamer against the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a conserved 
transcription factor responsible for mobilizing specific genomic expression
programs in response to stressful conditions such as elevated temperature. We
observed a temperature sensitive growth retardation phenotype and specific
decrease of heat shock gene expression. As HSF1 enables and promotes malignant
growth and metastasis in mammals, and this aptamer binds yeast HSF1 and its
mammalian ortholog with equal affinity, the results presented here attest to the 
potential of this aptamer as a specific and effective inhibitor of HSF1 activity.

PMCID: PMC2926621
PMID: 20542918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2010 Jun;2(6):a000695. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a000695. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Nuclear stress bodies.

Biamonti G(1), Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via
Abbiategrasso 207, Pavia, Italy. biamonti@igm.cnr.it

Nuclear stress bodies (nSBs) are unique subnuclear organelles which form in
response to heat shock. They are initiated through a direct interaction between
heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and pericentric tandem repeats of
satellite III sequences and correspond to active transcription sites for
noncoding satellite III transcripts. Given their unusual features, nSBs are
distinct from other known transcription sites. In stressed cells, they are
thought to participate in rapid, transient, and global reprogramming of gene
expression through different types of mechanisms including chromatin remodeling
and trapping of transcription and splicing factors. The analysis of these
atypical and intriguing structures uncovers new facets of the relationship
between nuclear organization and nuclear function.

PMCID: PMC2869524
PMID: 20516127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2010 Jun 1;2:1068-80.

Genomics and proteomics of heat acclimation.

Horowitz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Physiology, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem,
Israel.

Plasticity of the thermoregulatory system is a key factor for the induction of
heat acclimation. Temperature-adaptive shifts in gene expression play an
essential role in the processes involved. This review attempts to bridge the gap 
between the classical physiological heat acclimation profile and the
molecular/cellular mechanisms underlying the evolution of the acclimated
phenotype. Essential acclimatory modifications linked with thermal tolerance are 
(i) neuronal plasticity (ii) cytoprotection. Leftward and rightward threshold
shifts in these respective functional categories expand the dynamic
thermoregulatory range of the acclimated phenotype. Neural plasticity depends on 
changes in hypothalamic warm/cold sensitive neuron ratio and excitability. Over
the course of acclimation, there is marked upregulation of transcripts encoding
voltage dependent K+ and Ca2+ channels, neurotransmitters and/or their receptors.
Temperature threshold for thermal injury is associated with progressive
enhancement of inducible cytoprotective networks including the essential
acclimatory components HSP70, HSF1 and HIF-1. Via cross-tolerance, achieved
through shared on-call cytoprotective networks, acclimation also renders
protection against novel stressors. Collectively, heat acclimation is a within
life evolutionarily beneficial phenomenon with a memory, imprinted via epigenetic
mechanisms.

PMID: 20515841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 22;29(29):4216-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.171. Epub 2010 May
24.

Roles of heat shock factor 1 and 2 in response to proteasome inhibition:
consequence on p53 stability.

Lecomte S(1), Desmots F, Le Masson F, Le Goff P, Michel D, Christians ES, Le
Dréan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Homéostasie Intracellulaire des Protéines, UMR CNRS 6026, Interactions
Cellulaires et Moléculaires, IFR 140-Génomique Fonctionnelle Agronomie et Santé-,
Université de Rennes1, Rennes, France.

A single heat shock factor (HSF), mediating the heat shock response, exists from 
yeast to Drosophila, whereas several related HSFs have been found in mammals.
This raises the question of the specific or redundant functions of the different 
members of the HSF family and in particular of HSF1 and HSF2, which are both
ubiquitously expressed. Using immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (iMEFs)
derived from wild-type, Hsf1(-/-), Hsf2(-/-) or double-mutant mice, we observed
the distinctive behaviors of these mutants with respect to proteasome inhibition.
This proteotoxic stress reduces to the same extent the viability of Hsf1(-/-)-
and Hsf2(-/-)-deficient cells, but through different underlying mechanisms.
Contrary to Hsf2(-/-) cells, Hsf1(-/-) cells are unable to induce pro-survival
heat shock protein expression. Conversely, proteasome activity is lower in
Hsf2(-/-) cells and the expression of some proteasome subunits, such as Psmb5 and
gankyrin, is decreased. As gankyrin is an oncoprotein involved in p53
degradation, we analyzed the status of p53 in HSF-deficient iMEFs and observed
that it was strongly stabilized in Hsf2(-/-) cells. This study points a new role 
for HSF2 in the regulation of protein degradation and suggests that pan-HSF
inhibitors could be valuable tools to reduce chemoresistance to proteasome
inhibition observed in cancer therapy.

PMID: 20498630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Transl Med. 2010 May 6;8:44. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-8-44.

HSF1 overexpression enhances oncolytic effect of replicative adenovirus.

Wang C(1), Dai Z, Fan R, Deng Y, Lv G, Lu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University,
Changsha, China.

BACKGROUND: E1B55kD deleted oncolytic adenovirus was designed to achieve
cancer-specific cytotoxicity, but showed limitations in clinical study. To find a
method to increase its efficacy, we investigated the correlation between
oncolytic effect of such oncolytic adenovirus Adel55 and intracellular heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) activity.
METHODS: In the present study, human breast cancer cell line Bcap37 was stably
transfected with constitutively active HSF1 (cHSF1) or HSF1 specific siRNA
(HSF1i) to establish increased or decreased HSF1 expression levels. Cytotoxicity 
of Adel55 was analyzed in these cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore,
Adel55 incorporated with cHSF1 (Adel55-cHSF1) was used to treat various tumor
xenografts.
RESULTS: Adel55 could achieve more efficient oncolysis in cHSF1 transfected
Bcap37 cells, both in vitro and in vivo. However, inhibition of HSF1 expression
by HSF1i could rescue Bcap37 cell line from oncolysis by Adel55. A time course
study of viral replication established a correlation between higher replication
of Adel55 and cytolysis or tumor growth inhibition. Then, we constructed
Adel55-cHSF1 for tumor gene therapy and demonstrated that it is more potent than 
Adel55 itself in oncolysis and replication in both Bcap37 and SW620 xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS: cHSF1 enhances the Adel55 cell-killing potential through increasing 
the viral replication and is a potential therapeutic implication to augment the
potential of E1B55kD deleted oncolytic adenovirus by increasing its burst.

PMCID: PMC2877000
PMID: 20459615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Curr Genet. 2010 Aug;56(4):383-9. doi: 10.1007/s00294-010-0304-4. Epub 2010 May
7.

An inducible artificial microRNA system for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii confirms a 
key role for heat shock factor 1 in regulating thermotolerance.

Schmollinger S(1), Strenkert D, Schroda M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.

Several RNA silencing strategies employing antisense or inverted repeat
constructs have been applied to Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Problems inherent to
these strategies, like off-target effects by unpredictable generation of siRNAs, 
were solved previously by constructs allowing for routine expression of specific 
artificial microRNAs (amiRNAs). Yet missing was a routine tool for inducible
amiRNA expression, which to establish was the aim of this work. For this, we
equipped a recently developed amiRNA expression vector with the NIT1 promoter,
which is repressed by ammonium and activated by nitrate. We tested this
conditional amiRNA vector with heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) as target. HSF1
transcripts in transformants were already reduced ~2 h after transfer from
ammonium to nitrate-containing medium. In contrast, HSF1 protein levels declined 
only ~8 h after the shift and were strongly reduced after 24 h, suggesting that
HSF1 is a stable protein and diluted out by growth. HSF1 levels recovered partly 
when transformant cells were shifted back to ammonium for 72 h. Transformants
developed thermosensitivity only on nitrate and thermosensitivity correlated with
strong reduction in HSF1 levels, hence supporting our earlier conclusion that
HSF1 is a key regulator for thermotolerance in Chlamydomonas.

PMID: 20449593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Bacteriol. 2010 Jul;192(13):3294-303. doi: 10.1128/JB.00155-10. Epub 2010 Apr
30.

Functional characterization of a phospholipase A(2) homolog from Rickettsia
typhi.

Rahman MS(1), Ammerman NC, Sears KT, Ceraul SM, Azad AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, 685 West Baltimore Street, Room HSF1-380, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
mrahm001@umaryland.edu

Phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)) has long been proposed to be involved in rickettsial 
entry into host cells, escape from the phagosome to evade destruction by
lysosomal exposure, and lysis of the host cells. However, the corresponding
rickettsial gene(s) encoding a protein with PLA(2) activity has not been
identified or functionally characterized. Here, we report that the Rickettsia
typhi genome possesses two genes encoding patatin-like PLA(2) proteins, RT0590
and RT0522. Sequence analysis of RT0522 and RT0590 reveals the presence of the
conserved motifs essential for PLA(2) activity. Transcriptional analysis
indicates that RT0522, but not RT0590, is transcribed at all stages of
intracellular growth of R. typhi in Vero cells. The differential gene expression 
pattern of RT0522 at various stages of growth suggests its potential role during 
R. typhi infection of host cells. In silico, RT0522 is predicted to be
noncytoplasmic and its gene does not encode a recognizable signal peptide
sequence. However, our data indicate that RT0522 is secreted into the host
cytoplasm. In addition, we observe that RT0522 protein expression is cytotoxic to
both yeast and Vero cells. Importantly, we demonstrate that recombinant RT0522
possesses phospholipase A activity that requires a eukaryotic host cofactor for
activation. Both cytotoxicity and phospholipase A activity associated with RT0522
were reduced by PLA(2) inhibitors. Site-directed mutagenesis of predicted
catalytic Ser/Asp residues of RT0522 also eliminates cytotoxicity and
phospholipase A activity. To our knowledge, RT0522 is the first protein
identified from Rickettsia typhi with functional phospholipase A activity.

PMCID: PMC2897650
PMID: 20435729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Food Chem Toxicol. 2010 Jul;48(7):1913-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2010.04.033. Epub
2010 Apr 27.

Riboflavin protects mice against liposaccharide-induced shock through expression 
of heat shock protein 25.

Shih CK(1), Chen CM, Chen CY, Liu JF, Lin HW, Chou HT, Li SC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nutrition and Health Sciences, Taipei Medical University, Taipei
110, Taiwan, ROC.

Riboflavin (vitamin B2) is a water-soluble vitamin essential for normal cellular 
functions, growth and development. This study aimed to investigate the effects of
vitamin B2 on the survival rate, and expressions of tissue heat shock protein 25 
(HSP25) and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in mice undergoing lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) induced shock. Mice were assigned to four groups, saline vehicle, LPS, LPS 
plus low dose of vitamin B2 (LB2) and LPS plus high dose of vitamin B2 (HB2).
Vitamin B2 (1 and 10mg/kg BW) was administered intraperitoneally at 2 and 0 h
before the i.p. administration of LPS. At the end of the experiment, the survival
rate monitored was 10, 20, 60, and 100% for LPS, LB2, HB2, and saline mice,
respectively. HSP25 expressions in the heart and lung were significantly enhanced
in a time-dependent manner in the HB2 mice as compared to the saline mice (p <
0.05), but not altered in the LB2 mice. In the HB2 mice, plasma riboflavin
concentrations reached 300 nM at 6h post LPS and returned to the 0 h level at 72 
h. The results showed that high dose of riboflavin could decrease LPS-induced
mortality through an increased expression of HSP25.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20430062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Exp Lung Res. 2010 May;36(4):219-26. doi: 10.3109/01902140903349562.

Reduced heat shock protein 70 in airway smooth muscle in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Xie J(1), Zhao J, Xiao C, Xu Y, Yang S, Ni W.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Respiratory Medicine, Tongji Hospital Affiliated to Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, PR 
China. xiejjgg@hotmail.com

Studies demonstrated that pathophysiological abnormalities of airway smooth
muscle (ASM) contribute significantly to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) pathogenesis, the aim of this study is to investigate heat shock protein
70 (Hsp70) in ASM in COPD. ASM from 8 COPD patients and 6 controls were isolated 
for detection of Hsp70 using Western blot. Male adult Wister rats were exposed to
mixture of cigarette smoke/air or room air for an indicated period. The lung
tissues were obtained for pathological analysis, and ASM were dissected for Hsp70
detection. Normalized Hsp70 in ASM from COPD patients was significantly lower
than that from controls (P <.001), and it was a significant positive correlation 
of Hsp70 and lung function. One-month exposure of rats to cigarette smoke/air
mixture led to increased expression of Hsp70 and heat shock transcription factor 
(Hsf1) in ASM as compared to controls, whereas 3-month exposure caused
dramatically reduced Hsp70 and Hsf1 than control animals. In addition, 3-month
exposure to cigarette smoke/air mixture resulted in significantly lower Hsp70 and
Hsf1 in rats ASM than 1-month exposure (P <.001), and it was a positive
correlation of Hsf1 and Hsp70. Long-term cigarette smoking results in reduced
expression of Hsp70 in ASM. This finding provides additional insight in
understanding molecular changes in ASM during COPD pathogenesis.

PMID: 20426530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 13;5(4):e10158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010158.

Manipulating heat shock factor-1 in Xenopus tadpoles: neuronal tissues are
refractory to exogenous expression.

Dirks RP(1), van Geel R, Hensen SM, van Genesen ST, Lubsen NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The aging related decline of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) signaling may
be causally related to protein aggregation diseases. To model such disease, we
tried to cripple HSF1 signaling in the Xenopus tadpole.
RESULTS: Over-expression of heat shock factor binding protein-1 did not inhibit
the heat shock response in Xenopus. RNAi against HSF1 mRNA inhibited the heat
shock response by 70% in Xenopus A6 cells, but failed in transgenic tadpoles.
Expression of XHSF380, a dominant-negative HSF1 mutant, was embryonic lethal,
which could be circumvented by delaying expression via a tetracycline inducible
promoter. HSF1 signaling is thus essential for embryonic Xenopus development.
Surprisingly, transgenic expression of the XHSF380 or of full length HSF1,
whether driven by a ubiquitous or a neural specific promoter, was not detectable 
in the larval brain.
CONCLUSIONS: Our finding that the majority of neurons, which have little
endogenous HSF1, refused to accept transgene-driven expression of HSF1 or its
mutant suggests that HSF1 levels are strictly controlled in neuronal tissue.

PMCID: PMC2854154
PMID: 20405018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Reprod Domest Anim. 2011 Feb;46(1):e23-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2010.01617.x.

Expression of maternal transcripts during bovine oocyte in vitro maturation is
affected by donor age.

Romar R(1), De Santis T, Papillier P, Perreau C, Thélie A, Dell'Aquila ME,
Mermillod P, Dalbiès-Tran R.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Science, Department of Physiology, University of Murcia,
Murcia, Spain. rromar@um.es

The primary objective of this study was to compare expression of maternal
transcripts in bovine oocyte populations with differential developmental
competence: oocytes from prepubertal and pubertal animals; and oocytes from small
(3-4 mm) and large (6-10 mm) follicles from pubertal animals. All transcripts
were examined in oocytes prior to and after in vitro maturation (IVM). Genes were
selected based on their known maternal effect in mouse (ZAR1, STELLA, HSF1,
MATER/NLRP5 and its paralogue NLRP9), or their identification as markers of
oocyte maturation, either involved in redox metabolism (PRDX1, PRDX2) or meiotic 
progression (AURKA). Total or polyadenylated forms of the transcripts were
followed by reverse transcription coupled to real-time PCR. Six polyadenylated
transcripts were found significantly reduced after maturation irrespective of
donor age or follicle diameter (p<0.05). Within these six polyadenylated
transcripts, ZAR1, NLRP9, HSF1, PRDX1 and PRDX2 were significantly reduced in
oocytes from prepubertal animals compared to adult animals (p<0.05). A younger
age was also associated with lower abundance (total form) of PRDX2/PRDX1
irrespective of maturation. Total HSF1, PRDX1 and polyadenylated NLRP9 showed a
tendency (p values from 0.053 to 0.08) for a higher detection in oocytes from
small follicles, thus encouraging further investigation of the follicle diameter 
model. However, at the present time, follicle size did not significantly affect
expression of transcripts examined. In conclusion, this study demonstrates
differences in the maternal store of RNA and its regulation during IVM which is
dependent on donor age.

© 2010 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 20403124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Microbiol. 2010 May;76(4):1049-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07167.x.
Epub 2010 Apr 14.

The Rpd3L HDAC complex is essential for the heat stress response in yeast.

Ruiz-Roig C(1), Viéitez C, Posas F, de Nadal E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Unit, Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

To ensure cell survival and growth during temperature increase, eukaryotic
organisms respond with transcriptional activation that results in accumulation of
proteins that protect against damage and facilitate recovery. To define the
global cellular adaptation response to heat stress, we performed a systematic
genetic screen that yielded 277 yeast genes required for growth at high
temperature. Of these, the Rpd3 histone deacetylase complex was enriched. Global 
gene expression analysis showed that Rpd3 partially regulated gene expression
upon heat shock. The Hsf1 and Msn2/4 transcription factors are the main
regulators of gene activation in response to heat stress. RPD3-deficient cells
had impaired activation of Msn2/4-dependent genes, while activation of genes
controlled by Hsf1 was deacetylase-independent. Rpd3 bound to heat
stress-dependent promoters through the Msn2/4 transcription factors, allowing
entry of RNA Pol II and activation of transcription upon stress. Finally, we
found that the large, but not the small Rpd3 complex regulated cell adaptation in
response to heat stress.

PMID: 20398213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cells. 2010 May;29(5):527-31. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0065-4. Epub 2010 Apr
12.

Heat shock factor 1 is a transcription factor of Fas gene.

Shunmei E(1), Zhao Y, Huang Y, Lai K, Chen C, Zeng J, Zou J.

Author information: 
(1)The Tradition Chinese Hospital of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, 510120,
China.

In mammalian cells, stress-induced expression of heat shock protein is controlled
by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). However, HSF1 functions as a regulator of
additional genes. In this study, we observed that heat treatment effectively
induced expression of Fas. Using bioinformatics, a high affinity and functional
HSF1-binding element within the -1996/-1985 oligonucleotide of the 5'-flanking
region of the Fas gene was found, and was determined by electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Exogenous expression of a
constitutively activative HSF1, induced Fas gene transcription and protein
synthesis in the absence of heat stress. Moreover, RNA interference-mediated HSF1
gene-silencing attenuated Fas expression in a heat-induced model. Our results
suggested that HSF1 is an important transcription factor of Fas gene.

PMID: 20396959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Plant Physiol. 2010 Jun;153(2):773-84. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.151225. Epub 2010 Apr 
13.

Cytosol-localized heat shock factor-binding protein, AtHSBP, functions as a
negative regulator of heat shock response by translocation to the nucleus and is 
required for seed development in Arabidopsis.

Hsu SF(1), Lai HC, Jinn TL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology and Department of Life Science, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

Heat shock response (HSR) is a universal mechanism in all organisms. It is under 
tight regulation by heat shock factors (HSFs) and heat shock proteins (HSPs)
after heat shock (HS) to prevent stress damage. On the attenuation of HSR, HSP70 
and HSF Binding Protein1 (HSBP1) interact with HSF1 and thus dissociate trimeric 
HSF1 into an inert monomeric form in humans. However, little is known about the
effect of HSBP with thermal stress in plants. This report describes our
investigation of the role of AtHSBP in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) by
genetic and molecular approaches. AtHSBP was heat inducible and ubiquitously
expressed in all tissues; AtHSBP was also crucial for seed development, as
demonstrated by AtHSBP-knockout lines showing seed abortion. Thermotolerance
results showed that AtHSBP participates in acquired thermotolerance but not basal
thermotolerance and is a negative regulator of HSR. Subcellular localization
revealed that the cytosol-localized AtHSBP translocated to the nucleus in
response to HS. Protoplast two-hybrid assay results confirmed that AtHSBP
interacts with itself and with the HSFs, AtHSFA1a, AtHSFA1b, and AtHSFA2. AtHSBP 
also negatively affected AtHSFA1b DNA-binding capacity in vitro. Quantitative
polymerase chain reaction and western-blot analysis demonstrated that altered
levels of AtHSBP lead to differential HSP expression, mainly during the recovery 
from HS. These studies provide a new insight into HSBP in plants and reveal that 
AtHSBP is a negative regulator of HSR and required for seed development.

PMCID: PMC2879799
PMID: 20388662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cell Cycle. 2010 Apr 15;9(8):1542-50. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

Targeting HSP70: the second potentially druggable heat shock protein and
molecular chaperone?

Powers MV(1), Jones K, Barillari C, Westwood I, van Montfort RL, Workman P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer
Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

The HSF1-mediated stress response pathway is steadily gaining momentum as a
critical source of targets for cancer therapy. Key mediators of this pathway
include molecular chaperones such as heat shock protein (HSP) 90. There has been 
considerable progress in targeting HSP90 and the preclinical efficacy and signs
of early clinical activity of HSP90 inhibitors have provided proof-of-concept for
targeting this group of proteins. The HSP70 family of molecular chaperones are
also key mediators of the HSF-1-stress response pathway and have multiple
additional roles in protein folding, trafficking and degradation, as well as
regulating apoptosis. Genetic and biochemical studies have supported the
discovery of HSP70 inhibitors which have the potential for use as single agents
or in combination to enhance the effects of classical chemotherapeutic or
molecularly targeted agents including HSP90 inhibitors. Here we provide a
perspective on the progress made so far in designing agents which target the
HSP70 family.

PMID: 20372081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Jun;298(6):H1832-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.01047.2009. Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Role of heat shock factor-1 activation in the doxorubicin-induced heart failure
in mice.

Vedam K(1), Nishijima Y, Druhan LJ, Khan M, Moldovan NI, Zweier JL, Ilangovan G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular medicine, Davis Heart & Lung Research Institute,
Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Treating cancer patients with chemotherapeutics, such as doxorubicin (Dox), cause
dilated cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure because of oxidative stress. 
On the other hand, heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1), a transcription factor for heat
shock proteins (Hsps), is also known to be activated in response to oxidative
stress. However, the possible role of HSF-1 activation and the resultant Hsp25 in
chemotherapeutic-induced heart failure has not been investigated. Using HSF-1
wild-type (HSF-1(+/+)) and knock-out (HSF-1(-/-)) mice, we tested the hypothesis 
that activation of HSF-1 plays a role in the development of Dox-induced heart
failure. Higher levels of Hsp25 and its phosphorylated forms were found in the
failing hearts of Dox-treated HSF-1(+/+) mice. More than twofold increase in
Hsp25 mRNA level was found in Dox-treated hearts. Proteomic analysis showed that 
there is accumulation and aggregation of Hsp25 in Dox-treated failing hearts.
Additionally, Hsp25 was found to coimmunoprecipitate with p53 and vice versa.
Further studies indicated that the Dox-induced higher levels of Hsp25
transactivated p53 leading to higher levels of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax, but
other p53-related proteins remained unaltered. Moreover, HSF-1(-/-) mice showed
significantly reduced Dox-induced heart failure and higher survival rate, and
there was no change in Bax upon treating with Dox in HSF-1(-/-) mice. From these 
results we propose a novel mechanism for Dox-induced heart failure: increased
expression of Hsp25 because of oxidant-induced activation of HSF-1 transactivates
p53 to increase Bax levels, which leads to heart failure.

PMCID: PMC2886633
PMID: 20363884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell Signal. 2010 Aug;22(8):1206-13. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.03.012. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

Stat1 mediates an auto-regulation of hsp90beta gene in heat shock response.

Cheng MB(1), Zhang Y, Zhong X, Sutter B, Cao CY, Chen XS, Cheng XK, Zhang Y, Xiao
L, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

We have reported earlier that a heat shock element in the first intron of human
hsp90beta gene (iHSE) acts as an intronic enhancer to bind the heat shock factor 
(HSF1) and activates hsp90beta gene under heat shock. Here, we show that, in
addition to the HSF1, Stat1 phosphorylation is indispensable in the event. We
show that Jak2, a Janus kinase specifically associated with the beta subunit of
IFNgamma receptor, and PKCepsilon an isoform of the atypical PKC family, are the 
two dominant kinases responsible for the heat shock induced phosphorylation on
Y701 and S727 of Stat1. However, the activation of these kinases under heat shock
requires the association of chaperone proteins of the Hsp90 family, in
particular, the Hsp90beta under heat shock. Furthermore, Brg1, an ATPase subunit 
of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is likely recruited by HSF1 and Stat1
at the iHSE under heat shock. Brg1 further confers an open chromatin conformation
at the promoter region that is pivotal to the heat shock induced fully activation
of the hsp90beta gene in Jurkat cells. This is a novel example of how multiple
activation steps occur under heat shock, first on the kinases and then the Stat1 
and the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex that follows to conduct an
auto-regulation based fully activation of the gene.

PMID: 20353823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Apr 9;394(3):439-42. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.03.050. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

Celastrol: Molecular targets of Thunder God Vine.

Salminen A(1), Lehtonen M, Paimela T, Kaarniranta K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Eastern Finland, P.O. Box 1627, FIN-70211 Kuopio, Finland.
antero.salminen@uef.fi

Celastrol, a quinone methide triterpene, is a pharmacologically active compound
present in Thunder God Vine root extracts used as a remedy of inflammatory and
autoimmune diseases, e.g. rheumatoid arthritis. Celastrol is one of the most
promising medicinal molecules isolated from the plant extracts of traditional
medicines. Molecular studies have identified several molecular targets which are 
mostly centered on the inhibition of IKK-NF-kappaB signaling. Celastrol (i)
inhibits directly the IKKalpha and beta kinases, (ii) inactivates the Cdc37 and
p23 proteins which are co-chaperones of HSP90, (iii) inhibits the function of
proteasomes, and (iv) activates the HSF1 and subsequently triggers the heat shock
response. It seems that the quinone methide structure present in celastrol can
react with the thiol groups of cysteine residues, forming covalent protein
adducts. In laboratory experiments, celastrol has proved to be a potent inhibitor
of inflammatory responses and cancer formation as well as alleviating diseases of
proteostasis deficiency. Celastrol needs still to pass several hurdles, e.g.
ADMET assays, before it can enter the armoury of western drugs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20226165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Acc Chem Res. 2010 May 18;43(5):673-83. doi: 10.1021/ar900286y.

Systems analysis of protein modification and cellular responses induced by
electrophile stress.

Jacobs AT(1), Marnett LJ.

Author information: 
(1)A.B. Hancock Jr. Memorial Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of
Biochemistry, Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, Center in Molecular
Toxicology, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146, USA.

Biological electrophiles result from oxidative metabolism of exogenous compounds 
or endogenous cellular constituents, and they contribute to pathophysiologies
such as toxicity and carcinogenicity. The chemical toxicology of electrophiles is
dominated by covalent addition to intracellular nucleophiles. Reaction with DNA
leads to the production of adducts that block replication or induce mutations.
The chemistry and biology of electrophile-DNA reactions have been extensively
studied, providing in many cases a detailed understanding of the relation between
adduct structure and mutational consequences. By contrast, the linkage between
protein modification and cellular response is poorly understood. In this Account,
we describe our efforts to define the chemistry of protein modification and its
biological consequences using lipid-derived alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehydes as
model electrophiles. In our global approach, two large data sets are analyzed:
one represents the identity of proteins modified over a wide range of
electrophile concentrations, and the second comprises changes in gene expression 
observed under similar conditions. Informatics tools show theoretical connections
based primarily on transcription factors hypothetically shared between the two
data sets, downstream of adducted proteins and upstream of affected genes. This
method highlights potential electrophile-sensitive signaling pathways and
transcriptional processes for further evaluation. Peroxidation of cellular
phospholipids generates a complex mixture of both membrane-bound and diffusible
electrophiles. The latter include reactive species such as malondialdehyde,
4-oxononenal, and 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). Enriching HNE-adducted proteins for
proteomic analysis was a technical challenge, solved with click chemistry that
generated biotin-tagged protein adducts. For this purpose, HNE analogues bearing 
terminal azide or alkyne functionalities were synthesized. Cellular lysates were 
first exposed to a single type of HNE analogue (azido- or alkynyl-HNE), and then 
click reactions were performed against the cognate alkynyl- and azido-biotin
derivative. The resulting biotin-labeled proteins were captured and enriched over
a streptavidin matrix for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. We thereby
identified a multitude of HNE targets. Simultaneous microarray analysis of
changes in gene expression triggered by HNE also produced an abundance of data.
Functional analysis of both data sets generated the hypothesis that an important 
pathway of cellular response derives from electrophile modification of protein
chaperones, resulting in the release of transcription factors that are their
clients. Informatic analysis of the protein modification and microarray data sets
identified several transcription factors as potential mediators of the cellular
response to HNE-adducted proteins. Among these, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) was
confirmed as a sensitive and robust effector of HNE-induced changes in gene
expression. Activation of HSF1 appears, in part, to be mediated by the
electrophilic adduction of Hsp70 and Hsp90, which normally maintain HSF1 in an
inactive cytosolic complex. The identification of HSF1 as a mediator of
biological effects downstream of HSF1 has provided new opportunities for
research, illustrating the potential of our systems-based approach. Accordingly, 
we characterized HSF1-mediated gene expression in protecting against
electrophile-induced toxicity. Among the genes induced by HSF1, Bcl-2- associated
athanogene 3 (BAG3) is notable for its actions in promoting cell survival through
stabilization of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins, appearing to have a critical role 
in mediating cellular protection against electrophile-induced death.

PMCID: PMC2873822
PMID: 20218676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochemistry. 2010 Apr 13;49(14):3191-202. doi: 10.1021/bi100104e.

Role of lipid peroxidation in cellular responses to D,L-sulforaphane, a promising
cancer chemopreventive agent.

Sharma R(1), Sharma A, Chaudhary P, Pearce V, Vatsyayan R, Singh SV, Awasthi S,
Awasthi YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology, University of North Texas
Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas 76107, USA. rsharma@hsc.unt.edu

D,L-sulforaphane (SFN), a synthetic analogue of the broccoli-derived l-isomer, is
a highly promising cancer chemopreventive agent substantiated by inhibition of
chemically induced cancer in rodents and prevention of cancer development and
distant site metastasis in transgenic mouse models of cancer. SFN is also known
to inhibit growth of human cancer cells in association with cell cycle arrest and
reactive oxygen species-dependent apoptosis, but the mechanism of these cellular 
responses to SFN exposure is not fully understood. Because 4-hydroxynonenal
(4-HNE), a product of lipid peroxidation (LPO), the formation of which is
regulated by hGSTA1-1, assumes a pivotal role in oxidative stress-induced signal 
transduction, we investigated its contribution in growth arrest and apoptosis
induction by SFN using HL60 and K562 human leukemic cell lines as a model. The
SFN-induced formation of 4-HNE was suppressed in hGSTA1-1-overexpressing cells,
which also acquired resistance to SFN-induced cytotoxicity, cell cycle arrest,
and apoptosis. While resistance to SFN-induced cell cycle arrest by ectopic
expression of hGSTA1-1 was associated with changes in levels of G2/M regulatory
proteins, resistance to apoptosis correlated with an increased Bcl-xL/Bax ratio, 
inhibition of nuclear translocation of AIF, and attenuated cytochrome c release
in cytosol. The hGSTA1-1-overexpressing cells exhibited enhanced cytoplasmic
export of Daxx, nuclear accumulation of transcription factors Nrf2 and HSF1, and 
upregulation of their respective client proteins, gamma-GCS and HSP70. These
findings not only reveal a central role of 4-HNE in cellular responses to SFN but
also reaffirm that 4-HNE contributes to oxidative stress-mediated signaling.

PMCID: PMC2902186
PMID: 20205397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Proteome Res. 2010 May 7;9(5):2438-49. doi: 10.1021/pr901131p.

Post-translational modifications and protein-specific isoforms in endometriosis
revealed by 2D DIGE.

Stephens AN(1), Hannan NJ, Rainczuk A, Meehan KL, Chen J, Nicholls PK, Rombauts
LJ, Stanton PG, Robertson DM, Salamonsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Monash University, and Monash IVF, Clayton, Victoria, 3168,
Australia. Andrew.Stephens@princehenrys.org

Endometriosis is a chronic disorder affecting approximately 10% of women in whom 
endometrial tissue forms painful lesions outside the uterus. It has a major
impact on their physical, mental and social well-being but has no known cure, and
there is no nonsurgical means of diagnosis. We have used a proteomic approach to 
identify proteins with altered abundance in the eutopic endometrium of
endometriosis patients in the midsecretory phase of the menstrual cycle.
2D-differential in gel electrophoresis (DIGE) and mass spectrometry identified 20
proteins that were present at different levels in endometriosis patients (p <
0.05), many of which have not previously been associated with endometriosis.
Protein abundance changes did not correlate well with published gene array data, 
emphasizing the extensive post-translational modification that occurs in this
tissue. Abundance or localization changes in endometrial tissue were validated by
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting for three proteins, vimentin (VIM),
peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6), and ribonuclease/angiogenin inhibitor 1 (RNH1), while
observed changes could not be confirmed for coronin 1A (CORO1A) or transgelin
(TAGLN2). In addition, multiple charge and size isoforms were observed for PDRX6 
and vimentin (VIM), and an additional PDRX6 isoform was observed in endometriosis
patients that was below the level of detection in healthy women. Biological
pathway analysis identified that cytoskeletal remodeling via keratin intermediate
filaments, processing of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor (CFTR), the
glucocorticoid receptor subunit alpha (GCR), and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) were 
all significantly over-represented features in endometriosis patients. This study
highlights the highly dynamic nature of endometrial tissue and suggests that
considerable post-translational modification of proteins is a key factor in the
pathology of endometriosis.

PMID: 20199104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Oncol. 2010 Apr;36(4):867-72.

The antitumor effect of PLK1 and HSF1 double knockdown on human oral carcinoma
cells.

Kim SA(1), Kwon SM, Yoon JH, Ahn SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dongguk University College of Oriental Medicine,
Gyeongju 780-714, Korea.

High levels of mitotic progression-associated PLK1 and stress-associated HSF1
have been observed in various human cancers. In the present study, we
investigated the effects of PLK1 and HSF1 knockdown on the proliferation of oral 
cancer cells using small interfering RNA. In human oral squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) tissues, the levels of PLK1 and HSF1 were higher compared to normal
tissues. The expression levels of PLK1 and HSF1 were also elevated in the human
oral SCC cell lines FaDu and HEp-2. Disruption of PLK1 induced cell cycle arrest 
at G2/M phase as well as apoptosis in oral cancer cells. Interestingly, knockdown
of both PLK1 and HSF1 expression decreased cell proliferation while increasing
apoptotic cell death in synergistic fashion. These results establish the
potential value of PLK1 and HSF1 as targets for oral cancer therapy.

PMID: 20198330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2010 Jun;156(2):285-93. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2010.02.015. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Celastrol can inhibit proteasome activity and upregulate the expression of heat
shock protein genes, hsp30 and hsp70, in Xenopus laevis A6 cells.

Walcott SE(1), Heikkila JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L
3G1.

In eukaryotes, the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is responsible for the
degradation of most proteins. Proteasome inhibition, which has been associated
with various diseases, can cause alterations in various intracellular processes
including the expression of heat shock protein (hsp) genes. In this study, we
show that celastrol, a quinone methide triterpene and anti-inflammatory agent,
inhibited proteasome activity and enhanced HSP accumulation in Xenopus laevis A6 
kidney epithelial cells. Treatment of cells with celastrol induced the
accumulation of ubiquitinated protein and inhibited chymotrypsin-like activity.
This was accompanied by a dose- and time-dependent accumulation of HSP30 and
HSP70. Celastrol-induced HSP accumulation was mediated by HSF1-DNA binding
activity since this response was inhibited by the HSF1 activation inhibitor,
KNK437. Simultaneous exposure of cells with celastrol plus either mild heat shock
or the proteasome inhibitor, MG132, produced an enhanced accumulation of HSP30
that was greater than the sum of the individual stressors alone.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that celastrol-induced HSP30 accumulation
occurred in the cytoplasm in a granular pattern supplemented with larger circular
HSP30 staining structures. HSP30 was also noted in the nucleus with less staining
in the nucleolus. In some cells, celastrol induced the collapse of the actin
cytoskeleton and conversion to a rounder morphology. In conclusion, this study
has shown that celastrol inhibited proteasome activity and induced HSF1-mediated 
expression of hsp genes in amphibian cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20188206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):13607-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.082693. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

AIRAP, a new human heat shock gene regulated by heat shock factor 1.

Rossi A(1), Trotta E, Brandi R, Arisi I, Coccia M, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, CNR, 00133 Rome, Italy.

Heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) is the central regulator of heat-induced
transcriptional responses leading to rapid expression of molecular chaperones
that protect mammalian cells against proteotoxic stress. The main targets for
HSF1 are specific promoter elements (HSE) located upstream of heat shock genes
encoding a variety of heat shock proteins, including HSP70, HSP90, HSP27, and
other proteins of the network. Herein we report that the zinc finger AN1-type
domain-2a gene, also known as AIRAP, behaves as a canonical heat shock gene,
whose expression is temperature-dependent and strictly controlled by HSF1.
Transcription is triggered at temperatures above 40 degrees C in different types 
of human cancer and primary cells, including peripheral blood monocytes. As shown
by ChIP analysis, HSF1 is recruited to the AIRAP promoter rapidly after heat
treatment, with a kinetics that parallels HSP70 promoter HSF1-recruitment. In
transfection experiments HSF1-silencing abolished heat-induced AIRAP
promoter-driven transcription, which could be rescued by exogenous Flag-HSF1
expression. The HSF1 binding HSE sequence in the AIRAP promoter critical for
heat-induced transcription was identified. Because its expression is induced at
febrile temperatures in human cells, AIRAP may represent a new potential
component of the protective response during fever in humans.

PMCID: PMC2859522
PMID: 20185824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cancer Sci. 2010 May;101(5):1186-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01516.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 28.

Hyperthermia-associated carboplatin resistance: differential role of p53, HSF1
and Hsp70 in hepatoma cells.

Sharma A(1), Meena AS, Bhat MK.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Pune, India.

Due to substantial technical improvements, clinical application of heat as a
co-adjuvant in cancer treatment is acquiring new interest. The effect of
hyperthermia on hepatoma cell lines Hep3B (p53 defective) and HepG2 (p53 wild
type) when investigated led to an interesting observation that Hep3B cells are
more susceptible to heat stress than HepG2 cells. In addition, heat-induced
carboplatin resistance was observed in HepG2 cells only. To investigate the
reasons, heat shock response was explored and it was observed that heat stress
augmented heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) expression levels in HepG2 and not in
Hep3B cells. Furthermore, in HepG2 cells, induced Hsp70 is regulated by both p53 
and heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) wherein HSF1 levels are modulated by
p53. The data implies that Hep3B are more susceptible to death upon heat stress
than HepG2 cells because of non-induction of Hsp70. In addition, it was observed 
that inhibition of heat-induced p53/HSF1 diminishes Hsp70 levels, thereby
restoring the sensitivity of heat-stressed HepG2 cells to carboplatin-triggered
cell death. Collectively, the present study establishes interplay of p53, HSF1,
and Hsp70 upon heat stress in HepG2 cells and also defines novel strategies to
overcome constraints of utility of hyperthermia in cancer therapy through
p53/HSF1-targeted therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 20180806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Carcinogenesis. 2010 May;31(5):820-6. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq042. Epub 2010 Feb
22.

Arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 gene regulation by androgens requires a conserved
heat shock element for heat shock factor-1.

Butcher NJ(1), Minchin RF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072,
Australia. n.butcher@uq.edu.au

Human arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) is a widely distributed protein that
has been implicated in a number of different cancers including breast and
prostate. Previously, NAT1 gene expression was shown to be androgen dependent,
although the effect of androgens was not due to direct activation of the NAT1
promoter. Here, we show that heat shock factor (HSF)1 is induced by androgen in
androgen receptor-positive prostate 22Rv1 cells. It also binds to a heat shock
element (HSE) in the NAT1 promoter located 776 bp upstream of the transcriptional
start site. Mutation of the HSE inhibited androgen responsiveness and prevented
direct upregulation of the NAT1 promoter by HSF1. Although HSF2 also bound to the
HSE, it did not increase promoter activity. HSF1 induced endogenous NAT1 activity
in this cell line in the absence of androgen. This could be attenuated by
pretreating cells with HSF1-directed small interfering RNA but not by a scrambled
sequence. Our results show that HSF1 is an important transcription factor for
induction of NAT1 in human cells and is required for androgen activation of the
NAT1 promoter.

PMID: 20176657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2010 Feb;11(2):188-97.

Induction of molecular chaperones as a therapeutic strategy for the polyglutamine
diseases.

Nagai Y(1), Fujikake N, Popiel HA, Wada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo
187-8502, Japan. nagai@ncnp.go.jp

Protein misfolding and aggregation in the brain have been implicated as a common 
molecular pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases including
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and the 
polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases. The polyQ diseases are a group of nine hereditary
neurodegenerative diseases, including Huntington's disease (HD) and various types
of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), which are caused by abnormal expansions of the
polyQ stretch (> 35-40 repeats) in unrelated disease-causative proteins. The
expanded polyQ stretch is thought to trigger misfolding of these proteins,
leading to their aggregation and accumulation as inclusion bodies in affected
neurons, eventually resulting in neurodegeneration. Misfolding and aggregation of
the polyQ protein are the most ideal therapeutic targets since they are the most 
upstream events in the pathogenic cascade, and therefore, therapeutic approaches 
using molecular chaperones, which prevent protein misfolding and assist the
refolding of misfolded proteins, are being extensively investigated. Indeed, a
variety of molecular chaperones such as Hsp70 and Hsp40 have been demonstrated to
exert therapeutic effects against various experimental models of the polyQ
diseases. Furthermore, toward developing pharmacological therapies, small
chemical activators of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) such as
geldanamycin and its derivative 17-AAG, which induce multiple endogenous
molecular chaperones, have been proven to be effective not only in polyQ disease 
models, but also in other neurodegenerative disease models. We hope that
brain-permeable molecular chaperone inducers will be developed as drugs against a
wide range of neurodegenerative diseases in the near future.

PMID: 20166962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Jul 1;316(11):1845-55. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.02.002. Epub 
2010 Feb 10.

Heat shock factor 1 binds to and transcribes satellite II and III sequences at
several pericentromeric regions in heat-shocked cells.

Eymery A(1), Souchier C, Vourc'h C, Jolly C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Joseph Fourier-Grenoble I, INSERM Institut Albert Bonniot U823, La 
Tronche, F-38700, France. aeymery@gmail.com

Cells respond to stress by activating the synthesis of heat shock proteins (HSPs)
which protect the cells against the deleterious effects of stress. This mechanism
is controlled by the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). In parallel to HSP gene
transcription, in human cells, HSF1 also binds to and transcribes satellite III
repeated sequences present in numerous copies in the 9q12 pericentromeric region 
of chromosome 9. These HSF1 accumulation sites are termed nuclear stress bodies
(nSBs). In tumor cells, however, the number of nSBs is higher than the number of 
9q12 copies, suggesting the existence of other HSF1 targets. In this paper, we
were interested in characterizing these other HSF1 binding sites. We show that
HSF1 indeed binds to the pericentromeric region of 14 chromosomes, thereby
directing the formation of 'secondary nSBs'. The appearance of secondary nSBs
depends on the number of satellite sequences present in the target locus, and on 
the cellular amount of HSF1 protein. Moreover, secondary nSBs also correspond to 
transcription sites, thus demonstrating that heat shock induces a genome-wide
transcription of satellite sequences. Finally, by analyzing published
transcriptomic data, we show that the derepression of these large heterochromatic
blocks does not significantly affect the transcription of neighboring genes.

PMID: 20152833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Chem Biol. 2010 Jan 29;17(1):18-27. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2009.12.012.

ITZ-1, a client-selective Hsp90 inhibitor, efficiently induces heat shock factor 
1 activation.

Kimura H(1), Yukitake H, Tajima Y, Suzuki H, Chikatsu T, Morimoto S, Funabashi Y,
Omae H, Ito T, Yoneda Y, Takizawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda Pharmaceutical, Osaka, Japan.

ITZ-1 is a chondroprotective agent that inhibits interleukin-1beta-induced matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) production and suppresses nitric oxide-induced
chondrocyte death. Here we describe its mechanisms of action. Heat shock protein 
90 (Hsp90) was identified as a specific ITZ-1-binding protein. Almost all known
Hsp90 inhibitors have been reported to bind to the Hsp90 N-terminal ATP-binding
site and to simultaneously induce degradation and activation of its multiple
client proteins. However, within the Hsp90 client proteins, ITZ-1 strongly
induces heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) activation and causes mild Raf-1 degradation, 
but scarcely induces degradation of a broad range of Hsp90 client proteins by
binding to the Hsp90 C terminus. These results may explain ITZ-1's inhibition of 
MMP-13 production, its cytoprotective effect, and its lower cytotoxicity. These
results suggest that ITZ-1 is a client-selective Hsp90 inhibitor.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20142037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Scand J Rheumatol. 2010 May;39(3):212-8. doi: 10.3109/03009740903390145.

Heat shock protein expression is low in intestinal mucosa in juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis: a defect in immunoregulation?

Arvonen M(1), Tikanmäki M, Vähäsalo P, Karttunen TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oulu, and Oulu University Hospital,
Oulu, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are involved in the regulation of
inflammation and in the maintenance of mucosal integrity. Their altered
expression may be a marker of mucosal inflammation and also contribute to tissue 
injury. The small intestinal mucosa in children with juvenile idiopathic
arthritis (JIA) shows signs of intestinal immune activation, such as increased
intraepithelial cytotoxic lymphocyte counts. To further evaluate the
characteristics of this immune activation in JIA, we have studied the expression 
of several HSPs, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-related chain A
(MICA), and the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in intestinal biopsies
from children with JIA.
METHODS: We studied 15 patients with JIA. Controls included 13 children without
JIA, studied for various gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, but eventually shown not
to have any GI disease. The subjects were examined by endoscopy. The expression
of HSP60, HSP70, MICA, and HSF1 was analysed in ileal and duodenal biopsies by
using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The expression levels of HSP60, MICA, and HSF1 were significantly lower 
in the duodenal epithelium in the JIA patients compared to the controls. MICA and
HSF1 also showed lower expression in the ileal epithelium. The expression of
HSP70 did not differ between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The downregulation of HSP60, MICA, and HSF1 in small intestinal
mucosa may indicate that intestinal epithelial cells show immune aberration in
JIA. We speculate that the low heat shock response may play a role in the
pathogenesis of JIA, interfering with mucosal integrity and local intestinal
immunoregulation.

PMID: 20141486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2010 Feb;31(2):219-26. doi: 10.1038/aps.2009.194.

Bicyclol protects HepG2 cells against D-galactosamine-induced apoptosis through
inducing heat shock protein 27 and mitochondria associated pathway.

Bao XQ(1), Liu GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

AIM: To study the inducing effect of bicyclol on heat shock protein 27 (HSP27)
and its role on anti-apoptosis in HepG2 cells intoxicated with D-galactosamine
(D-GaIN).
METHODS: HepG2 cells were treated with various concentrations of bicyclol and
then subjected to D-GaIN intoxication. Apoptosis was assayed by hoechst 33258
staining and flow cytometry analysis. HSP27, cytochrome c, apoptosis inducing
factor (AIF) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) were assayed by Western blot. Heat
shock factor 1 (HSF1) was determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and 
the interactions of HSP27 with cytochrome c and AIF were detected by
co-immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: The results showed that bicyclol induced HSP27 protein and mRNA
expression in HepG2 cells in both time- and dose-dependent manners (the maximal
response: 1.23 fold increase at 100 micromol/L). Bicyclol treatment stimulated
HSF1 activation and increased the HSF1-HSE binding activity (the maximal
response: 2.1 fold increase at 100 micromol/L). This inducing effect of bicyclol 
on HSP27 and HSF1 was markedly blocked by quercetin. Pretreatment of the cells
with bicyclol markedly attenuated D-GaIN-induced apoptosis and the release of
cytochrome c and AIF from mitochondria. The induced HSP27 by bicyclol suppressed 
the activity of caspase-3 and the phosphorylation of JNK caused by D-GaIN in
HepG2 cells. All the above effect of bicyclol against D-GaIN-induced hepatocytes 
apoptosis were significantly reversed by quercetin.
CONCLUSION: HSP27 is involved in the anti-hepatocytes apoptosis of bicyclol, and 
this effect of bicyclol-induced HSP27 is mainly through inhibition of
mitochondria and JNK apoptotic pathways.

PMCID: PMC4002839
PMID: 20139905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eukaryot Cell. 2010 Apr;9(4):514-31. doi: 10.1128/EC.00251-09. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

The TEA transcription factor Tec1 confers promoter-specific gene regulation by
Ste12-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Heise B(1), van der Felden J, Kern S, Malcher M, Brückner S, Mösch HU.

Author information: 
(1)Philipps-Universität Marburg, Department of Genetics, Marburg, Germany.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the TEA transcription factor Tec1 is known to
regulate target genes together with a second transcription factor, Ste12.
Tec1-Ste12 complexes can activate transcription through Tec1 binding sites
(TCSs), which can be further combined with Ste12 binding sites (PREs) for
cooperative DNA binding. However, previous studies have hinted that Tec1 might
regulate transcription also without Ste12. Here, we show that in vivo,
physiological amounts of Tec1 are sufficient to stimulate TCS-mediated gene
expression and transcription of the FLO11 gene in the absence of Ste12. In vitro,
Tec1 is able to bind TCS elements with high affinity and specificity without
Ste12. Furthermore, Tec1 contains a C-terminal transcriptional activation domain 
that confers Ste12-independent activation of TCS-regulated gene expression. On a 
genome-wide scale, we identified 302 Tec1 target genes that constitute two
distinct classes. A first class of 254 genes is regulated by Tec1 in a
Ste12-dependent manner and is enriched for genes that are bound by Tec1 and Ste12
in vivo. In contrast, a second class of 48 genes can be regulated by Tec1
independently of Ste12 and is enriched for genes that are bound by the stress
transcription factors Yap6, Nrg1, Cin5, Skn7, Hsf1, and Msn4. Finally, we find
that combinatorial control by Tec1-Ste12 complexes stabilizes Tec1 against
degradation. Our study suggests that Tec1 is able to regulate TCS-mediated gene
expression by Ste12-dependent and Ste12-independent mechanisms that enable
promoter-specific transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC2863411
PMID: 20118212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS Biol. 2010 Jan 19;8(1):e1000291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000291.

Modulation of heat shock transcription factor 1 as a therapeutic target for small
molecule intervention in neurodegenerative disease.

Neef DW(1), Turski ML, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

Neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington disease are devastating disorders
with no therapeutic approaches to ameliorate the underlying protein misfolding
defect inherent to poly-glutamine (polyQ) proteins. Given the mounting evidence
that elevated levels of protein chaperones suppress polyQ protein misfolding, the
master regulator of protein chaperone gene transcription, HSF1, is an attractive 
target for small molecule intervention. We describe a humanized yeast-based
high-throughput screen to identify small molecule activators of human HSF1. This 
screen is insensitive to previously characterized activators of the heat shock
response that have undesirable proteotoxic activity or that inhibit Hsp90, the
central chaperone for cellular signaling and proliferation. A molecule identified
in this screen, HSF1A, is structurally distinct from other characterized small
molecule human HSF1 activators, activates HSF1 in mammalian and fly cells,
elevates protein chaperone expression, ameliorates protein misfolding and cell
death in polyQ-expressing neuronal precursor cells and protects against
cytotoxicity in a fly model of polyQ-mediated neurodegeneration. In addition, we 
show that HSF1A interacts with components of the TRiC/CCT complex, suggesting a
potentially novel regulatory role for this complex in modulating HSF1 activity.
These studies describe a novel approach for the identification of new classes of 
pharmacological interventions for protein misfolding that underlies devastating
neurodegenerative disease.

PMCID: PMC2808216
PMID: 20098725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Urol. 2010 Mar;183(3):1248-52. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2009.11.009. Epub 2010 Jan
22.

Heat shock protein and heat shock factor expression in sperm: relation to
oligozoospermia and varicocele.

Ferlin A(1), Speltra E, Patassini C, Pati MA, Garolla A, Caretta N, Foresta C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Clinical Pathology and Centre for Male Gamete Cryopreservation,
Department of Histology, Microbiology and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Padova, Padova, Italy.

PURPOSE: Varicocele may be associated with normozoospermia or oligozoospermia.
Much controversy still exists regarding the diagnosis, management and
pathophysiology of spermatogenesis alterations associated with varicocele. The
increased temperature induced by varicocele and stress in general may activate
heat shock proteins and heat shock factors with a protective function in cells.
We analyzed the expression of 5 heat shock proteins and heat shock factors in the
sperm of men with normozoospermia and oligozoospermia with or without varicocele.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a prospective study between June 2008 and
February 2009 at an academic clinic in 117 consecutive patients with varicocele
and 68 controls without varicocele. Four groups were based on the
presence/absence of varicocele and normozoospermia/oligozoospermia. Subjects were
studied by history, physical examination, scrotal Doppler ultrasound, semen
analysis, reproductive hormone plasma levels and quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction in RNA extracted from ejaculated sperm to analyze
HSP90, HSPA4, HSF1, HSF2 and HSFY expression.
RESULTS: Increased HSPA4, HSF1 and HSF2 were observed in the sperm of men with
varicocele and in those with oligozoospermia. Levels were maximum when the 2
conditions were present. Increased HSP90 was observed in oligozoospermia cases
independent of varicocele. HSFY was up-regulated only in patients with
varicocele, especially those with normozoospermia.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge we describe for the first time the expression of
different heat shock proteins and heat shock factors in ejaculated sperm. While
some of these proteins are up-regulated in men with oligozoospermia and
varicocele, HSFY is up-regulated only in the presence of varicocele and
especially in men with normozoospermia. This suggests that it may be a molecular 
marker of an adequate or inadequate response to the damaging effect of varicocele
on spermatogenesis.

2010 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20096881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 14;5(1):e8719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008719.

Modulation of Akt and ERK1/2 pathways by resveratrol in chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) cells results in the downregulation of Hsp70.

Banerjee Mustafi S(1), Chakraborty PK, Raha S.

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography and Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, Kolkata, India.

BACKGROUND: Resveratrol is known to downregulate the high endogenous level of
Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) in Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) K562 cells
and induce apoptosis. Since Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1) controls transcription of 
Hsp70, we wanted to probe the signaling pathways responsible for transcriptional 
activation of HSF1.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Cells exposed to 40microM Resveratrol rapidly
abolished serine473 phosphorylation of Akt and significantly reduced its kinase
activity. Inactivation of Akt pathway by Resveratrol subsequently blocked serine9
phosphorylation of Gsk3beta. Active non-phosphorylated Gsk3beta rendered HSF1
transcriptionally inactive and reduced Hsp70 production. Blocking PI3K/Akt
activity also demonstrated similar effects on Hsp70 comparable to Resveratrol.
Inactivation of Gsk3beta activity by inhibitors SB261763 or LiCl upregulated
Hsp70. Resveratrol significantly modulated ERK1/2 activity as evident from hyper 
phosphorylation at T302/Y304 residues and simultaneous upregulation in kinase
activity. Blocking ERK1/2 activation resulted in induction of Hsp70. Therefore,
increase in ERK1/2 activity by Resveratrol provided another negative influence on
Hsp70 levels through negative regulation of HSF1 activity.
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17AAG), a drug that inhibits Hsp90
chaperone and degrades its client protein Akt concomitantly elevated Hsp70 levels
by promoting nuclear translocation of HSF1 from the cytosol. This effect is
predominantly due to inhibition of both Akt and ERK1/2 activation by 17AAG.
Simultaneously treating K562 with Resveratrol and 17AAG maintained phosho-ERK1/2 
levels close to untreated controls demonstrating their opposite effects on ERK1/2
pathway. Resveratrol was found not to interfere with Bcr-Abl activation in K562
cells.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Thus our study comprehensively illustrates that
Resveratrol acts downstream of Bcr-Abl and inhibits Akt activity but stimulates
ERK1/2 activity. This brings down the transcriptional activity of HSF1 and Hsp70 
production in K562 cells. Additionally, Resveratrol can be used in combination
with chemotherapeutic agents such as 17AAG, an Hsp90 inhibitor reported to induce
Hsp70 and hence compromise its chemotherapeutic potential.

PMCID: PMC2806839
PMID: 20090934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jan 15;11:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-32.

Integrative analysis of the heat shock response in Aspergillus fumigatus.

Albrecht D(1), Guthke R, Brakhage AA, Kniemeyer O.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology,
Hans-Knöll-Institute, Jena, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Aspergillus fumigatus is a thermotolerant human-pathogenic mold and
the most common cause of invasive aspergillosis (IA) in immunocompromised
patients. Its predominance is based on several factors most of which are still
unknown. The thermotolerance of A. fumigatus is one of the traits which have been
assigned to pathogenicity. It allows the fungus to grow at temperatures up to and
above that of a fevered human host. To elucidate the mechanisms of heat
resistance, we analyzed the change of the A. fumigatus proteome during a
temperature shift from 30 degrees C to 48 degrees C by 2D-fluorescence difference
gel electrophoresis (DIGE). To improve 2D gel image analysis results, protein
spot quantitation was optimized by missing value imputation and normalization.
Differentially regulated proteins were compared to previously published
transcriptome data of A. fumigatus. The study was augmented by bioinformatical
analysis of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) in the promoter region of 
genes whose corresponding proteins were differentially regulated upon heat shock.
RESULTS: 91 differentially regulated protein spots, representing 64 different
proteins, were identified by mass spectrometry (MS). They showed a continuous
up-, down- or an oscillating regulation. Many of the identified proteins were
involved in protein folding (chaperones), oxidative stress response, signal
transduction, transcription, translation, carbohydrate and nitrogen metabolism. A
correlation between alteration of transcript levels and corresponding proteins
was detected for half of the differentially regulated proteins. Interestingly,
some previously undescribed putative targets for the heat shock regulator Hsf1
were identified. This provides evidence for Hsf1-dependent regulation of mannitol
biosynthesis, translation, cytoskeletal dynamics and cell division in A.
fumigatus. Furthermore, computational analysis of promoters revealed putative
binding sites for an AP-2alpha-like transcription factor upstream of some heat
shock induced genes. Until now, this factor has only been found in vertebrates.
CONCLUSIONS: Our newly established DIGE data analysis workflow yields improved
data quality and is widely applicable for other DIGE datasets. Our findings
suggest that the heat shock response in A. fumigatus differs from already
well-studied yeasts and other filamentous fungi.

PMCID: PMC2820008
PMID: 20074381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jan 7;11:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-16.

Analysis of the heat shock response in mouse liver reveals transcriptional
dependence on the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha (PPARalpha).

Vallanat B(1), Anderson SP, Brown-Borg HM, Ren H, Kersten S, Jonnalagadda S,
Srinivasan R, Corton JC.

Author information: 
(1)NHEERL Toxicogenomics Core, US EPA, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
corton.chris@epa.gov

BACKGROUND: The nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
(PPARalpha) regulates responses to chemical or physical stress in part by
altering expression of genes involved in proteome maintenance. Many of these
genes are also transcriptionally regulated by heat shock (HS) through activation 
by HS factor-1 (HSF1). We hypothesized that there are interactions on a genetic
level between PPARalpha and the HS response mediated by HSF1.
RESULTS: Wild-type and PPARalpha-null mice were exposed to HS, the PPARalpha
agonist WY-14,643 (WY), or both; gene and protein expression was examined in the 
livers of the mice 4 or 24 hrs after HS. Gene expression profiling identified a
number of Hsp family members that were altered similarly in both mouse strains.
However, most of the targets of HS did not overlap between strains. A subset of
genes was shown by microarray and RT-PCR to be regulated by HS in a
PPARalpha-dependent manner. HS also down-regulated a large set of mitochondrial
genes specifically in PPARalpha-null mice that are known targets of PPARgamma
co-activator-1 (PGC-1) family members. Pretreatment of PPARalpha-null mice with
WY increased expression of PGC-1beta and target genes and prevented the
down-regulation of the mitochondrial genes by HS. A comparison of HS genes
regulated in our dataset with those identified in wild-type and HSF1-null mouse
embryonic fibroblasts indicated that although many HS genes are regulated
independently of both PPARalpha and HSF1, a number require both factors for HS
responsiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that the PPARalpha genotype has a
dramatic effect on the transcriptional targets of HS and support an expanded role
for PPARalpha in the regulation of proteome maintenance genes after exposure to
diverse forms of environmental stress including HS.

PMCID: PMC2823686
PMID: 20059764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 5;5(1):e8568. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008568.

HSF1-controlled and age-associated chaperone capacity in neurons and muscle cells
of C. elegans.

Kern A(1), Ackermann B, Clement AM, Duerk H, Behl C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathobiochemistry, University Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.

Protein stability under changing conditions is of vital importance for the cell
and under the control of a fine-tuned network of molecular chaperones. Aging and 
age-related neurodegenerative diseases are directly associated with enhanced
protein instability. Employing C. elegans expressing GFP-tagged luciferase as a
reporter for evaluation of protein stability we show that the chaperoning
strategy of body wall muscle cells and neurons is significantly different and
that both are differently affected by aging. Muscle cells of young worms are
largely resistant to heat stress, which is directly mediated by the stress
response controlled through Heat Shock Transcription Factor 1. During recovery
following heat stress the ability to refold misfolded proteins is missing. Young 
neurons are highly susceptible to chronic heat stress, but show a high potency to
refold or disaggregate proteins during subsequent recovery. The particular
proteome instability in neurons results from a delayed induction of the heat
shock response. In aged neurons protein stability is increased during heat
stress, whereas muscle cells show enhanced protein instability due to a
deteriorated heat shock response. An efficient refolding activity is absent in
both aged tissues. These results provide molecular insights into the differential
protein stabilization capacity in different tissues and during aging.

PMCID: PMC2797298
PMID: 20052290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 15;339(2):338-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.037. Epub 2010 
Jan 4.

Lack of maternal Heat Shock Factor 1 results in multiple cellular and
developmental defects, including mitochondrial damage and altered redox
homeostasis, and leads to reduced survival of mammalian oocytes and embryos.

Bierkamp C(1), Luxey M, Metchat A, Audouard C, Dumollard R, Christians E.

Author information: 
(1)Université Toulouse, UPS, UMR 5547, Centre de Biologie du Développement, IFR
109, CNRS, UPS, 118 route de Narbonne (Bat 4R3), 31062 Toulouse Cedex 09, France.
bierkamp@cict.fr

Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1) is a transcription factor whose loss of function
results in the inability of Hsf1(-/-) females to produce viable embryos, as a
consequence of early developmental arrest. We previously demonstrated that
maternal HSF1 is required in oocytes to regulate expression of chaperones, in
particular Hsp90alpha, and is essential for the progression of meiotic
maturation. In the present work, we used comparative morphological and
biochemical analytic approaches to better understand how Hsf1(-/-) oocytes
undergo irreversible cell death. We found that the metaphase II arrest in mature 
oocytes, cortical granule exocytosis and formation of pronuclei in zygotes were
all impaired in Hsf1(-/-) mutants. Although oogenesis generated fully grown
oocytes in follicles, intra-ovarian Hsf1(-/-) oocytes displayed ultrastructural
abnormalities and contained dysfunctional mitochondria as well as elevated
oxidant load. Finally, the apoptotic effector, caspase-3, was activated in most
mutant oocytes and embryos, reflecting their commitment to apoptosis. In
conclusion, our study shows that early post-ovulation events are particularly
sensitive to oxidant insult, which abrogates the developmental competence of
HSF1-depleted oocytes. They also reveal that Hsf1 knock-out mice constitute a
genetic model that can be used to evaluate the importance of redox homeostasis in
oocytes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20045681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Sign Transduct Insights. 2010;2:13-24.

Signal Transduction Pathways Leading to Heat Shock Transcription.

Calderwood SK(1), Xie Y, Wang X, Khaleque MA, Chou SD, Murshid A, Prince T, Zhang
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSP) are essential for intracellular protein folding during 
stress and protect cells from denaturation and aggregation cascades that can lead
to cell death. HSP genes are regulated at the transcriptional level by heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) that is activated by stress and binds to heat shock
elements in HSP genes. The activation of HSF1 during heat shock involves
conversion from an inert monomer to a DNA binding trimer through a series of
intramolecular folding rearrangements. However, the trigger for HSF1 at the
molecular level is unclear and hypotheses for this process include reversal of
feedback inhibition of HSF1 by molecular chaperones and heat-induced binding to
large non-coding RNAs. Heat shock also causes a profound modulation in cell
signaling pathways that lead to protein kinase activation and phosphorylation of 
HSF1 at a number of regulatory serine residues. HSP genes themselves exist in an 
accessible chromatin conformation already bound to RNA polymerase II. The RNA
polymerase II is paused on HSP promoters after transcribing a short RNA sequence 
proximal to the promoter. Activation by heat shock involves HSF1 binding to the
promoter and release of the paused RNA polymerase II followed by further rounds
of transcriptional initiation and elongation. HSF1 is thus involved in both
initiation and elongation of HSP RNA transcripts. Recent studies indicate
important roles for histone modifications on HSP genes during heat shock. Histone
modification occurs rapidly after stress and may be involved in promoting
nucleosome remodeling on HSP promoters and in the open reading frames of HSP
genes. Understanding these processes may be key to evaluating mechanisms of
deregulated HSP expression that plays a key role in neurodegeneration and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3115718
PMID: 21687820  [PubMed]


155. RNA. 2010 Feb;16(2):274-9. doi: 10.1261/rna.1879610. Epub 2009 Dec 29.

Evidence for bacterial origin of heat shock RNA-1.

Kim DS, Lee Y, Hahn Y.

The heat shock RNA-1 (HSR1) is a noncoding RNA (ncRNA) reported to be involved in
mammalian heat shock response. HSR1 was shown to significantly stimulate the
heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) trimerization and DNA binding. The hamster HSR1
sequence was reported to consist of 604 nucleotides (nt) plus a poly(A) tail and 
to have only a 4-nt difference with the human HSR1. In this study, we present
highly convincing evidence for bacterial origin of the HSR1. No HSR1 sequence was
found by exhaustive sequence similarity searches of the publicly available
eukaryotic nucleotide sequence databases at the NCBI, including the expressed
sequence tags, genome survey sequences, and high-throughput genomic sequences
divisions of GenBank, as well as the Trace Archive database of whole genome
shotgun sequences, and genome assemblies. Instead, a putative open reading frame 
(ORF) of HSR1 revealed strong similarity to the amino-terminal region of
bacterial chloride channel proteins. Furthermore, the 5' flanking region of the
putative HSR1 ORF showed similarity to the 5' upstream regions of the bacterial
protein genes. We propose that the HSR1 was derived from a bacterial genome
fragment either by horizontal gene transfer or by bacterial infection of the
cells. The most probable source organism of the HSR1 is a species belonging to
the order Burkholderiales.

PMCID: PMC2811656
PMID: 20040589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2009 Nov;49(11):913-6.

[Molecular therapy targeting protein misfolding and aggregation for the
polyglutamine diseases].

[Article in Japanese]

Nagai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry.

Abnormal aggregation and deposition of misfolded proteins have been recognized as
a common molecular pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative diseases including
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and the polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases. The polyQ
diseases, including Huntington's disease and various spinocerebellar ataxias, are
caused by abnormal expansions of the polyQ stretch (> 35-40) within
disease-causative proteins, which are thought to trigger their misfolding and
aggregation, leading to their deposition as inclusion bodies, and eventually
resulting in neurodegeneration. We found that the expanded polyQ protein
undergoes a conformational transition to a beta-sheet dominant structure in the
monomeric state, triggering cytotoxicity, and subsequently resulting in formation
of insoluble amyloid-like fibrillar aggregates. Targeting misfolding and
aggregation of the expanded polyQ protein, we demonstrated that QBP1
(PolyQ-Binding Peptide 1: SNWKWWPGIFD) prevents the toxic beta-sheet transition
and aggregation of the expanded polyQ protein in vitro and suppresses
polyQ-induced neurodegeneration in Drosophila. From high-throughput screening of 
a chemical compound library (46,000), we have identified approximately 100 polyQ 
aggregate inhibitors as therapeutic candidates so far. We also found that 17-AAG,
an HSF1-activating compound, suppresses polyQ-induced neurodegeneration in
Drosophila through induction of endogenous molecular chaperones. We propose that 
our therapeutic strategy targeting protein misfolding and aggregation can also be
applied to other neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 20030247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Int J Hyperthermia. 2009 Dec;25(8):668-76. doi: 10.3109/02656730903213366.

Protective role of HSF1 and HSP70 against gastrointestinal diseases.

Tanaka K(1), Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan.

Retraction in
    Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2014 Dec;19:1-5.

PURPOSE: It is well known that heat shock proteins (HSPs) are induced by various 
stressors in order to confer protection against such stressors. Since
stressor-induced tissue damage is involved in various diseases, especially
gastrointestinal diseases, it has been thought that HSP-inducers are
therapeutically beneficial for these diseases. Indirect lines of evidence suggest
that HSPs provide a major protective mechanism against irritant-induced gastric
lesions. However, no direct evidence exists to support this notion. On the other 
hand, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) involves infiltration of leukocytes into
intestinal tissue, resulting in intestinal damage. Pro-inflammatory cytokines and
cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) play important roles in this infiltration of
leukocytes. The roles of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1, a transcription factor for
hsp genes) and heat shock proteins (HSPs) in development of IBD are unclear. In
this paper, we reviewed our recent work on the role of HSPs in pathogenesis of
gastric lesions and IBD by use of HSF1-null mice and transgenic mice expressing
Hsp70.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the first genetic evidence that HSF1 and Hsp70
play a role in protecting against both irritant-induced gastric lesions and
IBD-related colitis. The aggravation of irritant-induced gastric lesions in
HSF1-null mice is due to their inability to up-regulate Hsp70, leading to
apoptosis. On the other hand, this protective role of Hsp70 against colitis seems
to involve various mechanisms, such as suppression of expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and CAMs, and cell death.

PMID: 20021227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Immunol. 2010 Jan 15;184(2):1041-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902579. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 inhibits expression of IL-6 through activating 
transcription factor 3.

Takii R(1), Inouye S, Fujimoto M, Nakamura T, Shinkawa T, Prakasam R, Tan K,
Hayashida N, Ichikawa H, Hai T, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

The febrile response is a complex physiological reaction to disease, including a 
cytokine-mediated increase in body temperature and the activation of inflammatory
systems. Fever has beneficial roles in terms of disease prognosis, partly by
suppressing the expression of inflammatory cytokines. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlining the fever-mediated suppression of inflammatory gene
expression have not been clarified. In this study, we showed that heat shock
suppresses LPS-induced expression of IL-6, a major pyrogenic cytokine, in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and macrophages. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1)
activated by heat shock induced the expression of activating transcription factor
(ATF) 3, a negative regulator of IL-6, and ATF3 was necessary for heat-mediated
suppression of IL-6, indicating a fever-mediated feedback loop consisting of HSF1
and ATF3. A comprehensive analysis of inflammatory gene expression revealed that 
heat pretreatment suppresses LPS-induced expression of most genes (86%), in part 
(67%) via ATF3. When HSF1-null and ATF3-null mice were injected with LPS, they
expressed much higher levels of IL-6 than wild-type mice, resulting in an
exaggerated febrile response. These results demonstrate a novel inhibitory
pathway for inflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 20018623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 11;4(11):e7719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007719.

Oxidative stress impairs the heat stress response and delays unfolded protein
recovery.

Adachi M(1), Liu Y, Fujii K, Calderwood SK, Nakai A, Imai K, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology and Molecular Diagnosis, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. adachi@sapmed.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Environmental changes, air pollution and ozone depletion are
increasing oxidative stress, and global warming threatens health by heat stress. 
We now face a high risk of simultaneous exposure to heat and oxidative stress.
However, there have been few studies investigating their combined adverse effects
on cell viability.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Pretreatment of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) specifically and
highly sensitized cells to heat stress, and enhanced loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential. H(2)O(2) exposure impaired the HSP40/HSP70 induction as heat 
shock response (HSR) and the unfolded protein recovery, and enhanced eIF2alpha
phosphorylation and/or XBP1 splicing, land marks of ER stress. These
H(2)O(2)-mediated effects mimicked enhanced heat sensitivity in HSF1 knockdown or
knockout cells. Importantly, thermal preconditioning blocked H(2)O(2)-mediated
inhibitory effects on refolding activity and rescued HSF1 +/+ MEFs, but neither
blocked the effects nor rescued HSF1 -/- MEFs. These data strongly suggest that
inhibition of HSR and refolding activity is crucial for H(2)O(2)-mediated
enhanced heat sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: H(2)O(2) blocks HSR and refolding activity under heat stress,
thereby leading to insufficient quality control and enhancing ER stress. These
uncontrolled stress responses may enhance cell death. Our data thus highlight
oxidative stress as a crucial factor affecting heat tolerance.

PMCID: PMC2777389
PMID: 19936221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;87(6):845-51. doi: 10.1139/o09-049.

Modulation of Hsf1 activity by novobiocin and geldanamycin.

Conde R(1), Belak ZR, Nair M, O'Carroll RF, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, 107 Wiggins Rd., 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, S7N 5E5, Canada.

Since Hsp90 is a known modulator of HSF1 activity, we examined the effects of two
pharmacological inhibitors of Hsp90, novobiocin and geldanamycin, on HSF1
DNA-binding activity in the Xenopus oocyte model system. Novobiocin exhibits
antiproliferative activity in culture cells and interacts with a C-terminal
ATP-binding pocket on Hsp90, inhibiting Hsp90 autophosphorylation. Treatment of
oocytes with novobiocin followed by heat shock results in a dose-dependent
decrease in HSF1 DNA-binding and transcriptional activity. Immunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrate novobiocin does not alter HSF1 activity through
dissociation of Hsp90 from either monomeric or trimerized HSF1, suggesting that
the effect of novobiocin on HSF1 is mediated through alterations in Hsp90
autophosphorylation. Geldanamycin binds the N-terminal ATPase site of Hsp90 and
inhibits chaperone activity. Geldanamycin treatment of oocytes resulted in a
dose-dependent increase in stability of active HSF1 trimers during submaximal
heat shock and a delay in disassembly of trimers during recovery. The results
suggest that Hsp90 chaperone activity is required for disassembly of HSF1
trimers. The data obtained with novobiocin suggests the C-terminal ATP-binding
activity of Hsp90 is required for the initial steps of HSF1 trimerization,
whereas the effects of geldanamycin suggest N-terminal ATPase and chaperone
activities are required for disassembly of activated trimers. These data provide 
important insight into the molecular mechanisms by which pharmacological
inhibitors of Hsp90 affect the heat shock response.

PMID: 19935870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 15;69(24):9404-12. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1411.

Heat shock factor 1-mediated aneuploidy requires a defective function of p53.

Kim EH(1), Lee YJ, Bae S, Lee JS, Kim J, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

Because heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) phosphorylation by Plk1 has been previously
reported to be involved in mitotic regulation and p53 function may be involved in
this mitotic regulation, we have further examined HSF1 functions in mitotic
regulation according to p53 status. Nocodazole-mediated aneuploidy was increased 
in p53-defective (p53Mut) cells; however, it was not increased in p53 wild-type
(p53WT) cells. Phosphorylation of HSF1 at Ser216 was increased in p53Mut cells
with increased stability of securin and cyclin B1 in mitosis compared with p53WT 
cells. The interaction of p53 with Plk1 that was shown in p53WT cells and that
induced normal mitotic checkpoint function was not observed in p53Mut cells;
instead, the binding of HSF1 with Plk1 and HSF1 phosphorylation at Ser216 were
seen in p53Mut cells, which resulted in increased aneuploidy production.
Moreover, the interaction affinity of Cdc20 with Mad2 was inhibited in p53Mut
cells, whereas the interaction between Cdc20 and HSF1 was increased. From the
data, it was suggested that HSF1-mediated aneuploidy was more facilitated in
p53-defective cells, indicating the importance of novel mechanisms for p53
function in HSF1-mediated mitotic regulation and genomic instability.

PMID: 19934326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Circ Res. 2010 Jan 8;106(1):102-10. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.210914. Epub 2009
Nov 12.

Cardioprotection by CaMKII-deltaB is mediated by phosphorylation of heat shock
factor 1 and subsequent expression of inducible heat shock protein 70.

Peng W(1), Zhang Y, Zheng M, Cheng H, Zhu W, Cao CM, Xiao RP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, People's Republic
of China.

RATIONALE: Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMK)II is a multifunctional
kinase involved in vital cellular processes such as Ca(2+) handling and cell fate
regulation. In mammalian heart, 2 primary CaMKII isoforms, deltaB and deltaC,
localize in nuclear and cytosolic compartments, respectively. Although previous
studies have established an essential role of CaMKII-deltaC in cardiomyocyte
apoptosis, the functional role of the more abundant isoform, CaMKII-deltaB,
remains elusive.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we determined the potential role of CaMKII-deltaB in regulating 
cardiomyocyte viability and explored the underlying mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, the expression of
CaMKII-deltaB and CaMKII-deltaC was inversely regulated in response to
H2O2-induced oxidative stress with a profound reduction of the former and an
increase of the later. Similarly, in vivo ischemia/reperfusion (IR) led to an
opposite regulation of these CaMKII isoforms in a rat myocardial IR model.
Notably, overexpression of CaMKII-deltaB protected cardiomyocytes against
oxidative stress-, hypoxia-, and angiotensin II-induced apoptosis, whereas
overexpression of its cytosolic counterpart promoted apoptosis. Using cDNA
microarray, real-time PCR and Western blotting, we demonstrated that
overexpression of CaMKII-deltaB but not CaMKII-deltaC elevated expression of heat
shock protein (HSP)70 family members, including inducible (i)HSP70 and its
homolog (Hst70). Moreover, overexpression of CaMKII-deltaB led to phosphorylation
and activation of heat shock factor (HSF)1, the primary transcription factor
responsible for HSP70 gene regulation. Importantly, gene silencing of iHSP70, but
not Hst70, abolished CaMKII-deltaB-mediated protective effect, indicating that
only iHSP70 was required for CaMKII-deltaB elicited antiapoptotic signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that cardiac CaMKII-deltaB and CaMKII-deltaC were
inversely regulated in response to oxidative stress and IR injury, and that in
contrast to CaMKII-deltaC, CaMKII-deltaB serves as a potent suppressor of
cardiomyocyte apoptosis triggered by multiple death-inducing stimuli via
phosphorylation of HSF1 and subsequent induction of iHSP70, marking both
CaMKII-delta isoforms as promising therapeutic targets for the treatment of
ischemic heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2815328
PMID: 19910575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Cycle. 2009 Dec;8(23):3960-70. Epub 2009 Dec 25.

Anti-malaria drug blocks proteotoxic stress response: anti-cancer implications.

Neznanov N(1), Gorbachev AV, Neznanova L, Komarov AP, Gurova KV, Gasparian AV,
Banerjee AK, Almasan A, Fairchild RL, Gudkov AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2009 Dec 15;8(24):4024-5.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Jan 15;9(2):228.

The number of physical conditions and chemical agents induce accumulation of
misfolded proteins creating proteotoxic stress. This leads to activation of
adaptive pro-survival pathway, known as heat shock response (HSR), resulting in
expression of additional chaperones. Several cancer treatment approaches, such as
proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib and hsp90 inhibitor geldanamycin, involve
activation of proteotoxic stress. Low efficacy of these therapies is likely due
to the protective effects of HSR induced in treated cells, making this pathway an
attractive target for pharmacological suppression. We found that the anti-malaria
drugs quinacrine (QC) and emetine prevented HSR in cancer cells, as judged by
induction of hsp70 expression. As opposed to emetine, which inhibited general
translation, QC did not affect protein synthesis, but rather suppressed inducible
HSF1-dependent transcription of the hsp70 gene in a relatively selective manner. 
The treatment of tumor cells in vitro with a combination of non-toxic
concentrations of QC and proteotoxic stress inducers resulted in rapid induction 
of apoptosis. The effect was similar if QC was substituted by siRNA against
hsp70, suggesting that the HSR inhibitory activity of QC was responsible for cell
sensitization to proteotoxic stress inducers. QC was also found to enhance the
antitumor efficacy of proteotoxic stress inducers in vivo: combinatorial
treatment with 17-DMAG + QC resulted in suppression of tumor growth in two mouse 
syngeneic models. These results reveal that QC is an inhibitor of HSF1-mediated
HSR. As such, this compound has significant clinical potential as an adjuvant in 
therapeutic strategies aimed at exploiting the cytotoxic potential of proteotoxic
stress.

PMCID: PMC2923591
PMID: 19901558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. BMB Rep. 2009 Oct 31;42(10):631-5.

Heat shock transcription factors and sensory placode development.

Nakai A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan. anakai@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) family consists of at least three
members in mammals and regulates expression of heat shock proteins in response to
heat shock and proteotoxic stresses. Especially, HSF1 is indispensable for this
response. Members of this family are also involved in development of some tissues
such as the brain and reproductive organs. However, we did not know the molecular
mechanisms that regulate developmental processes. Involvement of HSFs in the
sensory development was implicated by the finding that human hereditary cataract 
is associated with mutations of the HSF4 gene. Analysis of gene-disrupted mice
showed that HSF4 and HSF1 are required for the lens and the olfactory epithelium,
respectively. Furthermore, a common molecular mechanism that regulates
developmental processes was revealed by analyzing roles of HSFs in the two
developmentally-related organs.

PMID: 19874706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Jan 1;21(1):106-16. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-07-0639. Epub 2009
Oct 28.

A novel mouse HSF3 has the potential to activate nonclassical heat-shock genes
during heat shock.

Fujimoto M(1), Hayashida N, Katoh T, Oshima K, Shinkawa T, Prakasam R, Tan K,
Inouye S, Takii R, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube,
Japan.

The heat-shock response is characterized by the expression of a set of classical 
heat-shock genes, and is regulated by heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in
mammals. However, comprehensive analyses of gene expression have revealed very
large numbers of inducible genes in cells exposed to heat shock. It is believed
that HSF1 is required for the heat-inducible expression of these genes although
HSF2 and HSF4 modulate some of the gene expression. Here, we identified a novel
mouse HSF3 (mHSF3) translocated into the nucleus during heat shock. However,
mHSF3 did not activate classical heat-shock genes such as Hsp70. Remarkably,
overexpression of mHSF3 restored the expression of nonclassical heat-shock genes 
such as PDZK3 and PROM2 in HSF1-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Although
down-regulation of mHSF3 expression had no effect on gene expression or cell
survival in wild-type MEF cells, it abolished the moderate expression of PDZK3
mRNA and reduced cell survival in HSF1-null MEF cells during heat shock. We
propose that mHSF3 represents a unique HSF that has the potential to activate
only nonclassical heat-shock genes to protect cells from detrimental stresses.

PMCID: PMC2801703
PMID: 19864465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):925-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.079. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

Identification of small-molecule HSF1 amplifiers by high content screening in
protection of cells from stress induced injury.

Zhang B(1), Au Q, Yoon IS, Tremblay MH, Yip G, Zhou Y, Barber JR, Ng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, CytRx Corporation, San Diego, CA 92109, USA.
bzhang418@gmail.com

Small molecule amplifiers of heat shock response have shown promising results in 
rescuing stress related injury through chaperone amplification. Herein, we report
the results of a high content target-based primary screening of several known
bioactive libraries. Screening resulted in the identification of three potent
gedunin derivatives and a sappanone A derivative. Western blot results confirmed 
compound-induced activation of HSF1 and increased expression level of HSP70.
These compounds rescued cells from cell death caused by proteasome inhibitor
MG-132 and RNAi knockdown of HSF1 significantly reversed the cytoprotective
effects, confirming an HSF1-dependent mechanism of action. These HSF1 amplifiers 
were tested in two mammalian cell based models of Huntington's disease (HD) and
found to improve survival. Therefore, these screening hits may have therapeutic
potential for HD and possibly other protein conformational disorders.

PMID: 19852939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):C171-81. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00346.2009. Epub 2009 Oct 21.

Febrile-range temperature modifies cytokine gene expression in LPS-stimulated
macrophages by differentially modifying NF-{kappa}B recruitment to cytokine gene 
promoters.

Cooper ZA(1), Ghosh A, Gupta A, Maity T, Benjamin IJ, Vogel SN, Hasday JD, Singh 
IS.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. of Maryland School of Medicine, Health Science Facility-II, Rm. S311, 20
Penn St., Baltimore, MD 21201,USA.

We previously showed that exposure to febrile-range temperatures (FRT, 39.5-40
degrees C) reduces LPS-induced TNF-alpha expression, in part through the direct
interaction of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) with the TNF-alpha gene promoter.
However, it is not known whether exposure to FRT also modifies more proximal
LPS-induced signaling events. Using HSF1-null mice, we confirmed that HSF1 is
required for FRT-induced repression of TNF-alpha in vitro by LPS-stimulated bone 
marrow-derived macrophages and in vivo in mice challenged intratracheally with
LPS. Exposing LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 mouse macrophages to FRT reduced TNF-alpha
expression while increasing IL-1beta expression despite the two genes sharing a
common myeloid differentiation protein-88 (MyD88)-dependent pathway. Global
activation of the three LPS-induced signaling intermediates that lead to cytokine
gene expression, ERK and p38 MAPKs and NF-kappaB, was not affected by exposing
RAW 264.7 cells to FRT as assessed by ERK and p38 phosphorylation and NF-kappaB
in vitro DNA-binding activity and activation of a NF-kappaB-dependent synthetic
promoter. However, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis demonstrated
that exposure to FRT reduced LPS-induced recruitment of NF-kappaB p65 to the
TNF-alpha promoter while simultaneously increasing its recruitment to the
IL-1beta promoter. These data suggest that FRT exerts its effects on cytokine
gene expression in a gene-specific manner through distal effects on promoter
activation rather than proximal receptor activation and signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC2806152
PMID: 19846753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 21;4(10):e7538. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007538.

Converting redox signaling to apoptotic activities by stress-responsive
regulators HSF1 and NRF2 in fenretinide treated cancer cells.

Wang K(1), Fang H, Xiao D, Zhu X, He M, Pan X, Shi J, Zhang H, Jia X, Du Y, Zhang
J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Pharmacological intervention of redox balance in cancer cells often
results in oxidative stress-mediated apoptosis, attracting much attention for the
development of a new generation of targeted therapy in cancer. However, little is
known about mechanisms underlying the conversion from oxidative signaling to
downstream activities leading cells to death.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We here report a systematic detection of
transcriptome changes in response to oxidative signals generated in leukemia
cells upon fenretinide treatment, implicating the occurrence of numerous
stress-responsive events during the fenretinide induced apoptosis, such as redox 
response, endoplasmic reticulum stress/unfolded protein response, translational
repression and proteasome activation. Moreover, the configuration of these
relevant events is primarily orchestrated by stress responsive transcription
factors, as typically highlighted by NF-E2-related factor-2 (NRF2) and heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1). Several lines of evidence suggest that the coordinated
regulation of these transcription factors and thus their downstream genes are
involved in converting oxidative signaling into downstream stress-responsive
events regulating pro-apoptotic and apoptotic activities at the temporal and
spatial levels, typifying oxidative stress-mediated programmed death rather than 
survival in cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides a roadmap for understanding
oxidative stress-mediated apoptosis in cancer cells, which may be further
developed into more sophisticated therapeutic protocols, as implicated by
synergistic induction of cell apoptosis using proteasome inhibitors with
fenretinide.

PMCID: PMC2760443
PMID: 19844581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2010 May;15(3):323-34. doi: 10.1007/s12192-009-0147-4.
Epub 2009 Oct 18.

Proteasome inhibition induces hsp30 and hsp70 gene expression as well as the
acquisition of thermotolerance in Xenopus laevis A6 cells.

Young JT(1), Heikkila JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.

Previous studies have shown that inhibiting the activity of the proteasome leads 
to the accumulation of damaged or unfolded proteins within the cell. In this
study, we report that proteasome inhibitors, lactacystin and
carbobenzoxy-L-leucyl-L-leucyl-L-leucinal (MG132), induced the accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins as well as a dose- and time-dependent increase in the
relative levels of heat shock protein (HSP)30 and HSP70 and their respective
mRNAs in Xenopus laevis A6 kidney epithelial cells. In A6 cells recovering from
MG132 exposure, HSP30 and HSP70 levels were still elevated after 24 h but
decreased substantially after 48 h. The activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) 
may be involved in MG132-induced hsp gene expression in A6 cells since KNK437, a 
HSF1 inhibitor, repressed the accumulation of HSP30 and HSP70. Exposing A6 cells 
to simultaneous MG132 and mild heat shock enhanced the accumulation of HSP30 and 
HSP70 to a much greater extent than with each stressor alone. Immunocytochemical 
studies determined that HSP30 was localized primarily in the cytoplasm of
lactacystin- or MG132-treated cells. In some cells treated with higher
concentrations of MG132 or lactacystin, we observed in the cortical cytoplasm (1)
relatively large HSP30 staining structures, (2) colocalization of actin and
HSP30, and (3) cytoplasmic areas that were devoid of HSP30. Lastly, MG132
treatment of A6 cells conferred a state of thermotolerance such that they were
able to survive a subsequent thermal challenge.

PMCID: PMC2866991
PMID: 19838833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Exp Gerontol. 2010 May;45(5):323-30. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2009.10.006. Epub 2009 
Oct 30.

Modulating expression of brain heat shock proteins by estrogen in ovariectomized 
mice model of aging.

Hou Y(1), Wei H, Luo Y, Liu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) serve as molecular chaperones and endogenous
cytoprotective factors. Two of the well-studied HSPs, HSP70, and HSP27 can be
significantly induced in many areas of brain by a variety of stressors. A
decrease in expression of brain HSPs has been documented in aged brain. Estrogen 
is well known as a neuroprotective hormone, and it has been reported that
estrogen can regulate HSP70 and HSP27 expression in neuronal cells. In this
study, the relationship between estrogen and heat stress-induced brain HSPs
expression in young and aged ovariectomized (OVX) mice was investigated. Our
results show that heat stress-induced levels of HSP70 proteins and mRNA
transcripts was significantly lower in brain of aged (12 month) OVX mice,
compared with young (2 month) OVX mice group. Estrogen supplementation
(17beta-estradiol 0.5mg/kg for 7 days) restored heat stress-induced brain HSP70
expression and attenuated heat stress-induced brain DNA fragmentation, caspase 3 
activation and mitochondrial leakage of cytochrome c and AIF in OVX mice. These
results suggest that estrogen deficiency during aging down-regulates heat
stress-induced brain HSP70 expression, which reveals a previously unknown link
between estrogen deficiency and stress response elements.

PMID: 19836443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Comp Physiol B. 2010 Mar;180(3):403-14. doi: 10.1007/s00360-009-0414-9. Epub
2009 Oct 16.

Regulation of the heat shock response under anoxia in the turtle, Trachemys
scripta elegans.

Krivoruchko A(1), Storey KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, 1125
Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada.

The effects of 20 h of anoxic submergence in cold water and 5 h of aerobic
recovery on the heat shock response were analyzed in four organs of the
anoxia-tolerant turtle Trachemys scripta elegans. Immunoblotting was used to
analyze levels of active and inactive forms of the heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1), nuclear translocation of HSF1, and the levels of six heat shock 
proteins (HSPs). PCR was also used to retrieve the turtle HSF1 nucleotide
sequence; its deduced amino acid sequence showed 97% identity with chicken HSF1. 
White skeletal muscle showed a strong fivefold increase in the amount of active
HSF1 under anoxic conditions as well as an 80% increase in nuclear localization. 
This was accompanied by upregulation of five HSPs by 1.8- to 2.9-fold: Hsp25,
Hsp40, Hsp70, Hsc70, and Hsp90, the latter two remained elevated after 5 h of
aerobic recovery. Kidney and liver showed little change in active HSF1 content
during anoxia and recovery, but a significant increase in the nuclear
localization of HSF1 during anoxia. This supported enhanced expression of three
HSPs in kidney (Hsp40, Hsc70, and Hsp90) and four in liver (Hsp40, Hsp60, Hsp70, 
Hsc70). Heart displayed a strong increase in active HSF1 during anoxia and
recovery (6.6- to 6.8-fold higher than control) and increased nuclear
localization but heart HSP levels did not rise. The data demonstrate
organ-specific regulation of HSPs during anoxia exposure and aerobic recovery in 
T. s. elegans and suggest that the heat shock response is an important aspect of 
cytoprotection during facultative anaerobiosis, particularly with regard to
underwater hibernation of turtles in cold water.

PMID: 19834715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biomol Screen. 2009 Dec;14(10):1165-75. doi: 10.1177/1087057109347472.

Identification of inhibitors of HSF1 functional activity by high-content
target-based screening.

Au Q(1), Zhang Y, Barber JR, Ng SC, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, CytRx Corporation, San Diego, California 92109, USA.

Cancer cells are known to experience a high level of stress and may require
constant repair for survival and proliferation. Recent studies showed that
inhibition of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the key regulator for the
stress-activated transcription of heat shock protein (HSP), can reduce the
tumorigenic potential of cancer cells. Such a "nononcogene addiction" phenomenon 
makes HSF1 an attractive cancer drug target. Here, the authors report an
image-based high-content screening (HCS) assay for HSF1 functional inhibitors. A 
heat shock-based methodology was used to stimulate the stress response followed
by quantitative measurement of HSF1/HSP70 granules for compound-induced
inhibitory effects. The authors discovered a small molecule from a compound
library that inhibits HSF1 granule formation substantially in heat-shocked HeLa
cells with IC(50) at 80 nM. Electorphoretic mobility shift of HSF1 by this
compound suggested significant inhibition of HSF1 phosphorylation, accompanied by
reduced expression levels of HSP70 and HSP90 after heat induction. Importantly,
HeLa cells stably transfected with HSF1 shRNA were more resistant to the compound
treatment under lethal temperature than cells containing HSF1, further validating
an HSF1-dependent mechanism of action. The HCS assay the authors developed was
robust with a Z' factor of 0.65 in a 384-well plate format, providing a valuable 
method for identifying small-molecule functional inhibitors of HSF1 for potential
cancer treatment.

PMID: 19820069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Microbiol. 2009 Nov;74(4):844-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2009.06883.x. Epub
2009 Oct 8.

Role of the heat shock transcription factor, Hsf1, in a major fungal pathogen
that is obligately associated with warm-blooded animals.

Nicholls S(1), Leach MD, Priest CL, Brown AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Aberdeen Fungal Group, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Institute of Medical Sciences, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK.

All organisms have evolved mechanisms that protect them against environmental
stress. The major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida albicans, has evolved robust
stress responses that protect it against human immune defences and promote its
pathogenicity. However, C. albicans is unlikely to be exposed to heat shock as it
is obligatorily associated with warm-blooded animals. Therefore, we examined the 
role of the heat shock transcription factor (Hsf1) in this pathogen. We show that
C. albicans expresses an evolutionarily conserved Hsf1 (orf19.4775) that is
phosphorylated in response to heat shock, induces transcription via the heat
shock element (HSE), contributes to the global transcriptional response to heat
shock, and is essential for viability. Why has Hsf1 been conserved in this
obligate animal saprophyte? We reasoned that Hsf1 might contribute to medically
relevant stress responses. However, this is not the case, as an Hsf1-specific
HSE-lacZ reporter is not activated by oxidative, osmotic, weak acid or pH stress.
Rather, Hsf1 is required for the expression of essential chaperones in the
absence of heat shock (e.g. Hsp104, Hsp90, Hsp70). Furthermore, Hsf1 regulates
the expression of HSE-containing genes in response to growth temperature in C.
albicans. Therefore, the main role of Hsf1 in this pathogen might be the
homeostatic modulation of chaperone levels in response to growth temperature,
rather than the activation of acute responses to sudden thermal transitions.

PMCID: PMC3675641
PMID: 19818013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Genes Cells. 2009 Nov;14(11):1253-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01348.x. Epub
2009 Oct 8.

Deficit of heat shock transcription factor 1-heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A axis
determines the cell death vulnerability in a model of spinocerebellar ataxia type
6.

Li L(1), Saegusa H, Tanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is caused by a small expansion of
polyglutamine (polyQ)-encoding CAG repeat in Ca(v)2.1 calcium channel gene. To
gain insights into pathogenic mechanism of SCA6, we used HEK293 cells expressing 
fusion protein of enhanced green fluorescent protein and Ca(v)2.1 carboxyl
terminal fragment (EGFP-Ca(v)2.1CT) [L24 and S13 cells containing 24 polyQ
(disease range) and 13 polyQ (normal range), respectively] and examined their
responses to some stressors. When exposed to CdCl(2), L24 cells showed lower
viability than the control S13 cells and caspase-dependent apoptosis was enhanced
more in L24 cells. Localization of EGFP-Ca(v)2.1CT was almost confined to the
nucleus, where it existed as speckle-like structures. Interestingly, CdCl(2)
treatment resulted in disruption of more promyelocytic leukemia nuclear bodies
(PML-NBs) in L24 cells than in S13 cells and in cells where PML-NBs were
disrupted, aggregates of EGFP-Ca(v)2.1CT became larger. Furthermore, a large
number of aggregates were formed in L24 cells than in S13 cells. Results of RNAi 
experiments indicated that HSPA1A determined the difference against CdCl(2)
toxicity. Furthermore, protein expression of heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1), which activates HSPA1A expression, was down-regulated in L24 cells.
Therefore, HSF1-HSPA1A axis is critical for the vulnerability in L24 cells.

PMID: 19817876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Dec;20(23):4976-84. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-04-0295. Epub 2009
Sep 30.

Heat-shock factor 1 controls genome-wide acetylation in heat-shocked cells.

Fritah S(1), Col E, Boyault C, Govin J, Sadoul K, Chiocca S, Christians E,
Khochbin S, Jolly C, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U823, Institut
Albert Bonniot, Université Joseph Fourier, F-38706 Grenoble, France.

A major regulatory function has been evidenced here for HSF1, the key
transcription factor of the heat-shock response, in a large-scale remodeling of
the cell epigenome. Indeed, upon heat shock, HSF1, in addition to its well-known 
transactivating activities, mediates a genome-wide and massive histone
deacetylation. Investigating the underlying mechanisms, we show that HSF1
specifically associates with and uses HDAC1 and HDAC2 to trigger this
heat-shock-dependent histone deacetylation. This work therefore identifies HSF1
as a master regulator of global chromatin acetylation and reveals a cross-talk
between HSF1 and histone deacetylases in the general control of genome
organization in response to heat shock.

PMCID: PMC2785740
PMID: 19793920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):830-40. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.07.023.

Characterization of cytoplasmic caspase-2 activation by induced proximity.

Bouchier-Hayes L(1), Oberst A, McStay GP, Connell S, Tait SW, Dillon CP, Flanagan
JM, Beere HM, Green DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):733-4.

Caspase-2 is an initiator caspase activated in response to heat shock and other
stressors that induce apoptosis. Activation of caspase-2 requires induced
proximity resulting after recruitment to caspase-2 activation complexes such as
the PIDDosome. We have adapted bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) to
measure caspase-2 induced proximity in real time in single cells. Nonfluorescent 
fragments of the fluorescent protein Venus that can associate to reform the
fluorescent complex were fused to caspase-2, allowing visualization and kinetic
measurements of caspase-2 induced proximity after heat shock and other stresses. 
This revealed that the caspase-2 activation platform occurred in the cytosol and 
not in the nucleus in response to heat shock, DNA damage, cytoskeletal
disruption, and other treatments. Activation, as measured by this approach, in
response to heat shock was RAIDD dependent and upstream of mitochondrial
outer-membrane permeabilization. Furthermore, we identify Hsp90alpha as a key
negative regulator of heat shock-induced caspase-2 activation.

PMCID: PMC2755603
PMID: 19782032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):733-4. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.09.001.

A cut above the other caspases.

Andersen JL(1), Kornbluth S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Box 3813, C370 LSRC, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):830-40.

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2009) develop a novel
approach to visualizing caspase-2 activation in real time, enabling resolution of
several controversies surrounding the position of this enzyme in apoptotic
signaling cascades.

PMID: 19782021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Dec;297(6):C1509-19. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00240.2009. Epub 2009 Sep 23.

Glutamine enhances heat shock protein 70 expression via increased hexosamine
biosynthetic pathway activity.

Hamiel CR(1), Pinto S, Hau A, Wischmeyer PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Aurora, 80045, USA.

Glutamine (GLN) plays a key role in cellular protection following injury via
enhancement of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70). The pathway by which GLN enhances
HSP70 is unknown. GLN is a key substrate for the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway 
(HBP), which has been shown to induce HSP70. We sought to explore the role of the
HBP in GLN-mediated HSP70 expression. Both chemical inhibitors and small
interfering (si)RNA knockdown of key HBP enzymes were used in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells to determine the effects of the HBP on HSP70 expression. The
O-glycosylation, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activation of heat
shock factor-1 (HSF-1) and Sp1 were evaluated using immunoprecipitation, Western 
blotting, and luciferase assays. HSP70 expression levels were evaluated via ELISA
and Western blotting. GLN augmented HBP activity before and after heat stress
(HS). Chemical inhibition of HBP enzymes reduced GLN-mediated HSP70 expression.
Specific siRNA targeting of the key HBP enzyme UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc): 
polypeptide-O-beta-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (OGT) blocked GLN-mediated HSP70
expression and attenuated GLN-mediated cellular protection post-HS. Chemical and 
siRNA attenuation of the HBP blocked GLN-induced nuclear translocation of Sp1 and
HSF-1, which are key to maximal HSP70 expression. Finally, immunoprecipitation
revealed HSF-1 was O-glycosylated, and GLN enhanced this effect. These results
suggest that metabolism of GLN via the HBP enhances HSP70 expression. This effect
appears to be mediated via O-glycosylation, nuclear translocation, and
transcriptional activation of Sp1 and HSF-1. This is an important mechanistic
description of a pathway that appears responsible for GLN-mediated HSP70
expression.

PMCID: PMC2793053
PMID: 19776393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochem J. 2009 Nov 11;424(2):253-61. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090922.

Mutational analysis of human heat-shock transcription factor 1 reveals a
regulatory role for oligomerization in DNA-binding specificity.

Takemori Y(1), Enoki Y, Yamamoto N, Fukai Y, Adachi K, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

HSF (heat-shock transcription factor) trimers bind to the HSE (heat-shock
element) regulatory sequence of target genes and regulate gene expression. A
typical HSE consists of at least three contiguous inverted repeats of the 5-bp
sequence nGAAn. Yeast HSF is able to recognize discontinuous HSEs that contain
gaps in the array of the nGAAn sequence; however, hHSF1 (human HSF1) fails to
recognize such sites in vitro, in yeast and in HeLa cells. In the present study, 
we isolated suppressors of the temperature-sensitive growth defect of
hHSF1-expressing yeast cells. Intragenic suppressors contained amino acid
substitutions in the DNA-binding domain of hHSF1 that enabled hHSF1 to regulate
the transcription of genes containing discontinuous HSEs. The substitutions
facilitated hHSF1 oligomerization, suggesting that the DNA-binding domain is
important for this conformational change. Furthermore, other
oligomerization-prone derivatives of hHSF1 were capable of recognizing
discontinuous HSEs. These results suggest that modulation of oligomerization is
important for the HSE specificity of hHSF1 and imply that hHSF1 possesses the
ability to bind to and regulate gene expression via various types of HSEs in
diverse cellular processes.

PMID: 19758120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Oct;37(19):6340-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp639. Epub 2009
Aug 31.

A transcriptomic analysis of human centromeric and pericentric sequences in
normal and tumor cells.

Eymery A(1), Horard B, El Atifi-Borel M, Fourel G, Berger F, Vitte AL, Van den
Broeck A, Brambilla E, Fournier A, Callanan M, Gazzeri S, Khochbin S, Rousseaux
S, Gilson E, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U823, Université Joseph Fourier, Institut Albert Bonniot, La Tronche
F-38706, Grenoble.

Although there is now evidence that the expression of centromeric (CT) and
pericentric (PCT) sequences are key players in major genomic functions, their
transcriptional status in human cells is still poorly known. The main reason for 
this lack of data is the complexity and high level of polymorphism of these
repeated sequences, which hampers straightforward analyses by available
transcriptomic approaches. Here a transcriptomic macro-array dedicated to the
analysis of CT and PCT expression is developed and validated in heat-shocked (HS)
HeLa cells. For the first time, the expression status of CT and PCT sequences is 
analyzed in a series of normal and cancer human cells and tissues demonstrating
that they are repressed in all normal tissues except in the testis, where PCT
transcripts are found. Moreover, PCT sequences are specifically expressed in HS
cells in a Heat-Shock Factor 1 (HSF1)-dependent fashion, and we show here that
another independent pathway, involving DNA hypo-methylation, can also trigger
their expression. Interestingly, CT and PCT were found illegitimately expressed
in somatic cancer samples, whereas PCT were repressed in testis cancer,
suggesting that the expression of CT and PCT sequences may represent a good
indicator of epigenetic deregulations occurring in response to environmental
changes or in cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC2770647
PMID: 19720732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Sep;16(9):945-52. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1648. Epub 2009 Aug
16.

A molecular basis for phosphorylation-dependent SUMO conjugation by the E2 UBC9.

Mohideen F(1), Capili AD, Bilimoria PM, Yamada T, Bonni A, Lima CD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Structural Biology, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, 
USA.

Phosphorylation and small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) conjugation contribute
to the spatial and temporal regulation of substrates containing
phosphorylation-dependent SUMO consensus motifs (PDSMs). Myocyte-enhancement
factor 2 (MEF2) is a transcription factor and PDSM substrate whose modification
by SUMO drives postsynaptic dendritic differentiation. NMR analysis revealed that
the human SUMO E2 interacted with model substrates for phosphorylated and
nonphosphorylated MEF2 in similar extended conformations. Mutational and
biochemical analysis identified a basic E2 surface that enhanced SUMO conjugation
to phosphorylated PDSM substrates MEF2 and heat-shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1), but not to nonphosphorylated MEF2 or HSF1, nor the non-PDSM substrate
p53. Mutant ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC9 isoforms defective in promoting
SUMO conjugation to phosphorylated MEF2 in vitro and in vivo also impair
postsynaptic differentiation in organotypic cerebellar slices. These data support
an E2-dependent mechanism that underlies phosphorylation-dependent SUMO
conjugation in pathways that range from the heat-shock response to nuclear
hormone signaling to brain development.

PMCID: PMC2771680
PMID: 19684601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Microb Pathog. 2009 Oct;47(4):231-6. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2009.08.002. Epub
2009 Aug 13.

Inhibition of heat shock protein expression by Helicobacter pylori.

Axsen WS(1), Styer CM, Solnick JV.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are primarily known as molecular chaperones that are
induced by cell stress and prevent protein aggregation and facilitate folding.
Recent evidence suggests that exposure of cells to microbial pathogens can also
induce HSPs, which then modulate both innate and adaptive immune responses.
Paradoxically, Helicobacter pylori has been found to decrease expression of HSPs.
We sought to investigate this phenomenon further and to examine the role of
different H. pylori strains and recognized virulence factors in cell culture and 
in the mouse model. Co-culture of H. pylori with two gastric carcinoma cell lines
reduced expression of HSP70 and, to a lesser extent, HSP60. Down modulation of
HSPs was not dependent on the presence of the vacuolating cytotoxin (VacA) or the
cag pathogenicity island (cag PAI). C57BL/6 mice infected with a human H. pylori 
strain also demonstrated reduced expression of HSP70, HSP8, and heat shock factor
1 (HSF-1), a transcriptional activator of HSP70. In contrast, the bacterial
pathogen, S. Typhimurium up-regulated HSP expression. Since HSPs are thought to
function as danger signals during microbial infection, H. pylori down-regulation 
of HSPs may be a mechanism of immune evasion that promotes chronic infection.

PMID: 19683049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. FEBS J. 2009 Sep;276(18):5252-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07219.x. Epub
2009 Aug 10.

CAP2 enhances germination of transgenic tobacco seeds at high temperature and
promotes heat stress tolerance in yeast.

Shukla RK(1), Tripathi V, Jain D, Yadav RK, Chattopadhyay D.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi,
India.

We reported earlier that ectopic expression of CAP2, a single AP2 domain
containing transcription activator from chickpea (Cicer arietinum) in tobacco
improves growth and development, and tolerance to dehydration and salt stress, of
the transgenic plants. Here, we report that, in addition, the CAP2-transgenic
tobacco seeds also exhibit higher germination efficiency at high temperature and 
show higher expression levels of genes for tobacco heat shock proteins and a heat
shock factor. CAP2 was able to activate the 5'-upstream activating sequence of
tobacco heat shock factor. Surprisingly, expression of CAP2 cDNA in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae also enhanced heat tolerance, with increased expression of the gene
for yeast heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) and its target, the gene for yeast heat
shock protein 104 (Hsp104). Sequence analysis of the Hsf1 promoter revealed the
presence of a dehydration-responsive element/C-repeat-like element (DRE/CRE).
Recombinant CAP2 protein bound to the DRE/CRE in the Hsf1 promoter in a gel shift
assay and transactivated the Hsf1 promoter-His reporter construct. The
full-length CAP2 protein was required to provide thermotolerance in yeast. If
these findings are taken together, our results suggest that CAP2 is involved in
the heat stress response and provides an example of functioning of a plant
transcription factor in yeast, highlighting the strong evolutionary conservation 
of the stress response mechanism.

PMID: 19674105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 22;28(42):3689-701. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.229. Epub 2009 Aug
10.

Upregulation of lactate dehydrogenase A by ErbB2 through heat shock factor 1
promotes breast cancer cell glycolysis and growth.

Zhao YH(1), Zhou M, Liu H, Ding Y, Khong HT, Yu D, Fodstad O, Tan M.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL 36604, USA.

ErbB2 has been shown to activate signaling molecules that may regulate glucose
metabolism. However, there is no evidence reported to directly link ErbB2 to
glycolysis, and the mechanism underlying ErbB2-enhanced glycolysis is poorly
understood. In this study, we investigated the role and mechanism of ErbB2 in
regulating glycolysis. We found that ErbB2-overexpressing cells possessed a
significantly higher level of glycolysis when compared to the
ErbB2-low-expressing cells, and the downregulation of ErbB2 markedly decreased
glycolysis. Overexpression of ErbB2 increased the expression of
glycolysis-regulating molecules lactate dehydrogenase A (LDH-A) and heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1). ErbB2 activated HSF1, indicated by the increased HSF1 trimer
formation, and promoted HSF1 protein synthesis. HSF1 bound to LDH-A promoter and 
the downregulation of HSF1 reduced the expression of LDH-A and subsequently
decreased cancer cell glycolysis and growth. Moreover, the glycolysis inhibitors,
2-deoxyglucose and oxamate, selectively inhibited the growth of
ErbB2-overexpressing cells. Taken together, this study shows that in human breast
cancer cells, ErbB2 promotes glycolysis at least partially through the
HSF1-mediated upregulation of LDH-A. This pathway may have a major role in
regulating glucose metabolism in breast cancer cells. These novel findings have
important implications for the design of new approaches to target
ErbB2-overexpressing breast cancers.

PMID: 19668225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Aug;25(3):349-52.

[Effects of human HSF1 on transcriptional regulation of prohibitin promoter].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XH(1), Guo DS, Wang XX, Zhang ZQ, Zhan R, Wang XM, Qian LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Medicine, Institute of Health & Environmental Medicine,
Tianjin 300050, China.

AIM: To assay the transcriptional regulation effect of hHSF1 on prohibitin gene
promoter.
METHODS: The total length of hHSF1 exon was amplified by PCR method and cloned
into pcDNA3. 1(+) vector. pcDNA3. 1(+)-hHSF1 and pGI3 prohibitin were
co-transfected into HEK293 cells. The luciferase activity was detected by
Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System to evaluate the transcriptional regulation 
effect of hHSF1 on prohibitin gene promoter.
RESULTS: The pcDNA3.1(+)-hHSF1 vector was constructed successfully. The assay of 
luciferase activity showed that the transcription of pGL3-prohibitin was
dramatically upregulated by hHSF1.
CONCLUSION: hHSF1 can transcriptionally regulate prohibitin expression.

PMID: 21155232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Apr;37(4):1875-81. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9623-2. Epub 2009
Jul 17.

Dominant-positive HSF1 decreases alpha-synuclein level and
alpha-synuclein-induced toxicity.

Liangliang X(1), Yonghui H, Shunmei E, Shoufang G, Wei Z, Jiangying Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China,
230027, Hefei, China.

Alpha-synuclein aggregation and cytotoxicity are widely considered to play a
critical role in the process of Parkinson's disease. Heat shock proteins are a
large family of cellular protective molecules in most kinds of cells. In this
study, we examined the impact of dominant-positive heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) on alpha-synuclein over-expression cellular model of Parkinson's 
disease. We found that over-expression of alpha-synuclein could form
alpha-synuclein immunopositive inclusions and result in cell death;
dominant-positive HSF1 dramatically increased the expression of HSP70 in SH-SY5Y 
cells, and significantly decreased the level and cytotoxicity of alpha-synuclein.
Taken together, these data indicate that dominant-positive HSF1 plays an
important role in suppressing alpha-synuclein aggregation and toxicity in SH-SY5Y
cells. Parkinson's disease which is marked by alpha-synuclein aggregation may be 
treated by increasing a set of endogenous heat shock proteins.

PMID: 19609719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Oncogene. 2009 Sep 17;28(37):3332-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.188. Epub 2009 Jul
13.

Heat shock protein 27 is involved in SUMO-2/3 modification of heat shock factor 1
and thereby modulates the transcription factor activity.

Brunet Simioni M(1), De Thonel A, Hammann A, Joly AL, Bossis G, Fourmaux E,
Bouchot A, Landry J, Piechaczyk M, Garrido C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U866, Dijon, France.

Heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) accumulates in stressed cells and helps them to
survive adverse conditions. We have already shown that HSP27 has a function in
the ubiquitination process that is modulated by its
oligomerization/phosphorylation status. Here, we show that HSP27 is also involved
in protein sumoylation, a ubiquitination-related process. HSP27 increases the
number of cell proteins modified by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-2/3 but 
this effect shows some selectivity as it neither affects all proteins nor
concerns SUMO-1. Moreover, no such alteration in SUMO-2/3 conjugation is
achievable by another HSP, such as HSP70. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a
transcription factor responsible for HSP expression, is one of the targets of
HSP27. In stressed cells, HSP27 enters the nucleus and, in the form of large
oligomers, binds to HSF1 and induces its modification by SUMO-2/3 on lysine 298. 
HSP27-induced HSF1 modification by SUMO-2/3 takes place downstream of the
transcription factor phosphorylation on S303 and S307 and does not affect its
DNA-binding ability. In contrast, this modification blocks HSF1 transactivation
capacity. These data show that HSP27 exerts a feedback inhibition of HSF1
transactivation and enlighten the strictly regulated interplay between HSPs and
HSF1. As we also show that HSP27 binds to the SUMO-E2-conjugating enzyme, Ubc9,
our study raises the possibility that HSP27 may act as a SUMO-E3 ligase specific 
for SUMO-2/3.

PMID: 19597476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Int J Biol Macromol. 2009 Oct 1;45(3):310-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2009.06.012.
Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Expression of Hsp90 chaperone [corrected] proteins in human tumor tissue.

McDowell CL(1), Bryan Sutton R, Obermann WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555, USA.

The activity of many oncogenic proteins depends on the molecular chaperone Hsp90.
Recent studies indicate that tumorigenesis is associated with increased
expression of chaperones, such as Hsp90. However, little is known about the
isoform dependence and cochaperone contribution on tumor formation. Here we
report the first systematic expression profiling for Hsp90alpha and Hsp90beta,
the cochaperones Aha1, Cdc37, p23, Tpr2, and the Hsp90 dependent transcription
factor HSF1 in a set of different tumor tissue samples. We find that in 10 out of
17 human tumors the expression level of at least one Hsp90 or Hsp90 cochaperone
protein is significantly elevated. However, individual tumors show unique
patterns of expression. Furthermore, Hsp90alpha and Hsp90beta expression levels
are not related. Our results suggest that expression profiling of Hsp90alpha and 
Hsp90beta and its cochaperone proteins may be useful for cancer diagnosis and
prognosis as well as for tailoring of drugs that interfere with the Hsp90 system 
in a tumor specific manner.

PMID: 19576239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2010 Mar;15(2):153-63. doi: 10.1007/s12192-009-0129-6.
Epub 2009 Jun 24.

LPS-induced cytokine levels are repressed by elevated expression of HSP70 in
rats: possible role of NF-kappaB.

Dokladny K(1), Lobb R, Wharton W, Ma TY, Moseley PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, Albuquerque, 87131, USA.

Heat shock protein (HSP)70 provides a spectrum of protection against any of a
variety of stresses, preventing damage measured at the level of molecules, cells,
as well as whole organism. We have previously reported that lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced lethality in rats is prevented by a previous exposure to a mild
thermal stress and that a thermal stress sufficient to induce HSP70 expression in
the liver is accompanied by an inhibition of endotoxin-mediated cytokines and
modulation of febrile response. However, the effect of HSP70 upregulation on
cytokine expression in animals is unknown. The aim of the present study was to
demonstrate the effect of HSP70 overexpression with adenovirus administration on 
LPS-induced increase in cytokines levels in animals. In the present study,
Sprague-Dawley rats were infected with either the control AdTrack or Ad70 virus
that directs the expression of human HSP70. After a 5-day incubation, animals
were injected with either saline alone or LPS (50 microg/kg). Four hours later,
blood samples were drawn and plasma levels of interleukin (IL)-6 or tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Our data demonstrate for the first time that HSP70 overexpression with adenovirus
injection prevented the LPS-induced increase in TNF-alpha and IL-6 levels in
rats. Repression of LPS-induced cytokines expressions by HSP70 upregulation was
associated with inhibited IkappaBalpha degradation and nuclear factor kappa-B
(NF-kappaB) p65 nuclear translocation in liver, suggesting that HSP70
overexpression may regulate LPS-induced cytokines expression through NF-kappaB
pathway. We conclude that the effects of heat stress-induced increase in HSP70
protein expression on LPS-induced cytokine elaboration in whole animals can be
reproduced by the actions of a single gene product.

PMCID: PMC2866987
PMID: 19551494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gerontology. 2009;55(5):550-8. doi: 10.1159/000225957. Epub 2009 Jun 18.

The shock of aging: molecular chaperones and the heat shock response in longevity
and aging--a mini-review.

Calderwood SK(1), Murshid A, Prince T.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA. scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Aging can be thought of as the collision between destructive
processes that act on cells and organs over the lifetime and the responses that
promote homeostasis, vitality and longevity. However, the precise mechanisms that
determine the rates of aging in organisms are not known.
OBJECTIVE: Macromolecules such as proteins are continuously exposed to potential 
damaging agents that can cause loss of molecular function and depletion of cell
populations over the lifetime of essential organs. One of the key homeostatic
responses involved in maintaining longevity is the induction of heat shock
proteins (HSPs), a conserved reaction to damaged intracellular proteins. We aim
to discuss how the interplay between protein damage and its repair or removal
from the cell may influence longevity and aging.
METHODS: We have reviewed experiments carried out in mammalian and non-mammalian 
organisms on molecular chaperones and the transcription factor (heat shock factor
1, HSF1) responsible for their expression. We have discussed mechanisms through
which these molecules are regulated in cells, respond to stimuli that enhance
longevity and become impaired during aging.
RESULTS: The transcription factor HSF1 initiates the prolific induction of HSP
when cells are exposed to protein damage. HSPs are molecular chaperones that
protect the proteome by folding denatured polypeptides and promoting the
degradation of severely damaged proteins. Activation of HSF1 is coupled
functionally to fundamental pathways of longevity and orchestrates the evasion of
aging through HSP induction and antagonism of protein aggregation. In addition to
mediating protein quality control, some HSPs such as Hsp27 and Hsp70 directly
protect cells against damage-induced entry into death pathways. However, the heat
shock response declines in potency over the lifetime, and enfeeblement of the
response contributes to aging by permitting the emergence of protein aggregation 
diseases, reduction in cellular vigor and decreased longevity.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular chaperones play an important role in the deterrence of
protein damage during aging and their expression is required for longevity.
Chemical stimulation of HSP synthesis might therefore be a significant strategy
in future design of antiaging pharmaceuticals.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2754743
PMID: 19546513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Aug 1;19(15):4303-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.05.073. 
Epub 2009 May 27.

Pyrimido[5,4-e][1,2,4]triazine-5,7(1H,6H)-dione derivatives as novel small
molecule chaperone amplifiers.

Zhou Y(1), Wei L, Brady TP, Murali Mohan Redddy PS, Nguyen T, Chen J, Au Q, Yoon 
IS, Yip G, Zhang B, Barber JR, Ng SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, CytRx Corporation, 3030 Bunker Hill Street, Suite
101, San Diego, CA 92109, USA. yuefen.zhou@gmail.com

Pyrimido[5,4-e][1,2,4]triazine-5,7(1H,6H)-dione derivatives were investigated as 
novel small molecule amplifiers of heat shock factor 1 transcriptional activity. 
Lead optimization led to the discovery of compound 4A-13, which displayed potent 
HSF1 activity under mild heat stress (EC(50)=2.5microM) and significant
cytoprotection in both rotenone (EC(50)=0.23microM) and oxygen-glucose
deprivation cell toxicity models (80% protection at 2.5microM).

PMID: 19502057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Aug 7;385(4):612-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.109. Epub 2009 May 30.

Alpha-helix 1 in the DNA-binding domain of heat shock factor 1 regulates its
heat-induced trimerization and DNA-binding.

Lu M(1), Sohn KJ, Kim SW, Li CR, Kim S, Kim DK, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735, Republic of
Korea.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) primarily regulates various cellular stress responses.
The role of alpha-helix1 (H1) in its DNA-binding domain (DBD) during HSF1
activation remains unknown. Here, HSF1 lacking H1 loses its heat-induced
activity, suggesting the importance of the latter. Furthermore, the CD spectra
and AMBER prediction show that this H1 deficiency does not change the structure
of HSF1 monomer, but does impact its heat-induced trimerization. Point mutation
showed that Phe18 in H1 interacts with Tyr60, and that Trp23 interacts with
Phe104 by an aromatic-aromatic interaction. Thus, the presence of H1 stabilizes
the DBD structure, which facilitates the heat-induced trimerization and
DNA-binding of HSF1.

PMID: 19486883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2009 Jun;68(6):642-52. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181a5deeb.

Mitochondrial and axonal abnormalities precede disruption of the neurofilament
network in a model of charcot-marie-tooth disease type 2E and are prevented by
heat shock proteins in a mutant-specific fashion.

Tradewell ML(1), Durham HD, Mushynski WE, Gentil BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology/Neurosurgery and Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Mutations in NEFL encoding the light neurofilament subunit (NFL) cause
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2E (CMT2E), which affects both motor and sensory
neurons. We expressed the disease-causing mutants NFL and NFL in motor neurons of
dissociated spinal cord-dorsal root ganglia and demonstrated that they are
incorporated into the preexisting neurofilament network but eventually disrupt
neurofilaments without causing significant motor neuron death. Importantly,
rounding of mitochondria and reduction in axonal diameter occurred before
disruption of the neurofilament network, indicating that mitochondrial
dysfunction contributes to the pathogenesis of CMT2E, as well as to CMT caused by
mitofusin mutations. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are involved in the formation of 
the neurofilament network and in protecting cells from misfolded mutant proteins.
Cotransfection of HSPB1 with mutated NEFL maintained the neurofilament network,
axonal diameter, and mitochondrial length in motor neurons expressing NFL, but
not NFL. Conversely, HSPA1 cotransfection was effective in motor neurons
expressing NFL, but not NFL. Thus, there are NFL mutant-specific differences in
the ability of individual HSPs to prevent neurofilament abnormalities, reduction 
in axonal caliber, and disruption of mitochondrial morphology in motor neurons.
These results suggest that HSP inducers have therapeutic potential for CMT2E but 
that their efficacy would depend on the profile of HSPs induced and the type of
NEFL mutation.

PMID: 19458545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Aug 15;18(16):2929-42. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp230. Epub 2009 May
14.

The A2A adenosine receptor rescues the urea cycle deficiency of Huntington's
disease by enhancing the activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system.

Chiang MC(1), Chen HM, Lai HL, Chen HW, Chou SY, Chen CM, Tsai FJ, Chern Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease
caused by a CAG trinucleotide expansion in the Huntingtin (Htt) gene. The
resultant mutant Htt protein (mHtt) forms aggregates in the brain and several
peripheral tissues (e.g. the liver) and causes devastating neuronal degeneration.
Metabolic defects resulting from Htt aggregates in peripheral tissues also
contribute to HD pathogenesis. Simultaneous improvement of defects in both the
CNS and peripheral tissues is thus the most effective therapeutic strategy and is
highly desirable. We earlier showed that an agonist of the A(2A) adenosine
receptor (A(2A) receptor), CGS21680 (CGS), attenuates neuronal symptoms of HD. We
found herein that the A(2A) receptor also exists in the liver, and that CGS
ameliorated the urea cycle deficiency by reducing mHtt aggregates in the liver.
By suppressing aggregate formation, CGS slowed the hijacking of a crucial
transcription factor (HSF1) and two protein chaperons (Hsp27 and Hsp70) into
hepatic Htt aggregates. Moreover, the abnormally high levels of
high-molecular-mass ubiquitin conjugates in the liver of an HD mouse model (R6/2)
were also ameliorated by CGS. The protective effect of CGS against mHtt-induced
aggregate formation was reproduced in two cells lines and was prevented by an
antagonist of the A(2A) receptor and a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor. Most
importantly, the mHtt-induced suppression of proteasome activity was also
normalized by CGS through PKA. Our findings reveal a novel therapeutic pathway of
A(2A) receptors in HD and further strengthen the concept that the A(2A) receptor 
can be a drug target in treating HD.

PMID: 19443488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 17;284(29):19705-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006817. Epub
2009 May 13.

A role for HSP70 in protecting against indomethacin-induced gastric lesions.

Suemasu S(1), Tanaka K, Namba T, Ishihara T, Katsu T, Fujimoto M, Adachi H, Sobue
G, Takeuchi K, Nakai A, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

A major clinical problem encountered with the use of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as indomethacin, is gastrointestinal
complications. Both NSAID-dependent cyclooxygenase inhibition and gastric mucosal
apoptosis are involved in NSAID-produced gastric lesions, and this apoptosis is
mediated by the endoplasmic reticulum stress response and resulting activation of
Bax. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) have been suggested to protect gastric mucosa
from NSAID-induced lesions; here we have tested this idea genetically. The
severity of gastric lesions produced by indomethacin was worse in mice lacking
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a transcription factor for hsp genes, than in control
mice. Indomethacin administration up-regulated the expression of gastric mucosal 
HSP70. Indomethacin-induced gastric lesions were ameliorated in transgenic mice
expressing HSP70. After indomethacin administration, fewer apoptotic cells were
observed in the gastric mucosa of transgenic mice expressing HSP70 than in
wild-type mice, whereas the gastric levels of prostaglandin E(2) for the two were
indistinguishable. This suggests that expression of HSP70 ameliorates
indomethacin-induced gastric lesions by affecting mucosal apoptosis. Suppression 
of HSP70 expression in vitro stimulated indomethacin-induced apoptosis and
activation of Bax but not the endoplasmic reticulum stress response.
Geranylgeranylacetone induced HSP70 at gastric mucosa in an HSF1-dependent manner
and suppressed the formation of indomethacin-induced gastric lesions in wild-type
mice but not in HSF1-null mice. The results of this study provide direct genetic 
evidence that expression of HSP70 confers gastric protection against
indomethacin-induced lesions by inhibiting the activation of Bax. The HSP
inducing activity of geranylgeranylacetone seems to contribute to its
gastroprotective activity against indomethacin.

PMCID: PMC2740595
PMID: 19439408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2009 Jul 9;54(1):53-64. doi: 10.1042/BA20080250.

Pifithrin-alpha decreases the radioprotective efficacy of a Podophyllum hexandrum
Himalayan mayapple fraction REC-2006 in HepG2 cells.

Singh PK(1), Kumar R, Sharma A, Arora R, Jain SK, Sharma RK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Biology and Radioprotection, Institute of Nuclear
Medicine and Allied Sciences (INMAS), Delhi-110 054, India.

Inhibition of the tumour suppressor p53 by PFT (pifithrin-alpha) promotes
p53-mediated apoptosis and protects against doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. The
present study was carried out to evaluate the effect of PFT on the
radioprotective potential of Podophyllum hexandrum fraction (REC-2006) in HepG2
(p53++) cell line. REC-2006 (10-5 microg/ml) treatment at 2 h before irradiation 
(10 Gy) rendered 80+/-3% protection in HepG2 cells, whereas PFT debilitated the
radioprotective potential of REC-2006. REC-2006 increased the expression of Hsp70
(heat-shock protein 70), HSF1 (heat-shock factor 1) and Bcl-2 in irradiated HepG2
cells, whereas PFT when treated with REC-2006 decreased the expression of Hsp70, 
HSF1 and Bcl-2 in HepG2 cells. REC-2006 facilitated post-irradiation DNA repair
by pausing cell-cycle progression at G1- and G2-phase, whereas no such cell-cycle
arrest was observed in irradiated HepG2 cells pretreated with PFT in irradiated
HepG2 cells. No change was observed in Mdm2 (murine double minute 2) and Ras-GAP 
(Ras-GTPase-activating protein) expression with or without PFT treatment.
Decrease in the expression of caspase 3 and Bax was observed in HepG2 cells when 
REC-2006 treatment was given 2 h before irradiation; however, PFT treatment
increased the expression of Bax leading to apoptosis. It can be concluded that
p53 expression plays a major role in the REC-2006-mediated protection against
acute irradiation in HepG2 cells. PFT treatment reduced the radioprotective
efficacy of REC-2006 by inhibiting the expression of HSF1 and Hsp70 and thereby
the expression of Bcl-2, by up-regulating the cell-cycle-regulatory proteins and 
therefore reducing the span of time for DNA repair and also by inducing
Bax-mediated apoptosis. PFT did not, however, show any effect on p53 regulating
protein (Mdm2) and pro-survival protein (Ras-GAP).

PMID: 19409072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jul;297(1):E104-11. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.91023.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

Involvement of NADPH oxidase in oxidized LDL-induced upregulation of heat shock
factor-1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in vascular endothelial cells.

Zhao R(1), Ma X, Xie X, Shen GX.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, University of Manitoba, 835-715 McDermot Ave.,
Winnipeg, Manitoba R3E 3P4, Canada.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is implicated in thrombogenesis,
inflammation, and extracellular matrix remodeling. Previous studies indicated
that oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) stimulated the generation of PAI-1 in
vascular endothelial cells (EC). The present study demonstrated that LDL oxidized
by copper, iron, or 3-morpholinosydnonimine increased the expression of NADPH
oxidase (NOX) 2, PAI-1, and heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) in human umbilical vein EC
or coronary artery EC compared with LDL or vehicle. Diphenyleneiodonium, a NOX
inhibitor, prevented the increases of the expression of HSF1 and PAI-1 in EC
induced by oxidized LDLs. Small-interference RNA (siRNA) for p22(phox), an
essential subunit of NOX, prevented oxidized LDL-induced expression of NOX2,
HSF1, and PAI-1 in EC. HSF1 siRNA inhibited oxidized LDL-induced expression of
PAI-1 and HSF1, but not NOX2, in EC. The binding of HSF1 to PAI-1 promoter and
the activity of PAI-1 promoter in EC were enhanced by oxidized LDL. Butylated
hydroxytulene, a potent antioxidant, inhibited oxidized LDL-induced release of
hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) and the expression of NOX2, HSF1, and PAI-1 in EC.
Treatment with H(2)O(2) increased the abundance of NOX2, HSF1, and PAI-1 in EC.
The results of the present study indicate that oxidized LDL-induced expression of
NOX may lead to the elevated release of reactive oxygen species, the activation
of HSF1, and the enhancement of the transcription of PAI-1 gene in cultured
vascular EC.

PMID: 19401454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Jun 1;19(11):3128-35. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.03.011.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Chloro-oxime derivatives as novel small molecule chaperone amplifiers.

Zhou Y(1), Vu K, Chen Y, Pham J, Brady T, Liu G, Chen J, Nam J, Murali Mohan
Reddy PS, Au Q, Yoon IS, Tremblay MH, Yip G, Cher C, Zhang B, Barber JR, Ng SC.

Author information: 
(1)CytRx Corporation, San Diego, CA 92109, USA. yuefen.zhou@gmail.com

Chloro-oxime derivatives were investigated as novel small molecule chaperone
amplifiers. Lead optimization led to the discovery of compounds that displayed
potent HSF1 activation activity, significant cytoprotection in MG-132 stress, ER 
stress and PolyQ stress cell models (EC(50)<10 microM).

PMID: 19398333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cell Microbiol. 2009 Jun;11(6):911-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01301.x.
Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Targeting eEF1A by a Legionella pneumophila effector leads to inhibition of
protein synthesis and induction of host stress response.

Shen X(1), Banga S, Liu Y, Xu L, Gao P, Shamovsky I, Nudler E, Luo ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA.

The Legionella pneumophila Dot/Icm type IV secretion system is essential for the 
biogenesis of a phagosome that supports bacterial multiplication, most likely via
the functions of its protein substrates. Recent studies indicate that fundamental
cellular processes, such as vesicle trafficking, stress response, autophagy and
cell death, are modulated by these effectors. However, how each translocated
protein contributes to the modulation of these pathways is largely unknown. In a 
screen to search substrates of the Dot/Icm transporter that can cause host cell
death, we identified a gene whose product is lethal to yeast and mammalian cells.
We demonstrate that this protein, called SidI, is a substrate of the Dot/Icm type
IV protein transporter that targets the host protein translation process. Our
results indicate that SidI specifically interacts with eEF1A and eEF1Bgamma, two 
components of the eukaryotic protein translation elongation machinery and such
interactions leads to inhibition of host protein synthesis. Furthermore, we have 
isolated two SidI substitution mutants that retain the target binding activity
but have lost toxicity to eukaryotic cells, suggesting potential biochemical
effect of SidI on eEF1A and eEF1Bgamma. We also show that infection by L.
pneumophila leads to eEF1A-mediated activation of the heat shock regulatory
protein HSF1 in a virulence-dependent manner and deletion of sidI affects such
activation. Moreover, similar response occurred in cells transiently transfected 
to express SidI. Thus, inhibition of host protein synthesis by specific effectors
contributes to the induction of stress response in L. pneumophila-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC2967282
PMID: 19386084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;540:265-79. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-558-9_19.

Isolation and characterization of the heat shock RNA 1.

Shamovsky I(1), Nudler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York University Medical Center, New York, NY
10016, USA.

The heat shock (HS) response is the major cellular defense mechanism against
acute exposure to environmental stresses. The hallmark of the HS response, which 
is conserved in all eukaryotes, is the rapid and massive induction of expression 
of a set of cytoprotective genes. Most of the induction occurs at the level of
transcription. The master regulator, heat shock transcription factor (HSF, or
HSF1 in vertebrates), is responsible for the induction of HS gene transcription
in response to elevated temperature. Under normal conditions HSF is present in
the cell as an inactive monomer. During HS, HSF trimerizes and binds to a
consensus sequence in the promoter of HS genes, stimulating their transcription
by up to 200-fold. We have shown that a large, noncoding RNA, HSR1, and the
translation elongation factor eEF1A form a complex with HSF during HS and are
required for its activation.

PMCID: PMC2929134
PMID: 19381566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2009 Aug;153(4):417-24. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.03.024. Epub 2009 Apr 7.

Simultaneous exposure of Xenopus A6 kidney epithelial cells to concurrent mild
sodium arsenite and heat stress results in enhanced hsp30 and hsp70 gene
expression and the acquisition of thermotolerance.

Young JT(1), Gauley J, Heikkila JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1.

In this study, we examined the effect of concurrent low concentrations of sodium 
arsenite and mild heat shock temperatures on hsp30 and hsp70 gene expression in
Xenopus A6 kidney epithelial cells. RNA blot hybridization and immunoblot
analysis revealed that exposure of A6 cells to 1-10 microM sodium arsenite at a
mild heat shock temperature of 30 degrees C enhanced hsp30 and hsp70 gene
expression to a much greater extent than found with either stress individually.
In cells treated simultaneously with 10 microM sodium arsenite and different heat
shock temperatures, enhanced accumulation of HSP30 and HSP70 protein was first
detected at 26 degrees C with larger responses at 28 and 30 degrees C. HSF1
activity was involved in combined stress-induced hsp gene expression since the
HSF1 activation inhibitor, KNK437, inhibited HSP30 and HSP70 accumulation.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that HSP30 was present in a granular pattern
primarily in the cytoplasm in cells treated simultaneously with both stresses.
Finally, prior exposure of A6 cells to concurrent sodium arsenite (10 microM) and
heat shock (30 degrees C) treatment conferred thermotolerance since it protected 
them against a subsequent thermal challenge (37 degrees C). Acquired
thermotolerance was not observed with cells treated with the two mild stresses
individually.

PMID: 19358893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jun 1;107(3):504-15. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22151.

Heat shock factor 1 deficiency via its downstream target gene alphaB-crystallin
(Hspb5) impairs p53 degradation.

Jin X(1), Moskophidis D, Hu Y, Phillips A, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Augusta,
Georgia 30912, USA.

Heat shock factor Hsf1 regulates the stress-inducibility of heat shock proteins
(Hsps) or molecular chaperones. One of the functions attributed to Hsps is their 
participation in folding and degradation of proteins. We recently showed that
hsf1(-/-) cells accumulate ubiquitinated proteins. However, a direct role for
Hsf1 in stability of specific proteins such as p53 has not been elucidated. We
present evidence that cells deficient in hsf1 accumulate wild-type p53 protein.
We further show that hsf1(-/-) cells express lower levels of alphaB-crystallin
and cells deficient in alphaB-crystallin also accumulate p53 protein. Reports
indicate that alphaB-crystallin binds to Fbx4 ubiquitin ligase, and they target
cyclin D1 for degradation through a pathway involving the SCF (Skp1-Cul1-F-box)
complex. Towards determining a mechanism for p53 degradation involving
alphaB-crystallin and Hsf1, we have found that ectopic expression of Fbx4 in
wild-type mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) expressing mutant p53 (p53R175H) leads 
to increase in its degradation, while MEFs deficient in hsf1 or alphaBcry are
defective in degradation of this p53 protein. In addition, immunoprecipitated
p53R175H from wild-type MEFs is able to pull-down both alphaB-crystallin and
Fbx4. Finally, immunoprecipitated wild-type p53 from doxorubicin treated U2OS
cells can pull-down endogenous alphaB-crystallin and Fbx4. These results indicate
that hsf1- and alphaBcry-deficient cells accumulate p53 due to reduced levels of 
alphaB-crystallin in these cells. Elevated levels of p53 in hsf1- and
alphaBcry-deficient cells lead to their increased sensitivity to DNA damaging
agents. These data reveal a novel mechanism for protein degradation through Hsf1 
and alphaB-crystallin.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2771697
PMID: 19343786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Biochemistry. 2009 May 12;48(18):3795-7. doi: 10.1021/bi802255c.

Aromatic-participant interactions are essential for disulfide-bond-based
trimerization in human heat shock transcription factor 1.

Lu M(1), Lee YJ, Park SM, Kang HS, Kang SW, Kim S, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pusan National University, 609-735 Busan, South of
Korea.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is a central regulator in the heat shock
response. However, its trimerization mechanism remains unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that three conserved aromatic amino acids (Trp37, Tyr60, and Phe104) 
are essential for HSF1 trimerization. Point mutation and fluorescence
spectroscopy experiments show that an intramolecular interaction between Tyr60
and alpha-helix 1 in the DNA-binding domain stabilizes the HSF1 structure upon
heat stress. Furthermore, intermolecular aromatic-aromatic interaction between
the Trp37 and Phe104 supports the approach with the Cys36 and Cys103. Thus, the
existence of two differential interactions facilitates the formation of
intermolecular disulfide bonds, leading to the heat-induced HSF1 trimerization.

PMID: 19338268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005050. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

A DNA sequence directed mutual transcription regulation of HSF1 and NFIX involves
novel heat sensitive protein interactions.

Singh U(1), Bongcam-Rudloff E, Westermark B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
umashankar.singh@genpat.uu.se

BACKGROUND: Though the Nuclear factor 1 family member NFIX has been strongly
implicated in PDGFB-induced glioblastoma, its molecular mechanisms of action
remain unknown. HSF1, a heat shock-related transcription factor is also a
powerful modifier of carcinogenesis by several factors, including PDGFB. How HSF1
transcription is controlled has remained largely elusive.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By combining microarray expression profiling and 
a yeast-two-hybrid screen, we identified that NFIX and its interactions with
CGGBP1 and HMGN1 regulate expression of HSF1. We found that CGGBP1 organizes a
bifunctional transcriptional complex at small CGG repeats in the HSF1 promoter.
Under chronic heat shock, NFIX uses CGGBP1 and HMGN1 to get recruited to this
promoter and in turn affects their binding to DNA. Results show that the
interactions of NFIX with CGGBP1 and HMGN1 in the soluble fraction are heat shock
sensitive due to preferential localization of CGGBP1 to heterochromatin after
heat shock. HSF1 in turn was found to bind to the NFIX promoter and repress its
expression in a heat shock sensitive manner.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: NFIX and HSF1 exert a mutual transcriptional repressive
effect on each other which requires CGG repeat in HSF1 promoter and HSF1 binding 
site in NFIX promoter. We unravel a unique mechanism of heat shock sensitive DNA 
sequence-directed reciprocal transcriptional regulation between NFIX and HSF1.
Our findings provide new insights into mechanisms of transcription regulation
under stress.

PMCID: PMC2660424
PMID: 19337383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Reproduction. 2009 Jun;137(6):923-9. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0015. Epub 2009 Mar 31.

RNA polymerase II interacts with the Hspa1b promoter in mouse epididymal
spermatozoa.

Wilkerson DC(1), Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

The Hspa1b (Hsp70.1) gene is one of the first genes expressed after
fertilization, with expression occurring during the minor zygotic genome
activation (ZGA) in the absence of stress. This expression can take place in the 
male pronucleus as early as the one-cell stage of embryogenesis. The importance
of HSPA1B for embryonic viability during times of stress is supported by studies 
showing that depletion of this protein results in a significant reduction in
embryos developing to the blastocyte stage. Recently, we have begun addressing
the mechanism responsible for allowing expression of Hspa1b during the minor ZGA 
and found that heat shock transcription factor (HSF) 1 and 2 bind the Hspa1b
promoter during late spermatogenesis. In this report, we have extended those
studies using western blots and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and found
that RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is present in epididymal spermatozoa and bound to
the Hspa1b promoter. These present results, in addition to our previous results, 
support a model in which the binding of HSF1, HSF2, SP1, and Pol II to the
promoter of Hspa1b would allow the rapid formation of a transcription-competent
state during the minor ZGA, thereby allowing Hspa1b expression.

PMCID: PMC2681783
PMID: 19336471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2009 Apr;13(4):469-78. doi: 10.1517/14728220902832697 .

Inhibiting the transcription factor HSF1 as an anticancer strategy.

Whitesell L(1), Lindquist S.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
whitesell@wi.mit.edu

BACKGROUND: In mammals, the cytoprotective heat-shock response is regulated
primarily by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). Unfortunately, the effects of HSF1 also 
support the ability of cancer cells to accommodate imbalances in signaling and
alterations in DNA, protein and energy metabolism associated with oncogenesis.
The malignant lifestyle confers dependence on this 'non-oncogene', suggesting a
therapeutic role for HSF1 inhibitors.
OBJECTIVE/METHODS: We begin with an overview of how HSF1 affects cancer biology
and how its activity is regulated. We then summarize progress in discovery and
development of HSF1 inhibitors, their current limitations and potential as
anticancer agents with a fundamentally different scope of action from other
clinically validated modulators of protein homeostasis.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: It is likely that within the next 5 years usable inhibitors 
of HSF1 will be identified and in early pre-clinical evaluation.

PMID: 19335068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2009 Sep;14(5):535-43. doi: 10.1007/s12192-009-0106-0.
Epub 2009 Mar 31.

Reinvestigation of the effect of carbenoxolone on the induction of heat shock
proteins.

Kawashima D(1), Asai M, Katagiri K, Takeuchi R, Ohtsuka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, Laboratory of Cell & Stress Biology,
Chubu University, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, Japan.

Carbenoxolone (CBX) is a semisynthetic derivative of the licorice root substance 
glycyrrhizinic acid and has been previously reported to induce only heat shock
protein 70 [Hsp70, HSPA1A (the systematic name of heat shock protein is given in 
the parenthesis after each HSP, according to the recent nomenclature guidelines, 
Kampinga et al., Cell Stress Chaperones, 14:105-111, 2008) but not other heat
shock proteins (HSPs) (Nagayama et al., Life Sci. 69:2867-2873, 2001). In this
study, we reinvestigated the effect of CBX on the induction of HSPs in HeLa and
human neuroblastoma (A-172) cells. CBX clearly induced not only Hsp70 but also
Hsp90 (HSPC1), Hsp40 (DNAJB1), and Hsp27 (HSPB1) at concentrations of 10 to 800
microM for 16 h incubation. At higher concentrations (more than 400 microM),
however, CBX appeared to be toxic. Treatment of cells with CBX resulted in
enhanced phosphorylation and acquisition of DNA-binding ability of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Furthermore, characteristic HSF1 granules were
formed in the nucleus, suggesting that the induction of HSPs by CBX is mediated
by the activation of HSF1. Furthermore, thermotolerance was induced by CBX
treatment, as determined by clonogenic survival. Although the precise target of
CBX is not known at present, these results indicate that CBX is one of the
molecular chaperone inducers and suggest that some pharmacological activities of 
CBX might be ascribable in part to its molecular chaperone-inducing property.

PMCID: PMC2728286
PMID: 19333787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 May;37(9):2962-73. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp180. Epub 2009 Mar
18.

Heat shock factor-1 modulates p53 activity in the transcriptional response to DNA
damage.

Logan IR(1), McNeill HV, Cook S, Lu X, Meek DW, Fuller-Pace FV, Lunec J, Robson
CN.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Medical School, 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

Here we define an important role for heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in the cellular
response to genotoxic agents. We demonstrate for the first time that HSF1 can
complex with nuclear p53 and that both proteins are co-operatively recruited to
p53-responsive genes such as p21. Analysis of natural and synthetic cis elements 
demonstrates that HSF1 can enhance p53-mediated transcription, whilst depletion
of HSF1 reduces the expression of p53-responsive transcripts. We find that HSF1
is required for optimal p21 expression and p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest in
response to genotoxins while loss of HSF1 attenuates apoptosis in response to
these agents. To explain these novel properties of HSF1 we show that HSF1 can
complex with DNA damage kinases ATR and Chk1 to effect p53 phosphorylation in
response to DNA damage. Our data reveal HSF1 as a key transcriptional regulator
in response to genotoxic compounds widely used in the clinical setting, and
suggest that HSF1 will contribute to the efficacy of these agents.

PMCID: PMC2685104
PMID: 19295133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2009 Nov;14(6):579-89. doi: 10.1007/s12192-009-0109-x.
Epub 2009 Mar 17.

Heat stress upregulates chaperone heat shock protein 70 and antioxidant manganese
superoxide dismutase through reactive oxygen species (ROS), p38MAPK, and Akt.

Banerjee Mustafi S(1), Chakraborty PK, Dey RS, Raha S.

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography and Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
physics, 1/AF Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata 700064, India.

Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts V79 cells were treated with heat stress for 4
weeks with short duration (15 min) heat shock every alternate day in culture. It 
was observed that Hsp 70 and the antioxidant enzyme MnSOD became overexpressed
during the chronic heat stress period. Both p38 MAPK and Akt became
phosphorylated by chronic heat stress exposure. Simultaneous exposure to
SB203580, a potent and specific p38MAPK inhibitor drastically inhibited the
phosphorylation of p38MAPK and Akt. Furthermore, exposure to SB203580 also
blocked the increase in Hsp70 and MnSOD levels and the elevated SOD activity
brought about by chronic heat stress. Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) transcriptional 
activity and nuclear translocation of HSF1 were prominently augmented by chronic 
heat stress, and this amplification is markedly reduced by concomitant exposure
to SB203580. Also, activations of p38MAPK and Akt and upregulations of Hsp70 and 
MnSOD were observed on exposure to heat shock for a single exposure of longer
duration (40 min). siRNA against p38MAPK notably reduced Akt phosphorylation by
single exposure to heat stress and drastically diminished the rise in Hsp70 and
MnSOD levels. Similarly, siRNA against Akt also eliminated the augmentation in
Hsp70 and MnSOD levels but p38MAPK levels remained unaffected. Heat stress
produced reactive oxygen species (ROS) in V79 fibroblasts. N-acetyl cysteine
blocked the increase in phosphorylation of p38MAPK, amplification of Hsp70, and
MnSOD levels by heat stress. Therefore, we conclude that heat stress-activated
p38MAPK which in turn activated Akt. Akt acted downstream of p38MAPK to increase 
Hsp70 and MnSOD levels.Concise summary: Thermal injury of the skin over a long
period of time has been associated with development of cancerous lesions. Also,
in many cancers, the cytoprotective genes Hsp70 and MnSOD have been found to be
overexpressed. Therefore, we considered it important to identify the signaling
elements upstream of the upregulated survival genes in heat stress. We conclude
that heat stress activated p38MAPK which in turn activated Akt. Akt mediated an
augmentation in Hsp70 and MnSOD levels working downstream of p38MAPK.

PMCID: PMC2866949
PMID: 19291423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004882. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

Regulation of clock-controlled genes in mammals.

Bozek K(1), Relógio A, Kielbasa SM, Heine M, Dame C, Kramer A, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany.

The complexity of tissue- and day time-specific regulation of thousands of
clock-controlled genes (CCGs) suggests that many regulatory mechanisms contribute
to the transcriptional output of the circadian clock. We aim to predict these
mechanisms using a large scale promoter analysis of CCGs.Our study is based on a 
meta-analysis of DNA-array data from rodent tissues. We searched in the promoter 
regions of 2065 CCGs for highly overrepresented transcription factor binding
sites. In order to compensate the relatively high GC-content of CCG promoters, a 
novel background model to avoid a bias towards GC-rich motifs was employed. We
found that many of the transcription factors with overrepresented binding sites
in CCG promoters exhibit themselves circadian rhythms. Among the predicted
factors are known regulators such as CLOCKratioBMAL1, DBP, HLF, E4BP4, CREB,
RORalpha and the recently described regulators HSF1, STAT3, SP1 and HNF-4alpha.
As additional promising candidates of circadian transcriptional regulators PAX-4,
C/EBP, EVI-1, IRF, E2F, AP-1, HIF-1 and NF-Y were identified. Moreover, GC-rich
motifs (SP1, EGR, ZF5, AP-2, WT1, NRF-1) and AT-rich motifs (MEF-2, HMGIY, HNF-1,
OCT-1) are significantly overrepresented in promoter regions of CCGs. Putative
tissue-specific binding sites such as HNF-3 for liver, NKX2.5 for heart or
Myogenin for skeletal muscle were found. The regulation of the erythropoietin
(Epo) gene was analysed, which exhibits many binding sites for circadian
regulators. We provide experimental evidence for its circadian regulated
expression in the adult murine kidney. Basing on a comprehensive literature
search we integrate our predictions into a regulatory network of core clock and
clock-controlled genes. Our large scale analysis of the CCG promoters reveals the
complexity and extensiveness of the circadian regulation in mammals. Results of
this study point to connections of the circadian clock to other functional
systems including metabolism, endocrine regulation and pharmacokinetics.

PMCID: PMC2654074
PMID: 19287494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 24;382(1):102-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.137. Epub 2009 Mar 1.

Satellite III non-coding RNAs show distinct and stress-specific patterns of
induction.

Sengupta S(1), Parihar R, Ganesh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Kanpur 208 016, India. sonalis@iitk.ac.in

The heat shock response in human cells is associated with the transcription of
satellite III repeats (SatIII) located in the 9q12 locus. Upon induction, the
SatIII transcripts remain associated with the locus and recruit several
transcription and splicing factors to form the nuclear stress bodies (nSBs). The 
nSBs are thought to modulate epigenetic changes during the heat shock response.
We demonstrate here that the nSBs are induced by a variety of stressors and show 
stress-specific patterns of induction. While the transcription factor HSF1 is
required for the induction of SatIII locus by the stressors tested, its specific 
role in the transcriptional process appears to be stress dependent. Our results
suggest the existence of multiple transcriptional loci for the SatIII transcripts
and that their activation might depend upon the type of stressors. Thus,
induction of SatIII transcripts appears to be a generic response to a variety of 
stress conditions.

PMID: 19258006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. FEBS J. 2009 Apr;276(7):1962-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06923.x. Epub 2009
Feb 23.

Differential recognition of heat shock elements by members of the heat shock
transcription factor family.

Yamamoto N(1), Takemori Y, Sakurai M, Sugiyama K, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF), an evolutionarily conserved stress
response regulator, forms trimers and binds to heat shock element (HSE),
comprising at least three continuous inverted repeats of the sequence
5'-nGAAn-3'. The single HSF of yeast is also able to bind discontinuously
arranged nGAAn units. We investigated interactions between three human HSFs and
various HSE types in vitro, in yeast cells, and in HeLa cells. Human HSF1, a
stress-activated regulator, preferentially bound to continuous HSEs rather than
discontinuous HSEs, and heat shock of HeLa cells caused expression of reporter
genes containing continuous HSEs. HSF2, whose function is implicated in neuronal 
specification and spermatogenesis, exhibited a slightly higher binding affinity
to discontinuous HSEs than did HSF1. HSF4, a protein required for ocular lens
development, efficiently recognized discontinuous HSEs in a
trimerization-dependent manner. Among four human gamma-crystallin genes encoding 
structural proteins of the lens, heat-induced HSF1 preferred HSEs on the
gammaA-crystallin and gammaB-crystallin promoters, whereas HSF4 preferred HSE on 
the gammaC-crystallin promoter. These results suggest that the HSE architecture
is an important determinant of which HSF members regulate genes in diverse
cellular processes.

PMID: 19250318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Interdiscip Sci. 2009 Mar;1(1):46-54. doi: 10.1007/s12539-008-0018-1. Epub 2009
Oct 27.

Cross-talks of sensory transcription networks in response to various
environmental stresses.

Chen T(1), Li F, Chen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic Engineering, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433,
China.

Erratum in
    Interdiscip Sci. 2009 Jun;1(2):162.

For living organisms like Saccharomyces cerevisiae, instinctual response to
sudden environmental changes leads to swift establishment of adaptive mechanisms.
The issue about how TFs sense and adapt to various environmental stresses has not
been systematically studied yet. Here we try to elucidate this problem with the
assistance of genomic expression patterns from a computation perspective. A
dynamic transcriptional regulatory model is employed to uncover significant
TF-target regulatory relationships under various environmental stresses. Based on
a global microarray dataset that describes how transcriptional regulators
significantly respond to one specific stress, we constructed a sensory
transcriptional network for the potential specific stressresponsive regulators.
Alternatively, we have observed cross-talks among these sensory transcription
networks that may shed light on general stress-responsive regulators. Results
reveal that our method not only reconstructs the potential global protection
mechanisms under various environmental stresses but also presents a set of
reported specific stress-responsive regulators (i.e., Aft2, Hsf1, Msn2, Msn4,
Skn7 and Yap1) as well as a set of inferred specific/general stress-responsive
regulators that may provide new guidance for further experiments on yeast cells' 
adaption to environmental stimuli. Though we only make a study on the yeast S.
cerevisiae, our method can be broadly applied to all species.

PMID: 20640818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Science. 2009 Feb 20;323(5917):1063-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1165946.

Stress-inducible regulation of heat shock factor 1 by the deacetylase SIRT1.

Westerheide SD(1), Anckar J, Stevens SM Jr, Sistonen L, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Rice Institute
for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2013 Nov 22;342(6161):931.

Comment in
    Science. 2009 Feb 20;323(5917):1021-2.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is essential for protecting cells from
protein-damaging stress associated with misfolded proteins and regulates the
insulin-signaling pathway and aging. Here, we show that human HSF1 is inducibly
acetylated at a critical residue that negatively regulates DNA binding activity. 
Activation of the deacetylase and longevity factor SIRT1 prolonged HSF1 binding
to the heat shock promoter Hsp70 by maintaining HSF1 in a deacetylated,
DNA-binding competent state. Conversely, down-regulation of SIRT1 accelerated the
attenuation of the heat shock response (HSR) and release of HSF1 from its cognate
promoter elements. These results provide a mechanistic basis for the requirement 
of HSF1 in the regulation of life span and establish a role for SIRT1 in protein 
homeostasis and the HSR.

PMCID: PMC3429349
PMID: 19229036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2009 Sep;14(5):499-508. doi: 10.1007/s12192-009-0103-3.
Epub 2009 Feb 17.

Hyperthermia in the febrile range induces HSP72 expression proportional to
exposure temperature but not to HSF-1 DNA-binding activity in human lung
epithelial A549 cells.

Tulapurkar ME(1), Asiegbu BE, Singh IS, Hasday JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) is classically activated at temperatures
above the physiologic range (>or=42 degrees C) via activation of the
stress-activated transcription factor, heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1). Several
studies suggest that less extreme hyperthermia, especially within the febrile
range, as occurs during fever and exertional/environmental hyperthemia, can also 
activate HSF-1 and enhance HSP expression. We compared HSP72 protein and mRNA
expression in human A549 lung epithelial cells continuously exposed to 38.5
degrees C, 39.5 degrees C, or 41 degrees C or exposed to a classic heat shock (42
degrees C for 2 h). We found that expression of HSP72 protein and mRNA increased 
linearly as incubation temperature was increased from 37 degrees C to 41 degrees 
C, but increased abruptly when the incubation temperature was raised to 42
degrees C. A similar response in luciferase activity was observed using A549
cells stably transfected with an HSF-1-responsive luciferase reporter plasmid.
However, activation of intranuclear HSF-1 DNA-binding activity was comparable at 
38.5 degrees C, 39.5 degrees C, and 41 degrees C and only modestly greater at 42 
degrees C but the mobility of HSF1 protein on a denaturing gel was altered with
increasing exposure temperature and was distinctly different at 42 degrees C.
These findings indicate that the proportional changes in HSF-1-dependent HSP72
expression at febrile-range temperatures are dependent upon exposure time and
temperature but not on the degree of HSF-1 DNA-binding activity. Instead,
HSF-1-mediated HSP expression following hyperthermia and heat shock appears to be
mediated, in addition to HSF-1 activation, by posttranslational modifications of 
HSF-1 protein.

PMCID: PMC2728283
PMID: 19221897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Transl Res. 2009 Mar;153(3):132-41. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2008.12.003. Epub 2008
Dec 29.

Acteylcholinesterase inhibitor rivastigmine enhances cellular defenses in
neuronal and macrophage-like cell lines.

Zhou X(1), Patel AR, Perez F, Jurivich DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Geriatric Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Jesse Brown VAMC, Chicago, IL, USA.

Neuroprotection mediated by the cellular heat shock response offers 1 clinical
strategy to prevent, stabilize, and possibly reverse neurodegenerative processes.
Although damaged proteins are thought to be the primary stimulus for the heat
shock response, several studies indicate that pharmaceutical agents can either
directly induce the heat shock transcription factor (Hsf1) or enhance its
activation during different forms of cellular stress. Because Hsf1 is now known
to combat the proteotoxicity of aging and has a central role in modulating
amyloid aggregation, pharmacologic interventions to strengthen Hsf1 action may
have important implications for preventing neurodegeneration linked to altered
and damaged proteins such as observed in Alzheimer's disease. Given reports that 
some agents for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease have neuroprotective
properties, this project investigated whether rivastigmine, which is an acetyl
and butaryl cholinesterase inhibitor, mediates the neuroprotection of the
neuronal-like cell line SH-SY5Y. The cells were exposed to various concentrations
of rivastigmine to determine whether the drug protected cells from toxic injury
and induced the 1st phase of the cellular heat shock response. In all,
100-micromol/L rivastigmine decreases cell death by 40% compared with untreated
cells. This concentration enhances Hsf1 activation by strengthening both its
multimerization and its phosphorylation, which leads to increased messenger RNA
(mRNA) for hsp70. Therefore, one of the putative neuroprotective mechanisms of
rivastigmine seems to be mediated through the heat shock response. These results 
also are observed in cultured macrophage-like cells, which suggests a future
clinical tool for monitoring pharmacologically improved stress responses in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells during treatment of Alzheimer disease.

PMID: 19218096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Circ Res. 2009 Mar 13;104(5):572-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.193250. Epub 2009
Feb 12.

A novel role of microRNA in late preconditioning: upregulation of endothelial
nitric oxide synthase and heat shock protein 70.

Yin C(1), Salloum FN, Kukreja RC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center,
Richmond, VA 23298-0281, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs of 18 to 24 nucleotides that are involved
in posttranscriptional regulation of protein expression. Their role in ischemic
preconditioning (IPC) is currently unknown. We hypothesized that miRNAs induced
after IPC in the heart may create a preconditioned phenotype through upregulating
proteins including endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)/inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS) and heat shock protein (HSP)70, which are implicated in the
late-phase protection of IPC. miRNAs were extracted from hearts of ICR mice
following IPC. The purified miRNAs were injected in vivo into the left
ventricular wall of mice, and, 48 hours later, the hearts were subjected to
regional ischemia/reperfusion injury by left anterior descending artery ligation 
for 30 minutes followed by reperfusion for 24 hour. IPC caused no changes in
miRNA-23b and miRNA-483 whereas miRNA-1, miRNA-21and miRNA-24 were significantly 
increased. The IPC-miRNA treatment caused an increase in eNOS mRNA and protein,
whereas iNOS was not changed. HSF-1 (heat shock transcription factor 1) and HSP70
were also increased with IPC-miRNA treatment versus control. Moreover, injection 
of IPC-miRNA protected the hearts against ischemia/reperfusion injury, as shown
by a reduction of infarct size as compared with saline or non-IPC miRNA-treated
control. We conclude that IPC-induced miRNAs trigger cardioprotection similar to 
the delayed phase of IPC, possibly through upregulating eNOS, HSP70, and the
HSP70 transcription factor HSF-1.

PMCID: PMC3359791
PMID: 19213952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Nov;36(8):2271-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-008-9444-8. Epub 2009
Feb 4.

Delivery of HSF1(+) protein using HIV-1 TAT protein transduction domain.

Hou Y(1), Zou J.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and Health (GIBH), Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 510663 Guangzhou, China.

HSF1 is the major transcription factor of HSPs (heat shock proteins) in response 
to various stresses. Wild type HSF1 (heat shock transcriptional factor 1) is
normally inactive, while a constitutively active form of HSF1 (HSF1(+)) can
activate downstream HSP expression in the absence of stresses. Here we generated 
the eukaryotic vectors that expresses HSF1(+) fusion proteins, and found that
HSF1(+)-TAT fusion protein was expressed and activated HSP expression. TAT, as a 
trans-acting factor of HIV-1, has been demonstrated to deliver functional cargo
protein into living cells. HSF1(+)-TAT fusion protein was expressed in E. coli,
purified, incubated with A549 cells for 8 h, Western blot analysis and luciferase
reporter assay showed that HSF1(+) fusion protein was delivered into A549 cells
successfully, and the accumulation of HSF1(+)-TAT fusion protein in A549 cells
up-regulated HSP70 expression.

PMID: 19190998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Pharmacol. 2009 May;75(5):1180-8. doi: 10.1124/mol.108.053280. Epub 2009 Feb 
2.

Induction of overexpression of the 27- and 70-kDa heat shock proteins by bicyclol
attenuates concanavalin A-Induced liver injury through suppression of nuclear
factor-kappaB in mice.

Bao XQ(1), Liu GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are molecular chaperones critical for cell survival
under adverse environmental conditions and for normal cellular homeostasis.
Bicyclol, a novel antihepatitis drug, has been shown to protect against liver
injury in animals. However, it is unclear how bicyclol protects against liver
injury. We recently found that bicyclol is an inducer of HSPs. We wondered
whether bicyclol regulated the expression of HSPs to produce a liver protection
in vivo. Thus, this study was designed to address these questions using a mouse
model with concanavalin A (ConA)-induced liver injury. Oral administration of
bicyclol markedly alleviated ConA-caused liver injury in mice as indicated by the
reduction of serum aminotransferases, liver necrosis, and the release of
cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing factor from mitochondria and hepatic DNA
fragmentation. Correlated with this, bicyclol induced the increase of mRNA and
protein levels of hepatic 27- and 70-kDa HSPs (HSP27 and HSP70) in the mice.
Correspondingly, the elevated HSP27 and HSP70 suppressed inhibitor kappaB
degradation and nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation that were caused by 
ConA. The protective effects of bicyclol on ConA-induced mouse liver injury were 
markedly attenuated by quercetin, an inhibitor of HSPs synthesis. Our results
suggest that the antihepatitis drug bicyclol may protect against liver injury by 
inducing the expression of hepatic HSP27 and HSP70 and consequently inhibit the
transcription factor NF-kappaB-mediated apoptosis and necrosis in liver tissue.

PMID: 19188336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9176-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808656200. Epub 2009
Jan 29.

HSF1-mediated BAG3 expression attenuates apoptosis in 4-hydroxynonenal-treated
colon cancer cells via stabilization of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins.

Jacobs AT(1), Marnett LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, Center
in Molecular Toxicology, and Vanderbilt-Ingram Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146, USA.

4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE) is a pro-apoptotic electrophile generated during the
spontaneous decomposition of oxidized lipids. We have previously shown that HNE
activates the transcription factor, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and promotes
cytoprotective heat shock gene expression and that silencing HSF1 sensitizes the 
colon cancer cell line RKO to HNE-induced apoptosis. Here we report a reduction
in the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-X(L), Mcl-1, and Bcl-2 in HSF1-silenced RKO
cells, and we examine the underlying mechanism. To investigate the regulation of 
the Bcl-2 family by HSF1, microarray analysis of gene expression was performed.
We observed that the Hsp70 co-chaperone, BAG3 (Bcl-2-associated athanogene domain
3), is strongly induced by HNE in control but not in HSF1-silenced colon cancer
cells. Silencing BAG3 expression with small interfering RNA caused a dramatic
reduction in Bcl-X(L), Mcl-1, and Bcl-2 protein levels in colon cancer cells and 
increased apoptosis, similar to the effect of silencing HSF1. Also,
immunoprecipitation experiments indicate specific interactions between BAG3,
Hsp70, and the Bcl-2 family member, Bcl-X(L). Overall, our data reveal that BAG3 
is HSF1-inducible and has a unique role facilitating cancer cell survival during 
pro-apoptotic stress by stabilizing the level of Bcl-2 family proteins.

PMCID: PMC2666569
PMID: 19179333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9521-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808819200. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

Mammalian heat shock factor 1 is essential for oocyte meiosis and directly
regulates Hsp90alpha expression.

Metchat A(1), Akerfelt M, Bierkamp C, Delsinne V, Sistonen L, Alexandre H,
Christians ES.

Author information: 
(1)UPS, Centre de Biologie du Développement-UMR5547, 4R3B3, Université de
Toulouse, 118 route de Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse, France.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the main regulator of the stress
response that triggers the transcription of several genes encoding heat shock
proteins (Hsps). Hsps act as molecular chaperones involved in protein folding,
stability, and trafficking. HSF1 is highly expressed in oocytes and Hsf1
knock-out in mice revealed that in the absence of stress this factor plays an
important role in female reproduction. We previously reported that Hsf1(-/-)
females produce oocytes but no viable embryos. Consequently, we asked whether
oocytes require HSF1 to regulate a particular set of Hsps necessary for them to
develop. We find that Hsp90alpha (Hspaa1) is the major HSF1-dependent chaperone
inasmuch as Hsf1 knock-out resulted in Hsp90-depleted oocytes. These oocytes
exhibited delayed germinal vesicle breakdown (or G(2)/M transition), partial
meiosis I block, and defective asymmetrical division. To probe the role of
Hsp90alpha in this meiotic syndrome, we analyzed meiotic maturation in wild-type 
oocytes treated with a specific inhibitor of Hsp90,
17-allylamino-17-demethoxy-geldanamycin, and observed similar defects. At the
molecular level we showed that, together with these developmental anomalies, CDK1
and MAPK, key meiotic kinases, were significantly disturbed. Thus, our data
demonstrate that HSF1 is a maternal transcription factor essential for normal
progression of meiosis.

PMCID: PMC2666604
PMID: 19158073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Nov;36(8):2323-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9451-4. Epub 2009
Jan 17.

Induction of macroautophagy by heat.

Zhao Y(1), Gong S, Shunmei E, Zou J.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou Science Park, 510663 Guangzhou, China.

Macroautophagy is a regulated bulk degradation process of cellular components,
mainly long-lived proteins or cytoplasmic organelles. Nutrient depletion is a
classic inducer of macroautophagy. In this report, we have induced heat-mediated 
macroautophagy in several cell lines in the absence of nutrient depletion. Heat
treatment increased the autophagic markers LC3-I and LC3-II at the protein
levels. Interestingly, expression of a constitutively active HSF1 mutant
suppressed basal LC3-II protein level and heat-induced increase of LC3-II. Our
results provide evidence that heat is a potent inducer of macroautophagy in
mammalian cells, and implicate the negative role of active HSF1 in this process.

PMID: 19152020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2009 Aug;58(8):1275-85. doi:
10.1007/s00262-008-0645-8. Epub 2009 Jan 13.

Sodium butyrate upregulates expression of NKG2D ligand MICA/B in HeLa and HepG2
cell lines and increases their susceptibility to NK lysis.

Zhang C(1), Wang Y, Zhou Z, Zhang J, Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunopharmacology and Immunotherapy, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Shandong University, 44 Wenhua West Road, Jinan, China.
caizhangsd@sdu.edu.cn

Natural killer (NK) cells are important effectors in the immune response to
tumors. A number of cell-surface inhibitory and activating receptors on NK cells 
tightly regulate their interaction with target cell ligands. In particular, the
strength of an anti-tumor immune response appears to depend critically on surface
levels of one activating receptor, NKG2D. Correspondingly, expression of NKG2D
ligands on target cells is a requirement for effective tumor immunosurveillance
and the elimination of pathogen-infected cells. Sodium butyrate, a potent
repressor of histone deacetylase (HDAC), has recently been proposed as a
potential agent in cancer treatment based on its ability to modify, in several
cancer cell types, the expression of a variety of genes related to cell cycle
regulation and apoptosis. Here we report that, in the HeLa and HepG2 tumor cell
lines, sodium butyrate upregulated the expression of the MHC class I-related
chain molecules A and B (MICA and MICB) at both the mRNA and protein levels,
resulting in an enhanced susceptibility of cells in both lines to NK lysis. It
also led to an elevated expression of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) and
transcription factor Sp1, and increased the binding of transcription factors Sp1 
and heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) to the MICA/B promoter, resulting in
increased expression of MICA and MICB. siRNA targeting Sp1 significantly
attenuate the enhancement of MICA expression by sodium butyrate. These results
suggest that sodium butyrate and other HDAC inhibitors may have therapeutic
potential by enhancing the immune response to cancer.

PMID: 19139882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Proteomics. 2009 Feb;9(3):657-70. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800452.

Insights into yeast adaptive response to the agricultural fungicide mancozeb: a
toxicoproteomics approach.

Santos PM(1), Simões T, Sá-Correia I.

Author information: 
(1)IBB-Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Centre for Biological and 
Chemical Engineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Portugal.

Toxicogenomics has the potential to elucidate gene-environment interactions to
identify genes that are affected by a particular chemical at the early stages of 
the toxicological response and to establish parallelisms between different
organisms. The fungicide mancozeb, widely used in agriculture, is an
ethylene-bis-dithiocarbamate complex with manganese and zinc. Exposure to this
pesticide has been linked to the development of idiopathic Parkinson's disease
and cancer. Given that many signalling pathways and their molecular components
are substantially conserved among eukaryotic organisms, we used Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to get insights into the molecular mechanisms of mancozeb toxicity and
adaptation based on expression proteomics. The early global response to mancozeb 
was analysed by quantitative proteomics using 2-DE. The target genes (e.g. TSA1, 
TSA2, SOD1, SOD2, AHP1, GRE2, GRX1, CYS3, PRE3, PRE6, PRE8, PRE9, EFT1, RPS5,
TIF11, HSP31, HSP26, HSP104, HSP60, HSP70-family) and the putative main
transcription activators (e.g. Yap1, Msn2/Msn4, Met4, Hsf1, Aft1, Pdr1, Skn7,
Rpn4p, Gcn4) of the complex mancozeb-induced expression changes are related with 
yeast response to stress, in particular to oxidative stress, protein translation 
initiation and protein folding, disassembling of protein aggregates and
degradation of damaged proteins. Our results also suggest that this study
provided powerful indications that may be useful to expand the knowledge obtained
in yeast not only to the global response to mancozeb toxicity in phytopathogenic 
fungi but also to humans.

PMID: 19137554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Mar;20(5):1340-7. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-08-0864. Epub 2009 Jan
7.

Heterotrimerization of heat-shock factors 1 and 2 provides a transcriptional
switch in response to distinct stimuli.

Sandqvist A(1), Björk JK, Akerfelt M, Chitikova Z, Grichine A, Vourc'h C, Jolly
C, Salminen TA, Nymalm Y, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
20520 Turku, Finland.

Organisms respond to circumstances threatening the cellular protein homeostasis
by activation of heat-shock transcription factors (HSFs), which play important
roles in stress resistance, development, and longevity. Of the four HSFs in
vertebrates (HSF1-4), HSF1 is activated by stress, whereas HSF2 lacks intrinsic
stress responsiveness. The mechanism by which HSF2 is recruited to
stress-inducible promoters and how HSF2 is activated is not known. However,
changes in the HSF2 expression occur, coinciding with the functions of HSF2 in
development. Here, we demonstrate that HSF1 and HSF2 form heterotrimers when
bound to satellite III DNA in nuclear stress bodies, subnuclear structures in
which HSF1 induces transcription. By depleting HSF2, we show that HSF1-HSF2
heterotrimerization is a mechanism regulating transcription. Upon stress, HSF2
DNA binding is HSF1 dependent. Intriguingly, when the elevated expression of HSF2
during development is mimicked, HSF2 binds to DNA and becomes transcriptionally
competent. HSF2 activation leads to activation of also HSF1, revealing a
functional interdependency that is mediated through the conserved trimerization
domains of these factors. We propose that heterotrimerization of HSF1 and HSF2
integrates transcriptional activation in response to distinct stress and
developmental stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2649261
PMID: 19129477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Ocul Biol Dis Infor. 2008;1(1):37-45.

Prediction of Cis-Regulatory Elements Controlling Genes Differentially Expressed 
by Retinal and Choroidal Vascular Endothelial Cells.

Choi D(1), Appukuttan B, Binek SJ, Planck SR, Stout JT, Rosenbaum JT, Smith JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Cultured endothelial cells of the human retina and choroid demonstrate distinct
patterns of gene expression. We hypothesized that differential gene expression
reflected differences in the interactions of transcription factors and respective
cis-regulatory motifs(s) in these two emdothelial cell subpopulations,
recognizing that motifs often exist as modules. We tested this hypothesis in
silico by using TRANSFAC Professional and CisModule to identify cis-regulatory
motifs and modules in genes that were differentially expressed by human retinal
versus choroidal endothelial cells, as identified by analysis of a microarray
data set. Motifs corresponding to eight transcription factors were significantly 
(p < 0.05) differentially abundant in genes that were relatively highly expressed
in retinal (i.e., GCCR, HMGIY, HSF1, p53, VDR) or choroidal (i.e., E2F, YY1, ZF5)
endothelial cells. Predicted cis-regulatory modules were quite different for
these two groups of genes. Our findings raise the possibility of exploiting
specific cis-regulatory motifs to target therapy at the ocular endothelial cells 
subtypes responsible for neovascular age-related macular degeneration or
proliferative diabetic retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC2573398
PMID: 19122891  [PubMed]


227. Rejuvenation Res. 2008 Dec;11(6):1049-57. doi: 10.1089/rej.2008.0793.

Engineered repeated electromagnetic field shock therapy for cellular senescence
and age-related diseases.

Perez FP(1), Zhou X, Morisaki J, Ilie J, James T, Jurivich DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois, College of Medicine, Chicago, 
IL 60612, USA. fperez04@uic.edu

A new consensus of gerontologists proposes that delay of biological senescence is
the most potent public health measure for preventing chronic disease in late
life. At the most fundamental level, cellular aging is characterized by a decline
in repair and homeostatic systems. Thus, interventions that protect or rejuvenate
these cellular systems hold significant promise for preventing or delaying the
onset of age-related diseases. The most likely candidates for delaying senescence
are the longevity-linked transcription factors DAF16 and HSF1. If one were to
engineer negligible senescence, a key target would be the heat shock protein axis
regulated by HSF1. This pathway is the preferred pathway to prevent protein
damage or aggregation, whereas DAF-16/FOXO is a backup pathway activated during
stress. Reduced HSF1 activity appears to accelerate tissue aging and shortens
life span. Conversely, over-expression of HSF1 increases life span and decreases 
amyloid toxicity in animal models. This paper describes enhancement of the
HSR/HSF1 pathway engineered by repeated electromagnetic field shock (REMFS). In a
recent study, we demonstrated that REMFS therapy upregulates the HSR/HSF1
pathway, delays cellular senescence in young cells, and transiently reverses it
in senescent cells, thus altering cellular mortality. The technology of applying 
certain beneficial EMF energy to the human body to stimulate the natural stress
response and activate the repair and maintenance systems is a new strategy for
engineered negligible senescence. We discuss the exciting clinical implications
of REMFS therapy in human aging and disease.

PMID: 19119860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 1;106(2):267-78. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21997.

Aberrant regulation and modification of heat shock factor 1 in senescent human
diploid fibroblasts.

Lee YK(1), Liu DJ, Lu J, Chen KY, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers State University of New
Jersey 604 Allison Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Induction of the heat shock response (HSR), determined by hsp70-luciferase
reporter and HSP70 protein expression, is attenuated as a function of age of the 
IMR-90 human diploid fibroblasts. To better understand the underlying mechanism, 
we evaluated changes in the regulation and function of the HSF1 transcription
factor. We show that the activation of HSF1 both in vivo and in vitro was
decreased as a function of age, and this was attributable to a change in the
regulation of HSF1 as the abundance of HSF1 protein and mRNA was unaffected. HSF1
was primarily cytosolic in young cells maintained at 37 degrees C, and heat shock
promoted its quantitative nuclear translocation and trimerization. In old cells, 
some HSF1 was nuclear sequestered at 37 degrees C, and heat shock failed to
promote the quantitative trimerization of HSF1. These changes in HSF1 could be
reproduced by treating young cells with H2O2 to stunt them into premature
senescence. Flow cytometry measurement of peroxide content showed higher levels
in old cells and H2O2-induced premature senescent cells as compared to young
cells. Experiments using isoelectric focusing and Western blot showed
age-dependent changes in the mobility of HSF1 in a pattern consistent with its
S-glutathiolation and S-nitrosylation; these changes could be mimicked by
treating young cells with H2O2. Our results demonstrated dynamic age-dependent
changes in the regulation but not the amount of HSF1. These changes are likely
mediated by oxidative events that promote reversible and irreversible
modification of HSF1 including S-glutathiolation and S-nitrosylation.

PMID: 19097133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. FEBS J. 2008 Dec;275(23):5969-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06725.x.

DNA-dependent protein kinase is involved in heat shock protein-mediated
accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha in hypoxic preconditioned HepG2
cells.

Kang MJ(1), Jung SM, Kim MJ, Bae JH, Kim HB, Kim JY, Park SJ, Song HS, Kim DW,
Kang CD, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Pusan National University School of Medicine,
Busan, South Korea.

Hypoxic preconditioning may afford protection against subsequent lethal hypoxia. 
As hypoxic tolerance induces changes in the expression of genes involved in DNA
damage and repair response pathways, we investigated whether DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK), one of the DNA double-strand break repair proteins,
could be involved in hypoxic preconditioning-induced protective signaling
cascades. We showed that induction of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression 
during hypoxic preconditioning by repeated hypoxic exposure was associated with
increased mRNA and protein levels of DNA-PK catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and
Ku70/Ku80, the DNA-PK components, in human hepatoma HepG2 cells, followed by
upregulation of Hsp70/Hsp90 and Bcl-2 and concurrent downregulation of Bax.
Additionally, loss of DNA-PKcs led to attenuated expression of Hsp70/Hsp90,
accelerated hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha degradation, and increased
susceptibility to hypoxia-induced cell death. We also found that the mRNA and
protein levels of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) were progressively increased with
DNA-PK activation during hypoxic preconditioning, and inhibition of HSF1 function
by KNK437 resulted in a significant decrease in the level of protein kinase Akt
as well as of DNA-PKcs, with downregulation of Hsp70/Hsp90 and HIF-1alpha. Our
results suggest the possibility that DNA-PK-mediated signaling pathway is
required for the increase in HIF-1alpha expression through activation of HSF1 and
subsequent upregulation of heat shock proteins after hypoxic reconditioning.

PMID: 19021771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Biomol Screen. 2008 Dec;13(10):953-9. doi: 10.1177/1087057108326538. Epub 2008 
Nov 17.

High-content image-based screening for small-molecule chaperone amplifiers in
heat shock.

Au Q(1), Kanchanastit P, Barber JR, Ng SC, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Cytrx Corporation, San Diego, CA 92109, USA.

Heat shock proteins represent the major elements of the cellular stress response 
that protects cells from diseases caused by protein misfolding. Small-molecule
amplifiers of heat shock proteins have shown promising results in several animal 
models, demonstrating the potential importance of such compounds for
therapeutics. The expression of many heat shock proteins is controlled by HSF1,
which forms stress granules in the nucleus when transcriptionally activated.
Activation of the cellular stress also correlates with the translocation of HSP70
into nucleoli. The authors have developed an image-based, multiparametric assay
to simultaneously monitor the effects of compounds on HSF1/HSP70 stress granule
formation in heat-shocked Hela cells. High-content screening of the compound
library was performed with a Z' of 0.62, demonstrating a highly robust assay for 
large-scale screening. The resulting hits showed prolonged amplification of HSP70
induction in heat-stressed cells but no effects in cells without stress.
Treatment of cells with selected hits exhibited significant cytoprotection from
both oxygen glucose deprivation and rotenone-induced stresses. Thus, high-content
screening of HSF1/HSP70 amplifiers provides a practical opportunity for clinical 
therapeutics targeting protein misfolding diseases.

PMID: 19015292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2008 Dec;17(12):1955-62. doi:
10.1517/13543780802528609 .

Custirsen (OGX-011): a second-generation antisense inhibitor of clusterin for the
treatment of cancer.

Chi KN(1), Zoubeidi A, Gleave ME.

Author information: 
(1)The Prostate Centre at Vancouver General Hospital, 6th Floor, 2775 Laurel
Street, Vancouver, V5Z 1M9, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Clusterin is a stress-induced cytoprotective chaperone protein,
regulated by HSF1, and functions similarly to a small heat-shock protein.
Clusterin is expressed in a variety of cancers and associated with broad-spectrum
treatment resistance. Custirsen (OGX-011) is a 2'-methoxyethyl modified
phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotide that is complementary to clusterin
mRNA; it is currently in clinical trials for patients with cancer.
OBJECTIVE/METHODS: To review the literature on the role of clusterin in cancer
progression and treatment resistance, and to summarize completed and ongoing
clinical trials with custirsen.
RESULTS/CONCLUSIONS: Custirsen is well tolerated in humans and biologically
active in inhibiting expression of clusterin in patients with cancer. Randomized 
trials of custirsen in combination with chemotherapy are planned in patients with
castration-resistant prostate cancer.

PMID: 19012510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Mar;218(3):631-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21634.

Proteasome inhibitor MG132 induces BAG3 expression through activation of heat
shock factor 1.

Du ZX(1), Zhang HY, Meng X, Gao YY, Zou RL, Liu BQ, Guan Y, Wang HQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Metabolism, The 1st Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, China.

BAG3 protein, a member of the BAG co-chaperones family, sustains cell survival in
a variety of normal and neoplastic cell types, via its interaction with a variety
of partners, such as the heat shock protein (HSP) 70, Bcl-2, Raf-1 and others.
Expression of BAG3 is induced by some stressful stimuli, such as heat shock,
heavy metal exposure. We have reported that proteasome inhibitors can also induce
BAG3 expression at the transcriptional level and the induction of BAG3
compromises proteasome inhibitors-mediated apoptosis. However, the molecular
mechanism of BAG3 upregulation has not been elucidated. In the current study, we 
provide evidence that heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is involved in
BAG3 induction by proteasome inhibitor MG132. Using a series of varying lengths
of 5'-flanking region of the BAG3 gene into luciferase reporter vectors, we found
that MG132 stimulated the promoter activity via the -326/-233 and -825/-689
regions, which contains one putative heat shock-responsive element (HSE) for
HSF1-binding, respectively. Site-directed deletion of the sites abrogated the
enhanced reporter activity in response to MG132 treatment. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that HSF1 directly bound to the
MG132-responsive site on the BAG3 promoter. Activation of HSF1 occurred with
MG132 along with BAG3 upregulation. Furthermore, knockdown HSF1 by small
interfering RNA attenuated the BAG3 upregulation due to MG132.These results
indicate that the proteasome inhibitor MG132 induces BAG3 expression through HSF1
activation.

PMID: 19006120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 Nov;15(3):375-90.

The activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 is differentially regulated
in the brain of estrogen- and testosterone-treated heat-shocked rats.

Papasozomenos SCh(1), Papasozomenos H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Sozos.C.Papasozomenos@uth.tmc.edu

One hundred and fifteen rats were ovariectomized, given daily injections of 10
microg of 17beta-estradiol 3-benzoate (EB), 250 microg of testosterone propionate
(TP), or 10 microg of EB + 250 microg of TP in sesame oil (SO) or SO alone for 1,
1.5 and 2 mo, and heat shocked at 42 degrees C for 15 min. Immediately after heat
shock, the increase in inducibly hyperphosphorylated heat shock transcription
factor 1 (pHSF1) was highest in TP-treated and least in EB-treated rats. Heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) also accumulated in the nuclei of neurons in 
TP-treated and exit the nuclei in EB-treated rats. While the subnuclear
distribution of HSF1 was uniform and similar in control and heat-shocked
EB-treated rats, it localized predominantly on euchromatin in heat-shocked
TP-treated rats. An antibody, which preferentially recognized pHSF1, stained
almost exclusively cell nuclei and demonstrated irregularly-shaped and round
neuronal nuclei of heat-shocked TP- and EB-treated rats, respectively.
Concomitantly, synthesis of the inducible heat shock protein Hsp70 was lowest in 
EB- and highest in TP-treated rats. In this model, testosterone prevents the heat
shock-induced hyperphosphorylation of tau. Because HSF1 delays aging, its
enhanced activation by testosterone strengthens the argument for a therapeutic
role of androgens in Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 18997291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Jan 30;450(2):172-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.10.080. Epub 
2008 Oct 28.

Bradykinin-induced blood-tumor barrier opening is mediated by tumor necrosis
factor-alpha.

Qin LJ(1), Gu YT, Zhang H, Xue YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of physiology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Inner Mongolia
Medical College, Huhehaote 010059, Inner Mongolia Municipality, PR China.

Bradykinin has been shown to increase the permeability of blood-tumor barrier
(BTB) selectively. This study was performed to determine whether tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) was involved in the regulation of this biological
process. We found that the levels of TNF-alpha mRNA and heat shock factor-1
(HSF1) protein in C6 cells were markedly up-regulated by bradykinin via real-time
RT-PCR and Western blot methods. And the most obvious increase of HSF1 protein
and TNF-alpha mRNA in C6 cells were observed at 5 min and 10 min of bradykinin
perfusion, respectively. In addition, the radioactivity of TNF-alpha in C6 cells'
culture fluid also mostly increased at 15 min of bradykinin perfusion. And the
Evans blue content of brain tumor tissues in rats and the concentration of
TNF-alpha reached the maximum at 15 min of bradykinin perfusion. Our results
suggested that the bradykinin-mediated BTB permeability increase is due to
accelerated release of TNF-alpha, which could cause the increase of BTB
permeability by promoting to the release HSF1 from neurospongioma cells.

PMID: 18983897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Exp Physiol. 2009 Jan;94(1):71-80. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2008.044685. Epub 2008
Oct 17.

Increased temperature and protein oxidation lead to HSP72 mRNA and protein
accumulation in the in vivo exercised rat heart.

Staib JL(1), Tümer N, Powers SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida, PO
Box 118225, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA. staib001@mc.duke.edu

Expression of myocardial heat shock protein 72 (HSP72), mediated by its
transcription factor, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), increases following exercise.
However, the upstream stimuli governing exercise-induced HSF1 activation and
subsequent Hsp72 gene expression in the whole animal remain unclear.
Exercise-induced increases in body temperature may promote myocardial radical
production, leading to protein oxidation. Conceivably, myocardial protein
oxidation during exercise may serve as an important signal to promote nuclear
HSF1 migration and activation of Hsp72 expression. Therefore, these experiments
tested the hypothesis that prevention of exercise-induced increases in body
temperature attenuates cardiac protein oxidation, diminishes HSF1 activation and 
decreases HSP72 expression in vivo. To test this hypothesis, in vivo
exercise-induced changes in body temperature were manipulated by exercising male 
rats in either cold (4 degrees C) or warm ambient conditions (22 degrees C). Warm
exercise increased both body temperature (+3 degrees C) and myocardial protein
oxidation, whereas these changes were attenuated by cold exercise. Interestingly,
exercise in both conditions did not significantly increase myocardial nuclear
localized phosphorylated HSF1. Nonetheless, warm exercise elevated
left-ventricular HSP72 mRNA by ninefold and increased myocardial HSP72 protein
levels by threefold compared with cold-exercised animals. Collectively, these
data indicate that elevated body temperature and myocardial protein oxidation
promoted exercise-induced cardiac HSP72 mRNA expression and protein accumulation 
following in vivo exercise. However, these results suggest that exercise-induced 
myocardial HSP72 protein accumulation is not a result of nuclear-localized,
phosphorylated HSF1, indicating that other transcriptional or
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms are involved in exercise-induced HSP72
expression.

PMCID: PMC2941883
PMID: 18931043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2009 May;14(3):291-9. doi: 10.1007/s12192-008-0084-7.
Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Tissue-specific regulation and expression of heat shock proteins in type 2
diabetic monkeys.

Kavanagh K(1), Zhang L, Wagner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.
kkavanag@wfubmc.edu

The chaperone protein heat shock protein (HSP) 70 has been shown to protect
against obesity-associated insulin resistance. Induction of HSPs is thus
considered an exciting therapeutic strategy for diabetes (DM). The aims of this
study were to (1) determine HSP levels in plasma, hepatic, and pancreatic tissues
of type 2 DM primates and (2) assess the relationship between chaperone proteins 
of the HSP family and cellular protection. We collected plasma from 24 type 2 DM 
and 25 normoglycemic control (CTL) cynomolgus macaques. A subset of DM monkeys
had liver and pancreas samples available which were compared to a second group of
CTL monkeys. We found that DM monkeys had 32% lower HSP70 in circulation which
remained significant even after adjustment for the greater age and bodyweight of 
these monkeys (p < 0.001). The liver demonstrated a similar reductions in both
HSP70 and 90 that was related to 50% lower levels of the transcription factor,
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1; p = 0.03). Pancreatic tissue had the opposite
expression pattern with significantly higher HSF1 (p = 0.004) and accordingly
higher HSP70 and 90. Pancreas from DM monkeys had less nitrosative oxidation (p =
0.03) which was unaccounted for by superoxide dismutases and was negatively
associated with HSP levels (r = -0.57, p = 0.009). HSF1/HSP deficiency exists in 
DM liver which may contribute to hepatic insulin resistance and this deficiency
was reflected in lower circulating concentrations. Pancreas maintains HSP levels 
despite hyperglycemia, likely in an attempt to protect vulnerable beta cells from
exocrine pancreatic damage and from stress associated with insulin
hypersecretion.

PMCID: PMC2728265
PMID: 18843550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Neoplasia. 2008 Oct;10(10):1138-45.

Hsf1 is required for the nuclear translocation of p53 tumor suppressor.

Li Q(1), Feldman RA, Radhakrishnan VM, Carey S, Martinez JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Arizona Cancer Center, University of
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724-5024, USA.

Although the p53 tumor suppressor is most frequently inactivated by genetic
mutations, exclusion from the nucleus is also seen in human tumors. We have begun
to examine p53 nuclear importation by isolating a series of mutant cells in which
the temperature-sensitive murine p53(Val135) mutant is sequestered in the
cytoplasm. We previously showed that that three of them (ALTR12, ALTR19, and
ALTR25) constituted a single complementation group. Here, we found that ALTR12
cells are more sensitive to heat stress than either ALTR19 or ALTR25 and that
there was a complete lack of induction of Hsp70 in response to heat shock.
Western blot analysis showed no expression of the Hsf1 transcription factor, and 
neither heat shock nor azetidine could induce p53 nuclear localization in ALTR12 
cells but did in parental A1-5 cells. Suppression of Hsf1 in A1-5 cells with
quercetin or an Hsf1 siRNA reduced p53 nuclear importation and inhibited
p53-mediated activation of a p21 reporter. Most convincingly, p53 nuclear
importation could be restored in ALTR12 cells by introducing an exogenous Hsf1
gene. Collectively, our result suggests that Hsf1 is required for p53 nuclear
importation and activation and implies that heat shock factors play a role in the
regulation of p53.

PMCID: PMC2546585
PMID: 18813348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. BMC Genomics. 2008 Sep 23;9:439. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-439.

Identifying gene regulatory modules of heat shock response in yeast.

Wu WS(1), Li WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA. wessonwu@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: A gene regulatory module (GRM) is a set of genes that is regulated by
the same set of transcription factors (TFs). By organizing the genome into GRMs, 
a living cell can coordinate the activities of many genes in response to various 
internal and external stimuli. Therefore, identifying GRMs is helpful for
understanding gene regulation.
RESULTS: Integrating transcription factor binding site (TFBS), mutant, ChIP-chip,
and heat shock time series gene expression data, we develop a method, called
Heat-Inducible Module Identification Algorithm (HIMIA), for reconstructing GRMs
of yeast heat shock response. Unlike previous module inference tools which are
static statistics-based methods, HIMIA is a dynamic system model-based method
that utilizes the dynamic nature of time series gene expression data. HIMIA
identifies 29 GRMs, which in total contain 182 heat-inducible genes regulated by 
12 heat-responsive TFs. Using various types of published data, we validate the
biological relevance of the identified GRMs. Our analysis suggests that different
combinations of a fairly small number of heat-responsive TFs regulate a large
number of genes involved in heat shock response and that there may exist
crosstalk between heat shock response and other cellular processes. Using HIMIA, 
we identify 68 uncharacterized genes that may be involved in heat shock response 
and we also identify their plausible heat-responsive regulators. Furthermore,
HIMIA is capable of assigning the regulatory roles of the TFs that regulate GRMs 
and Cst6, Hsf1, Msn2, Msn4, and Yap1 are found to be activators of several GRMs. 
In addition, HIMIA refines two clusters of genes involved in heat shock response 
and provides a better understanding of how the complex expression program of heat
shock response is regulated. Finally, we show that HIMIA outperforms four current
module inference tools (GRAM, MOFA, ReMoDisvovery, and SAMBA), and we conduct two
randomization tests to show that the output of HIMIA is statistically meaningful.
CONCLUSION: HIMIA is effective for reconstructing GRMs of yeast heat shock
response. Indeed, many of the reconstructed GRMs are in agreement with previous
studies. Further, HIMIA predicts several interesting new modules and novel TF
combinations. Our study shows that integrating multiple types of data is a
powerful approach to studying complex biological systems.

PMCID: PMC2575218
PMID: 18811975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7550-60. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0129.

HSF1 as a mitotic regulator: phosphorylation of HSF1 by Plk1 is essential for
mitotic progression.

Lee YJ(1), Kim EH, Lee JS, Jeoung D, Bae S, Kwon SH, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effects, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul, Korea.

Previously, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) had been reported to induce genomic
instability and aneuploidy by interaction with Cdc20. Here, we have further
examined the functions of HSF1 in the regulation of mitosis. A null mutant or
knockdown of HSF1 caused defective mitotic progression. By monitoring chromosomes
in living cells, we determined that HSF1 was localized to the centrosome in
mitosis and especially to the spindle poles in metaphase. HSF1 was phosphorylated
by Plk1 at Ser(216) of the DSGXXS motif during the timing of mitosis and a
phospho-defective mutant form of HSF1 inhibited mitotic progression.
Phosphorylated HSF1 during spindle pole localization underwent ubiquitin
degradation through the SCF(beta-TrCP) pathway. However, binding of HSF1 with
Cdc20 stabilized the phosphorylation of HSF1. Moreover, SCF(beta-TrCP)-mediated
degradation only occurred when phosphorylated HSF1 was released from Cdc20. HSF1 
phosphorylation at Ser(216) occurred in the early mitotic period with
simultaneous binding of Cdc20. The interaction of HSF1 with SCF(beta-TrCP) was
followed and then the interaction of APC/Cdc20 was subsequently observed. From
these findings, it was shown that Plk1 phosphorylates HSF1 in early mitosis and
that the binding of phosphorylated HSF1 with Cdc20 and ubiquitin degradation by
SCF(beta-TrCP) regulates mitotic progression.

PMID: 18794143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Nov;70(4):882-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06450.x. Epub
2008 Sep 11.

Yeast Yak1 kinase, a bridge between PKA and stress-responsive transcription
factors, Hsf1 and Msn2/Msn4.

Lee P(1), Cho BR, Joo HS, Hahn JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 599 
Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-744, Korea.

Hsf1 and Msn2/Msn4 transcription factors in Saccharomyces cerevisiae play
important roles in cellular homeostasis by activating gene expression in response
to multiple stresses including heat shock, oxidative stress and nutrient
starvation. Although it has been known that nuclear import of Msn2 is inhibited
by PKA-dependent phosphorylation, the mechanism for PKA-dependent regulation of
Hsf1 is not well understood. Here we demonstrate that Yak1 kinase, which is under
the negative control of PKA, activates both Hsf1 and Msn2 by phosphorylation when
PKA activity is lowered by glucose depletion or by overexpressing Pde2 that
hydrolyses cAMP. We show that Yak1 directly phosphorylates Hsf1 in vitro, leading
to the increase in DNA binding activity of Hsf1. We also demonstrate that Yak1
phosphorylates Msn2 in vitro, but does not affect DNA binding activity of Msn2 or
nuclear localization of Msn2 upon glucose depletion. These results suggest a
central role for Yak1 in mediating PKA-dependent inhibition of Hsf1 and
Msn2/Msn4.

PMID: 18793336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Proteins. 2009 Apr;75(1):1-11. doi: 10.1002/prot.22216.

Crystal structure of the hexamer of human heat shock factor binding protein 1.

Liu X(1), Xu L, Liu Y, Tong X, Zhu G, Zhang XC, Li X, Rao Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Heat shock response (HSR) is a ubiquitous cellular mechanism that copes with a
variety of stresses. This response is mediated by a family of transcriptional
activators, heat shock factors (HSFs), which are under tight regulation. HSF
binding protein 1 (HSBP1) is a negative regulator of HSR and is reported to bind 
specifically with the active trimeric form of HSF1, thus inhibiting its activity.
HSBP1 contains heptad-repeats in the primary sequence and was believed to stay in
a trimer form in solution. We report the crystal structure of the trimerization
domain of the M30I/L55P mutant of human HSBP1 at 1.8 A resolution. In this
crystal form, the HSBP1 fragment of residues 6-53 forms a continuous, 11-turn
long helix. The helix self-associates to form a parallel, symmetrical, triple
coiled-coil helix bundle, which further assembles into a dimer of trimers in a
head-to-head fashion. Solution study confirmed that the wild-type HSBP1 shares
similar biophysical properties with the crystallized variant. Furthermore, we
identified Ser31, which buried its polar side chain in the hydrophobic interior
of the helix bundle, as a stability weak-spot. Substitution of this residue with 
Ile increases the melting temperature by 24 degrees C, implicating that this
conserved serine residue is maintained at position 31 for functional purposes.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18767159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 9;105(36):13626-31. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806319105. Epub 2008 Aug 29.

Heat shock factor 1 regulates lifespan as distinct from disease onset in prion
disease.

Steele AD(1), Hutter G, Jackson WS, Heppner FL, Borkowski AW, King OD, Raymond
GJ, Aguzzi A, Lindquist S.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Prion diseases are fatal, transmissible, neurodegenerative diseases caused by the
misfolding of the prion protein (PrP). At present, the molecular pathways
underlying prion-mediated neurotoxicity are largely unknown. We hypothesized that
the transcriptional regulator of the stress response, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1),
would play an important role in prion disease. Uninoculated HSF1 knockout (KO)
mice used in our study do not show signs of neurodegeneration as assessed by
survival, motor performance, or histopathology. When inoculated with Rocky
Mountain Laboratory (RML) prions HSF1 KO mice had a dramatically shortened
lifespan, succumbing to disease approximately 20% faster than controls.
Surprisingly, both the onset of home-cage behavioral symptoms and pathological
alterations occurred at a similar time in HSF1 KO and control mice. The
accumulation of proteinase K (PK)-resistant PrP also occurred with similar
kinetics and prion infectivity accrued at an equal or slower rate. Thus, HSF1
provides an important protective function that is specifically manifest after the
onset of behavioral symptoms of prion disease.

PMCID: PMC2533240
PMID: 18757733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 31;283(44):29961-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804629200. Epub 2008
Aug 27.

Analysis of HSF4 binding regions reveals its necessity for gene regulation during
development and heat shock response in mouse lenses.

Fujimoto M(1), Oshima K, Shinkawa T, Wang BB, Inouye S, Hayashida N, Takii R,
Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine,
Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) regulate gene expression in response to
heat shock and in physiological conditions. In mammals, HSF1 is required for
heat-mediated induction of classic heat shock genes; however, we do not know the 
molecular mechanisms by which HSF4 regulates gene expression or the biological
consequences of its binding to chromatin. Here, we identified that HSF4 binds to 
various genomic regions, including the introns and distal parts of protein-coding
genes in vivo in mouse lenses, and a substantial numbers of the regions were also
occupied by HSF1 and HSF2. HSF4 regulated expression of some genes at a
developmental stage when HSF1 and HSF2 expression decreased. Although HSF4
binding did not affect expression of many genes, it induces demethylated status
of histone H3K9 on the binding regions. Unexpectedly, a lot of HSF4 targets were 
induced by heat shock treatment, and HSF4 is required for induction of a set of
non-classic heat shock genes in response to heat shock, in part by facilitating
HSF1 binding through chromatin modification. These results suggest novel
mechanisms of gene regulation controlled by HSF4 in non-classic heat shock
response and in lens development.

PMCID: PMC2662063
PMID: 18755693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cell Cycle. 2008 Aug 15;7(16):2456-7. Epub 2008 Aug 19.

Strap: a versatile transcription co-factor.

Xu D(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Clinical Pharmacology, Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Old Road Campus
Research Building, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The Stress-responsive activator of p300 (Strap) is a transcription co-factor that
has an important role in the control of DNA damage response through its ability
to regulate p53 activity. Recent studies have however suggested that Strap takes 
on a wider role in regulating the cellular response to stress. Thus, Strap is now
known to be inducible by heat shock and stimulate the transcription of heat-shock
genes. A chromatin-associated complex involving heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), Strap
and the p300 co-activator assembles on the HSP70 gene promoter, and Strap
augments HSF1 binding and chromatin acetylation in HSP genes, most probably
through recruiting p300 acetyltransferase. Cells depleted of Strap do not survive
under heat-shock conditions. It appears therefore that Strap is an essential
co-factor that acts at the level of chromatin control to regulate
heat-shock-responsive transcription. These recent studies underscore the central 
role taken on by transcription co-factors in integrating and co-ordinating
different cellular stress response pathways.

PMID: 18719389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Chin Med J (Engl). 2008 Jul 20;121(14):1269-73.

Increased expression of heat shock protein 70 and heat shock factor 1 in chronic 
dermal ulcer tissues treated with laser-aided therapy.

Zhou JD(1), Luo CQ, Xie HQ, Nie XM, Zhao YZ, Wang SH, Xu Y, Pokharel PB, Xu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China. zjianda@yahoo.com.cn)

BACKGROUND: Chronic dermal ulcers are also referred to as refractory ulcers. This
study was conducted to elucidate the therapeutic effect of laser on chronic
dermal ulcers and the induced expression of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and heat
shock protein 70 (HSP70) in wound tissues.
METHODS: Sixty patients with 84 chronic dermal ulcers were randomly divided into 
traditional therapy and laser therapy groups. Laser treatment was performed in
addition to traditional therapy in the laser therapy group. The treatment
efficacy was evaluated after three weeks. Five tissue sections of healing wounds 
were randomly collected along with five normal skin sections as controls.
HSP70-positive cells from HSP70 immunohistochemical staining were counted and the
gray scale of positive cells was measured for statistical analysis. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting were
performed to determine the mRNA and protein expressions of HSF1 and HSP70.
RESULTS: The cure rate of the wounds and the total efficacy in the laser therapy 
group were significantly higher than those in the traditional therapy group (P < 
0.05, P < 0.01, respectively). Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the
HSP70-positive cell count was significantly higher in laser therapy group than
those in the traditional therapy group and controls (P < 0.01), and the gray
scale of the cell signal was obviously lower than traditional therapy group and
controls (P < 0.05). By contrast, the traditional therapy group and the control
group were not significantly different. The RNA levels of HSF1 and HSP70 were
higher in the laser therapy group by RT-PCR, but very low in normal skin and the 
traditional therapy group. The analysis on the gray scale of the Western blot
bands indicated that the expression of HSF1 and HSP70 in the laser therapy group 
was significantly higher than in the traditional therapy group and the control
group (P < 0.01), and the expression in the traditional therapy group was also
higher than in the control group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Laser-aided therapy of chronic dermal ulcers plays a facilitating
role in healing due to the mechanism of laser-activated endogenous heat shock
protection in cells in wound surfaces.

PMID: 18713545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biol Reprod. 2008 Dec;79(6):1092-101. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070334. Epub
2008 Aug 13.

Mouse heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) is involved in testicular response to genotoxic 
stress induced by doxorubicin.

Salmand PA(1), Jungas T, Fernandez M, Conter A, Christians ES.

Author information: 
(1)Université Toulouse 3, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5547 (UMR 5547), Centre
National pour la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)-Université Paul Sabatier (UPS),
31062 Toulouse, France.

Heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) protects cells and organisms against various types of 
stress, either by triggering a complex response that promotes cell survival or by
triggering cell death when stress-induced alterations cannot be rescued. Although
this dual role of HSF1 was observed in spermatogenesis exposed to heat shock or
proteotoxic stress, HSF1 was also reported to contribute to cell resistance
against genotoxic stress, such as that caused by doxorubicin, an anticancer drug 
in common clinical use. To better understand the stress/cell-dependent functions 
of HSF1, we used wild-type and Hsf1(tm1Ijb)/Hsf1(tm1Ijb) males to determine the
role of HSF1 in the genotoxic stress response elicited in spermatogenic cells.
Within 2 days after a single intraperitoneal injection of doxorubicin (DOXO; 5
mg/kg), proliferation of Hsf1+/+ but not Hsf1-/- spermatogenic cells was
significantly reduced, whereas cell death was increased in mitotic germ cells and
metaphase I spermatocytes. By 21 days, meiotic cells were depleted in all treated
Hsf1+/+ testes but not in Hsf1-/- ones. Nevertheless, after 3 mo, spermatogenesis
showed better signs of recovery in Hsf1+/+ than in Hsf1-/- males. Taken together,
these data indicate that acute response to genotoxic stress in the testis
involves HSF1-dependent mechanisms that induce apoptotic cell death in a
TRP53-independent manner, but also intervene on a longer term to restore
seminiferous tubules.

PMID: 18703420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 Nov;84(5):1335-45. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0407256. Epub 2008 Aug 8.

Alcohol exposure regulates heat shock transcription factor binding and heat shock
proteins 70 and 90 in monocytes and macrophages: implication for TNF-alpha
regulation.

Mandrekar P(1), Catalano D, Jeliazkova V, Kodys K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA. pranoti.mandrekar@umassmed.edu

Immunomodulatory effects of alcohol use involve regulation of innate immune cell 
function leading to liver disease. Alteration of inflammatory responses by
alcohol is linked to dysregulated TNF-alpha production. Alcohol-induced oxidative
stress also contributes to alterations in inflammatory cell activity. Heat shock 
proteins (hsps) and the heat shock transcription factor-1 (HSF-1) induced by
oxidative stress regulate NF-kappaB activation and TNF-alpha gene expression in
monocytes and macrophages. Here, we report that in vitro alcohol treatment
induced and augmented LPS-induced HSF-1 nuclear translocation and DNA-binding
activity in monocytes and macrophages. Supershift analysis revealed that alcohol 
regulated HSF-1- and not HSF-2-binding activity. Hsp70, a target gene induced by 
HSF-1, was transiently increased within 24 h by alcohol, but extended alcohol
exposure decreased hsp70 in macrophages. The alcohol-induced alteration of hsp70 
correlated with a concomitant change in hsp70 promoter activity. Hsp90, another
HSF-1 target gene, was decreased during short-term alcohol but increased after
prolonged alcohol exposure. Decreased hsp90-HSF-1 complexes after short-term
alcohol indicated dissociation of HSF-1 from hsp90. On the other hand, hsp90
interacted with client protein IkappaB kinase beta, a signaling intermediate of
the LPS pathway, followed by IkappaBalpha degradation and increased NF-kappaB
activity after chronic alcohol exposure, indicating that hsp90 plays an important
role in supporting inflammatory cytokine production. Inhibition of hsp90 using
geldanamycin prevented prolonged alcohol-induced elevation in LPS-induced
NF-kappaB and TNF-alpha production. These results suggest that alcohol exposure
differentially regulates hsp70 and hsp90 via HSF-1 activation. Further, hsp90
regulates TNF-alpha production in macrophages contributing to alcohol-induced
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2567895
PMID: 18689673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 6;3(8):e2864. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002864.

Riluzole increases the amount of latent HSF1 for an amplified heat shock response
and cytoprotection.

Yang J(1), Bridges K, Chen KY, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers State University of New
Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Induction of the heat shock response (HSR) and increased expression
of the heat shock proteins (HSPs) provide mechanisms to ensure proper protein
folding, trafficking, and disposition. The importance of HSPs is underscored by
the understanding that protein mis-folding and aggregation contribute centrally
to the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used a cell-based hsp70-luciferease reporter
gene assay system to identify agents that modulate the HSR and show here that
clinically relevant concentrations of the FDA-approved ALS drug riluzole
significantly increased the heat shock induction of hsp70-luciferse reporter
gene. Immuno-Western and -cytochemical analysis of HSF1 show that riluzole
increased the amount of cytosolic HSF1 to afford a greater activation of HSF1
upon heat shock. The increased HSF1 contributed centrally to the cytoprotective
activity of riluzole as hsf1 gene knockout negated the synergistic activity of
riluzole and conditioning heat shock to confer cell survival under oxidative
stress. Evidence of a post-transcriptional mechanism for the increase in HSF1
include: quantitation of mRNA(hsf1) by RT-PCR showed no effect of either heat
shock or riluzole treatment; riluzole also increased the expression of HSF1 from 
a CMV-promoter; analysis of the turnover of HSF1 by pulse chase and
immunoprecipitation show that riluzole slowed the decay of [(35)S]labeled-HSF1.
The effect of riluzole on HSF1 was qualitatively different from that of MG132 and
chloroquine, inhibitors of the proteasome and lysosome, respectively, and
appeared to involve the chaperone-mediated autophagy pathway as RNAi-mediated
knockdown of CMA negated its effect.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: We show that riluzole increased the amount of HSF1 to
amplify the HSR for cytoprotection. Our study provides novel insight into the
mechanism that regulates HSF1 turnover, and identifies the degradation of HSF1 as
a target for therapeutics intervention.

PMCID: PMC2481402
PMID: 18682744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2008 Oct;151(2):253-61. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2008.07.004. Epub 2008 Jul 10.

Comparison of the effect of heat shock factor inhibitor, KNK437, on heat shock-
and chemical stress-induced hsp30 gene expression in Xenopus laevis A6 cells.

Voyer J(1), Heikkila JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada.

In this study, we compared the effect of KNK437 (N-formyl-3,
4-methylenedioxy-benzylidene-gamma-butyrolactam), a benzylidene lactam compound, 
on heat shock and chemical stressor-induced hsp30 gene expression in Xenopus
laevis A6 kidney epithelial cells. Previously, KNK437 was shown to inhibit
HSE-HSF1 binding activity and heat-induced hsp gene expression. In the present
study, Northern and Western blot analysis revealed that pretreatment of A6 cells 
with KNK437 inhibited hsp30 mRNA and HSP30 and HSP70 protein accumulation induced
by chemical stressors including sodium arsenite, cadmium chloride and herbimycin 
A. In A6 cells subjected to sodium arsenite, cadmium chloride, herbimycin A or a 
33 degrees C heat shock treatment, immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy
revealed that HSP30 accumulated primarily in the cytoplasm. However, incubation
of A6 cells at 35 degrees C resulted in enhanced HSP30 accumulation in the
nucleus. Pre-treatment with 100 microM KNK437 completely inhibited HSP30
accumulation in A6 cells heat shocked at 33 or 35 degrees C as well as cells
treated with 10 microM sodium arsenite, 100 microM cadmium chloride or 1
microg/mL herbimycin A. These results show that KNK437 is effective at inhibiting
both heat shock- and chemical stress-induced hsp gene expression in amphibian
cells.

PMID: 18675372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Yeast. 2008 Aug;25(8):577-94. doi: 10.1002/yea.1610.

A small molecule-directed approach to control protein localization and function.

Geda P(1), Patury S, Ma J, Bharucha N, Dobry CJ, Lawson SK, Gestwicki JE, Kumar
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2216, USA.

Protein localization is tightly linked with function, such that the subcellular
distribution of a protein serves as an important control point regulating
activity. Exploiting this regulatory mechanism, we present here a general
approach by which protein location, and hence function, may be controlled on
demand in the budding yeast. In this system a small molecule, rapamycin, is used 
to temporarily recruit a strong cellular address signal to the target protein,
placing subcellular localization under control of the selective chemical
stimulus. The kinetics of this system are rapid: rapamycin-directed
nucleo-cytoplasmic transport is evident 10-12 min post-treatment and the process 
is reversible upon removal of rapamycin. Accordingly, we envision this platform
as a promising approach for the systematic construction of conditional
loss-of-function mutants. As proof of principle, we used this system to direct
nuclear export of the essential heat shock transcription factor Hsf1p, thereby
mimicking the cell-cycle arrest phenotype of an hsf1 temperature-sensitive
mutant. Our drug-induced localization platform also provides a method by which
protein localization can be uncoupled from endogenous cell signalling events,
addressing the necessity or sufficiency of a given localization shift for a
particular cell process. To illustrate, we directed the nuclear import of the
calcineurin-dependent transcription factor Crz1p in the absence of native
stimuli; this analysis directly substantiates that nuclear translocation of this 
protein is insufficient for its transcriptional activity. In total, this
technology represents a powerful method for the generation of conditional alleles
and directed mislocalization studies in yeast, with potential applicability on a 
genome-wide scale.

Copyright 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18668531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Cell. 2008 Jul 25;31(2):222-31. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.06.015.

CoREST represses the heat shock response mediated by HSF1.

Gómez AV(1), Galleguillos D, Maass JC, Battaglioli E, Kukuljan M, Andrés ME.

Author information: 
(1)Millenium Nucleus in Stress and Addiction, Departamento de Biología Celular y 
Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Santiago 8330025, Chile.

The stress response in cells involves a rapid and transient transcriptional
activation of stress genes. It has been shown that Hsp70 limits its own
transcriptional activation functioning as a corepressor of heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) during the attenuation of the stress response. Here we show that the
transcriptional corepressor CoREST interacts with Hsp70. Through this
interaction, CoREST represses both HSF1-dependent and heat shock-dependent
transcriptional activation of the hsp70 promoter. In cells expressing short
hairpin RNAs directed against CoREST, Hsp70 cannot repress HSF1-dependent
transcription. A reduction of CoREST levels also provoked a significant increase 
of Hsp70 protein levels and an increase of HSF1-dependent transactivation of
hsp70 promoter. Via chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we show that CoREST is
bound to the hsp70 gene promoter under basal conditions and that its binding
increases during heat shock response. In conclusion, we demonstrated that CoREST 
is a key regulator of the heat shock stress response.

PMID: 18657505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Neurosci Methods. 2008 Sep 15;174(1):10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.06.016.
Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Differential gene expression profiling of large and small retinal ganglion cells.

Ivanov D(1), Dvoriantchikova G, Barakat DJ, Nathanson L, Shestopalov VI.

Author information: 
(1)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, 1638 NW 10th Avenue, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Different sub-populations of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) vary in their
sensitivity to pathological conditions such as retinal ischemia, diabetic
retinopathy and glaucoma. Comparative transcriptomic analysis of such groups will
likely reveal molecular determinants of differential sensitivity to stress.
However, gene expression profiling of primary neuronal sub-populations represent 
a challenge due to the cellular heterogeneity of retinal tissue. In this
manuscript, we report the use of a fluorescent neural tracer to specifically
label and selectively isolate RGCs with different soma sizes by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) for the purpose of differential gene
expression profiling. We identified 145 genes that were more active in the large 
RGCs and 312 genes in the small RGCs. Differential data were validated by
quantitative RT-PCR, several corresponding proteins were confirmed by
immunohistochemistry. Functional characterization revealed differential activity 
of genes implicated in synaptic transmission, neurotransmitter secretion, axon
guidance, chemotaxis, ion transport and tolerance to stress. An in silico
reconstruction of cellular networks suggested that differences in pathway
activity between the two sub-populations of RGCs are controlled by networks
interconnected by SP-1, Erk2 (MAPK1), Egr1, Egr2 and, potentially, regulated via 
transcription factors C/EBPbeta, HSF1, STAT1- and c-Myc. The results show that
FACS-aided purification of retrogradely labeled cells can be effectively utilized
for transcriptional profiling of adult retinal neurons.

PMCID: PMC4133941
PMID: 18640154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 19;283(38):26188-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710521200. Epub 2008
Jul 16.

Heat shock transcription factor 1-activating compounds suppress
polyglutamine-induced neurodegeneration through induction of multiple molecular
chaperones.

Fujikake N(1), Nagai Y, Popiel HA, Okamoto Y, Yamaguchi M, Toda T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Many neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer, Parkinson, and polyglutamine
(polyQ) diseases are thought to be caused by protein misfolding. The polyQ
diseases, including Huntington disease and spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs), are
caused by abnormal expansions of the polyQ stretch in disease-causing proteins,
which trigger misfolding of these proteins, resulting in their deposition as
inclusion bodies in affected neurons. Although genetic expression of molecular
chaperones has been shown to suppress polyQ protein misfolding and
neurodegeneration, toward developing a therapy, it is ideal to induce endogenous 
molecular chaperones by chemical administration. In this study, we assessed the
therapeutic effects of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1)-activating
compounds, which induce multiple molecular chaperones, on polyQ-induced
neurodegeneration in vivo. We found that oral administration of
17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) markedly suppresses compound
eye degeneration and inclusion body formation in a Drosophila model of SCA.
17-AAG also dramatically rescued the lethality of the SCA model (74.1% rescue)
and suppressed neurodegeneration in a Huntington disease model (46.3% rescue),
indicating that 17-AAG is widely effective against various polyQ diseases. 17-AAG
induced Hsp70, Hsp40, and Hsp90 expression in a dose-dependent manner, and the
expression levels correlated with its therapeutic effects. Furthermore, knockdown
of HSF1 abolished the induction of molecular chaperones and the therapeutic
effect of 17-AAG, indicating that its therapeutic effects depend on HSF1
activation. Our study indicates that induction of multiple molecular chaperones
by 17-AAG treatment is a promising therapeutic approach for a wide range of polyQ
diseases and possibly other neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC3258858
PMID: 18632670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Behav Brain Res. 2008 Nov 21;193(2):225-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.05.024. Epub
2008 Jun 17.

Basal behavioral characterization of hsf1 deficient mice and its cellular and
behavioral abnormalities underlying chronic unpredictable stressors.

Zhu X(1), Cheng M, Peng M, Xiao X, Yao S, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Psychological Research Center, Second XiangYa Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China. xzxzhu@yahoo.com

The heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a major transcriptional factor that controls
the rapid induction of heat shock proteins in response to various environmental
stressors. In this study, we globally investigated the effect of HSF1 deficiency 
on animal behaviors during postnatal growth, and abnormalities in hippocampal
neurons and behavior in response to chronic unpredictable stressors (CUS). Mouse 
behaviors were measured in several behavioral paradigms, including elevated plus 
maze, open field, closed field, T-maze continuous alternation task (T-CAT),
bridge-walking, and wire suspension tests. The hsf1-null mice exhibited reduction
in basal anxiety levels and exploratory behavior, and working memory deficits,
but normal motor coordination abilities. Chronic unpredictable stressors
significantly increased apoptosis in hippocampal CA3 cells in both the hsf1-null 
and wild-type (WT) mice in the in situ TUNEL staining and induced more
anxiety-like behavior in the hsf1-null mice than WT mice in the plus T-maze
paradigm. We conclude that hsf1 gene deficiency results in significant
abnormalities in mouse basal behaviors and sensitization to chronic unpredictable
stressors.

PMID: 18601956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):369-77. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.174607. Epub
2008 Jul 3.

Involvement of heat shock factor 1 in statin-induced transcriptional upregulation
of endothelial thrombomodulin.

Fu Q(1), Wang J, Boerma M, Berbée M, Qiu X, Fink LM, Hauer-Jensen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):334-6.

Statins upregulate endothelial thrombomodulin (TM) by mechanisms that involve
members of the Kruppel-like factor family. Although Kruppel-like factors are
unequivocally implicated in this process, experimental evidence points to
additional mechanisms. Deletion/mutation analysis of reporter constructs was used
to demonstrate that mutation of the SP1/Kruppel-like factor element in the TM
promoter only partially abolishes statin-induced TM upregulation, whereas
simultaneous mutation of relevant heat shock elements and SP1/Kruppel-like factor
element completely prevents statin-induced TM upregulation, thus demonstrating a 
role for heat shock factors (HSFs). We further identified the pathway by which
statins increase binding of HSF1 to heat shock elements in the TM promoter.
Specifically, statins caused NO-dependent dissociation of HSF1 from heat shock
protein 90, nuclear translocation of HSF1, and binding to heat shock elements in 
the TM promoter. Statins also decreased nuclear content of the HSF1 chaperone
14-3-3beta. In addition to reducing TM upregulation, inhibition of HSF1 reduced
statin-induced upregulation of tissue plasminogen activator, whereas
downregulation of thrombomospondin, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, or
connective tissue growth factor was unaffected. Knockdown of 14-3-3beta or
inhibition of HSF1 phosphorylation enhanced the effect of statins on TM and
tissue plasminogen activator, but did not influence thrombomospondin, plasminogen
activator inhibitor 1, or connective tissue growth factor. These data demonstrate
that HSF1 is involved in statin-induced regulation of TM. They also suggest that 
analogous mechanisms may apply to genes that are upregulated by statins, but not 
to downregulated genes. These results may have broad implications and suggest the
use of heat shock protein modulators to selectively regulate pleiotropic statin
effects.

PMCID: PMC2562544
PMID: 18599869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct;317(1-2):197-204. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9851-0. Epub
2008 Jul 3.

Transcriptional regulation of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in vascular
endothelial cells induced by oxidized very low density lipoproteins.

Zhao R(1), Ma X, Shen GX.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Physiology, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada, R3E 3P4.

Elevated levels of triglycerides and very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) are
biochemical markers of metabolic syndrome and diabetes. VLDL from
hypertriglyceridemic or diabetic patients increased the generation of plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) from cultured vascular endothelial cells (EC).
Susceptibility of VLDL to peroxidation was increased in diabetic patients. Heat
shock factor-1 (HSF1) is implicated in the transcriptional regulation of PAI-1
induced by glycated low density lipoprotein (LDL). The present study examined the
effects of oxidized VLDL (oxVLDL) on the expression of PAI-1 and HSF1 in cultured
human EC and mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF). OxVLDL modified by copper or iron
ions increased the expression of PAI-1 and HSF1 in EC compared to VLDL or LDL.
Butylated hydroxytulene inhibited oxVLDL-induced expression of PAI-1 and HSF1 in 
EC. OxVLDL increased the binding of HSF1 to PAI-1 promoter. Short interference
RNA for HSF1 inhibited oxVLDL-induced PAI-1 expression in EC. OxVLDL stimulated
the expression of PAI-1 from MEF of wild-type mice, but failed to increase PAI-1 
expression in MEF of HSF1-knockout mice. The results indicate that oxVLDL
increased PAI-1 expression, and HSF1 mediates the transcription of PAI-1 in
cultured vascular EC or fibroblasts.

PMID: 18597060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Eukaryot Cell. 2008 Sep;7(9):1573-81. doi: 10.1128/EC.00427-07. Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Neurospora crassa heat shock factor 1 Is an essential gene; a second heat shock
factor-like gene, hsf2, is required for asexual spore formation.

Thompson S(1), Croft NJ, Sotiriou A, Piggins HD, Crosthwaite SK.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Appropriate responses of organisms to heat stress are essential for their
survival. In eukaryotes, adaptation to high temperatures is mediated by heat
shock transcription factors (HSFs). HSFs regulate the expression of heat shock
proteins, which function as molecular chaperones assisting in protein folding and
stability. In many model organisms a great deal is known about the products of
hsf genes. An important exception is the filamentous fungus and model eukaryote
Neurospora crassa. Here we show that two Neurospora crassa genes whose protein
products share similarity to known HSFs play different biological roles. We
report that heat shock factor 1 (hsf1) is an essential gene and that hsf2 is
required for asexual development. Conidiation may be blocked in the hsf2 knockout
(hsf2(KO)) strain because HSF2 is an integral element of the conidiation pathway 
or because it affects the availability of protein chaperones. We report that
genes expressed during conidiation, for example fluffy, conidiation-10, and
repressor of conidiation-1 show wild-type levels of expression in a hsf2(KO)
strain. However, consistent with the lack of macroconidium development, levels of
eas are much reduced. Cultures of the hsf2(KO) strain along with two other
aconidial strains, the fluffy and aconidial-2 strains, took longer than the wild 
type to recover from heat shock. Altered expression profiles of hsp90 and a
putative hsp90-associated protein in the hsf2(KO) strain after exposure to heat
shock may in part account for its reduced ability to cope with heat stress.

PMCID: PMC2547069
PMID: 18586951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Jul 1;314(11-12):2224-30. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.04.015.
Epub 2008 May 8.

PRC1 associates with the hsp70i promoter and interacts with HSF2 during mitosis.

Murphy LA(1), Wilkerson DC, Hong Y, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, 40536, USA.

Mitosis is a series of events leading to division of a cell by the process known 
as cytokinesis. Protein regulating cytokinesis 1 (PRC1) is a CDK substrate that
associates with the mitotic spindle and functions in microtubule bundling.
Previous studies revealed that loss of PRC1 is associated with chromosomal
mis-segregation and atypical chromosome alignment. HSF2 is a DNA binding protein 
that we previously showed bookmarks the hsp70i gene during mitosis, an epigenetic
mechanism which allows the hsp70i gene to re-establish transcriptional competence
early in G1. Another study demonstrated that HSF2-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts 
(MEFs) exhibit increased numbers of multinucleated cells vs. wild-type MEFs. This
suggests that HSF2 is important for proper cytokinesis, but the mechanism was
unknown. Here we report the existence of a direct interaction between HSF2 and
PRC1. HSF2 and PRC1 associate during mitosis and co-localize during this phase of
the cell cycle. PRC1 does not interact with the related protein HSF1, indicating 
the specificity of the HSF2-PRC1 interaction. Intriguingly, PRC1 is associated
with the hsp70i promoter during mitosis. These results provide a potential
mechanistic basis for the defective cytokinesis phenotype exhibited by HSF2-/-
cells, as well as suggest a potential role for PRC1 in HSF2-mediated gene
bookmarking.

PMCID: PMC2515623
PMID: 18570919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Aug;295(2):F397-405. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00361.2007. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Heat shock protein 90-binding agents protect renal cells from oxidative stress
and reduce kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Harrison EM(1), Sharpe E, Bellamy CO, McNally SJ, Devey L, Garden OJ, Ross JA,
Wigmore SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Injury and Repair Group, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
mail@ewenharrison.com

Heat shock proteins (Hsps) are protective in models of transplantation, yet
practical strategies to upregulate them remain elusive. The heat shock protein
90-binding agent (HBA) geldanamycin and its analogs (17-AAG and 17-DMAG) are
known to upregulate Hsps and confer cellular protection but have not been
investigated in a model relevant to transplantation. We examined the ability of
HBAs to upregulate Hsp expression and confer protection in renal adenocarcinoma
(ACHN) cells in vitro and in a mouse model of kidney ischemia-reperfusion (I/R)
injury. Hsp70 gene expression was increased 30-40 times in ACHN cells treated
with HBAs, and trimerization and DNA binding of heat shock transcription factor-1
(HSF1) were demonstrated. A three- and twofold increase in Hsp70 and Hsp27
protein expression, respectively, was found in ACHN cells treated with HBAs. HBAs
protected ACHN cells from an H2O2-mediated oxidative stress, and HSF1 short
interfering RNA was found to abrogate HBA-mediated Hsp induction and protection. 
In vivo, Hsp70 was upregulated in the kidneys, liver, lungs, and heart of
HBA-treated mice. This was associated with a functional and morphological renal
protection from I/R injury. Therefore, HBAs mediate upregulation of protective
Hsps in mouse kidneys which are associated with reduced I/R injury and may be
useful in reducing transplant-associated kidney injury.

PMID: 18562631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Mar;28(3):487-90.

[Expression of heat-shock transcription factor 1 and X-linked inhibitor of
apoptosis protein-associated factor-1 in gastrointestinal cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li T(1), Chen CL, Wang JD, Cui SD, Cui DY, Guo W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. ivyliting@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
protein (XIAP)-associated factor-1 (XAFI) and heat-shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1) and their relationship in human gastrointestinal cancers.
METHODS: Immunoblotting was used to analyze the expressions of HSF1 and XAF1 in
gastric and colon cancer tissues and in gastrointestinal cancer cells. The
gastrointestinal cancer cells were tranfected with a eukaryotic expression vector
containing HSF1 gene fragment or subjected to RNA interference to induce up- or
down-regulation of HSF1 expression, and the consequence changes in XAF1
expression in the cells was measured. XAF1 expression was also assayed in the
cells after stress stimulation for HSF1 expression.
RESULTS: The expression of HSF1 was higher in gastrointestinal cancer tissues
than in normal tissues. The expression of XAF1 and HSF1 was inversely correlated 
in the cancer cell lines, and stress stimuli of the cells up-regulated the
expression of HSF1 but down-regulated XAF1 expression.
CONCLUSION: HSF1 expression is increased in gastrointestinal cancer tissues to
result in suppressed expression of XAF1, which may be one of the reasons for the 
low expression of XAF1 in association with the defect of the apoptosis mechanisms
in the cancer cells

PMID: 18546582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Proteome Res. 2008 Jul;7(7):2769-79. doi: 10.1021/pr700883t. Epub 2008 Jun 7.

Novel high-throughput profiling of human transcription factors and its use for
systematic pathway mapping.

Qiao JY(1), Shao W, Wei HJ, Sun YM, Zhao YC, Xing WL, Zhang L, Mitchelson K,
Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Systems Biology Research Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China.

Transcription factors (TFs) are crucial components of regulatory networks that
control gene transcription. Current TF assays are limited to the analysis of a
single TF or require TF-specific antibodies. Here we report the Single Primer
Amplification assisted Oligonucleotide Array-based Transcription Factor Assay
(SPA-OATFA) which can directly analyze the binding activities of 240 human TFs
simultaneously. Examining early events during serum-stimulation of HeLa cells as 
a model, we demonstrated the utility of SPA-OATFA combined with whole genome gene
expression to systematically map the temporal activation of signaling pathways.
Both TFs known to function in this stimulation response such as EGR1 and AP1 and 
new TFs such as HSF1 were identified. This information, combined with mRNA
profiling, provided novel insights into the activities of regulatory pathways,
and illustrates the potential of SPA-OATFA in detailed systems biology analysis
of cell responses.

PMID: 18537283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Jun 6;9:267. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-267.

Principal components analysis based methodology to identify differentially
expressed genes in time-course microarray data.

Jonnalagadda S(1), Srinivasan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore. sudhakar@nus.edu.sg

BACKGROUND: Time-course microarray experiments are being increasingly used to
characterize dynamic biological processes. In these experiments, the goal is to
identify genes differentially expressed in time-course data, measured between
different biological conditions. These differentially expressed genes can reveal 
the changes in biological process due to the change in condition which is
essential to understand differences in dynamics.
RESULTS: In this paper, we propose a novel method for finding differentially
expressed genes in time-course data and across biological conditions (say C1 and 
C2). We model the expression at C1 using Principal Component Analysis and
represent the expression profile of each gene as a linear combination of the
dominant Principal Components (PCs). Then the expression data from C2 is
projected on the developed PCA model and scores are extracted. The difference
between the scores is evaluated using a hypothesis test to quantify the
significance of differential expression. We evaluate the proposed method to
understand differences in two case studies (1) the heat shock response of
wild-type and HSF1 knockout mice, and (2) cell-cycle between wild-type and
Fkh1/Fkh2 knockout Yeast strains.
CONCLUSION: In both cases, the proposed method identified biologically
significant genes.

PMCID: PMC2435549
PMID: 18534040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2008 Sep;9(3):277-89. doi: 10.1007/s10162-008-0122-2.
Epub 2008 May 30.

Hsp70 inhibits aminoglycoside-induced hair cell death and is necessary for the
protective effect of heat shock.

Taleb M(1), Brandon CS, Lee FS, Lomax MI, Dillmann WH, Cunningham LL.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC 29403, USA.

Sensory hair cells of the inner ear are sensitive to death from aging, noise
trauma, and ototoxic drugs. Ototoxic drugs include the aminoglycoside antibiotics
and the antineoplastic agent cisplatin. Exposure to aminoglycosides results in
hair cell death that is mediated by specific apoptotic proteins, including c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) and caspases. Induction of heat shock proteins (Hsps) is 
a highly conserved stress response that can inhibit JNK- and caspase-dependent
apoptosis in a variety of systems. We have previously shown that heat shock
results in a robust upregulation of Hsps in the hair cells of the adult mouse
utricle in vitro. In addition, heat shock results in significant inhibition of
both cisplatin- and aminoglycoside-induced hair cell death. In our system, Hsp70 
is the most strongly induced Hsp, which is upregulated over 250-fold at the level
of mRNA 2 h after heat shock. Therefore, we have begun to examine the role of
Hsp70 in mediating the protective effect of heat shock. To determine whether
Hsp70 is necessary for the protective effect of heat shock against
aminoglycoside-induced hair cell death, we utilized utricles from Hsp70.1/3 (-/-)
mice. While heat shock inhibited gentamicin-induced hair cell death in wild-type 
utricles, utricles from Hsp70.1/3 (-/-) mice were not protected. In addition, we 
have examined the role of the major heat shock transcription factor, Hsf1, in
mediating the protective effect of heat shock. Utricles from Hsf1 (-/-) mice and 
wild-type littermates were exposed to heat shock followed by gentamicin. The
protective effect of heat shock on aminoglycoside-induced hair cell death was
only observed in wild-type mice and not in Hsf1 (-/-) mice. To determine whether 
Hsp70 is sufficient to protect hair cells, we have utilized transgenic mice that 
constitutively overexpress Hsp70. Utricles from Hsp70-overexpressing mice and
wild-type littermates were cultured in the presence of varying neomycin
concentrations for 24 h. The Hsp70-overexpressing utricles were significantly
protected against neomycin-induced hair cell death at moderate to high doses of
neomycin. This protective effect was achieved without a heat shock. Taken
together, these data indicate that Hsp70 and Hsf1 are each necessary for the
protective effect of heat shock against aminoglycoside-induced death.
Furthermore, overexpression of Hsp70 alone significantly inhibits
aminoglycoside-induced hair cell death.

PMCID: PMC2538150
PMID: 18512096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Feb;31(2):280-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.04.001.

The heat shock response modulates transthyretin deposition in the peripheral and 
autonomic nervous systems.

Santos SD(1), Fernandes R, Saraiva MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Unit, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology - IBMC, 
4150-180 Porto, Portugal.

Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP) is a neurodegenerative disease that
selectively affects the peripheral nervous system. The putative cause of this
life threatening pathology is tissue deposition of mutant transthyretin (TTR),
initially as non-fibrillar deposits and later as fibrillar material. The mouse
models currently available do not recapitulate the human whole features, since
the peripheral nervous tissue is spared. We have characterized a new mouse model 
expressing the human transthyretin V30M in a heat shock transcription factor 1
(Hsf1) null background. The lack of HSF1 expression leads to an extensive and
earlier non-fibrillar TTR, evolving into fibrillar material in distinct organs
including the peripheral nervous system. Furthermore, inflammatory stress and a
reduction in unmyelinated nerve fibers were observed, as in human patients. These
results indicate that HSF1 regulated genes are involved in FAP, modulating TTR
tissue deposition. The novel mouse model is of the utmost importance in testing
new therapeutic strategies and in addressing the influence of the stress response
in misfolding diseases.

PMID: 18485534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochemistry. 2008 Jun 3;47(22):6007-15. doi: 10.1021/bi702185u. Epub 2008 May 6.

Two distinct disulfide bonds formed in human heat shock transcription factor 1
act in opposition to regulate its DNA binding activity.

Lu M(1), Kim HE, Li CR, Kim S, Kwak IJ, Lee YJ, Kim SS, Moon JY, Kim CH, Kim DK, 
Kang HS, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Center for Innovative BioPhysio Sensor Technology,
Pusan National University, 609-735 Busan, South Korea.

Under circumstances of heat stress, heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1)
plays important roles in heat shock protein expression. In this study, an
increasing concentration of dithiothreitol (DTT) was found to either enhance or
inhibit the heat-induced trimerization of HSF1, suggesting the involvement of
dual redox-dependent HSF1 activation mechanisms. Our in vitro experiments show
that the heat-induced bonding between the cysteine C36 and C103 residues of HSF1 
forms an intermolecular disulfide covalent bond (SS-I bond) and that it directly 
causes HSF1 to trimerize and bond to DNA. Gel filtration assays show that HSF1
can form intermolecular hydrophobic interaction-mediated (iHI-m) noncovalent
oligomers. However, the lack of a trimerization domain prevents HSF1 activation, 
which suggests that iHI-m noncovalent trimerization is a precondition of SS-I
bond formation. On the other hand, intramolecular SS-II bond (in which the C153, 
C373, and C378 residues of HSF1 participate) formation inhibits this iHI-m
trimerization, thereby preventing SS-I bond formation and DNA binding. Thus, HSF1
activation is regulated positively by intermolecular SS-I bond formation and
negatively by intramolecular SS-II bond formation. Importantly, these two SS
bonds confer different DTT sensitivities (the SS-II bond is more sensitive).
Therefore, a low concentration of DTT cleaves the SS-II bond but not the SS-I
bond and thus improves DNA binding of HSF1, whereas a high concentration DTT cuts
both SS bonds and inhibits HSF1 activation. We propose that these interesting
effects further explain cellular HSF1 trimerization, DNA binding, and
transcription when cells are under stress.

PMID: 18457423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. EMBO Rep. 2008 Jul;9(7):662-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.70. Epub 2008 May 2.

A transcription cofactor required for the heat-shock response.

Xu D(1), Zalmas LP, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Medical Sciences Division, John Radcliffe
Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

The Stress-responsive activator of p300 (Strap) is a transcription cofactor that 
has an important role in the control of DNA damage response through its ability
to regulate p53 activity. Here, we report that Strap is inducible by heat shock
and stimulates the transcription of heat-shock genes. A chromatin-associated
complex involving heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), Strap and the p300 coactivator
assembles on the heat-shock protein 70 (hsp70) promoter, and Strap augments HSF1 
binding and chromatin acetylation in Hsp genes, most probably through the p300
histone acetyltransferase. Cells depleted of Strap do not survive under
heat-shock conditions. These results indicate that Strap is an essential cofactor
that acts at the level of chromatin control to regulate heat-shock-responsive
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2475325
PMID: 18451878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008 Apr 25;9:214. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-9-214.

M-BISON: microarray-based integration of data sources using networks.

Daigle BJ Jr(1), Altman RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. bdaigle@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: The accurate detection of differentially expressed (DE) genes has
become a central task in microarray analysis. Unfortunately, the noise level and 
experimental variability of microarrays can be limiting. While a number of
existing methods partially overcome these limitations by incorporating biological
knowledge in the form of gene groups, these methods sacrifice gene-level
resolution. This loss of precision can be inappropriate, especially if the
desired output is a ranked list of individual genes. To address this shortcoming,
we developed M-BISON (Microarray-Based Integration of data SOurces using
Networks), a formal probabilistic model that integrates background biological
knowledge with microarray data to predict individual DE genes.
RESULTS: M-BISON improves signal detection on a range of simulated data,
particularly when using very noisy microarray data. We also applied the method to
the task of predicting heat shock-related differentially expressed genes in S.
cerevisiae, using an hsf1 mutant microarray dataset and conserved yeast DNA
sequence motifs. Our results demonstrate that M-BISON improves the analysis
quality and makes predictions that are easy to interpret in concert with
incorporated knowledge. Specifically, M-BISON increases the AUC of DE gene
prediction from .541 to .623 when compared to a method using only microarray
data, and M-BISON outperforms a related method, GeneRank. Furthermore, by
analyzing M-BISON predictions in the context of the background knowledge, we
identified YHR124W as a potentially novel player in the yeast heat shock
response.
CONCLUSION: This work provides a solid foundation for the principled integration 
of imperfect biological knowledge with gene expression data and other
high-throughput data sources.

PMCID: PMC2396182
PMID: 18439292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biol Reprod. 2008 Aug;79(2):283-8. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.107.066241. Epub 2008 
Apr 23.

Interaction of HSF1 and HSF2 with the Hspa1b promoter in mouse epididymal
spermatozoa.

Wilkerson DC(1), Murphy LA, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

The Hspa1b gene is one of the first genes expressed after fertilization, with
expression observed in the male pronucleus as early as the one-cell stage of
embryogenesis. This expression can occur in the absence of stress and is
initiated during the minor zygotic genome activation. There is a significant
reduction in the number of embryos developing to the blastocyte stage when HSPA1B
levels are depleted, which supports the importance of this protein for embryonic 
viability. However, the mechanism responsible for allowing expression of Hspa1b
during the minor zygotic genome activation (ZGA) is unknown. In this report, we
investigated the role of HSF1 and HSF2 in bookmarking Hspa1b during late
spermatogenesis. Western blot results show that both HSF1 and HSF2 are present in
epididymal spermatozoa, and immunofluorescence analysis revealed that some of the
HSF1 and HSF2 proteins in these cells overlap the
4',6'-diamidino-2-phenylindole-stained DNA region. Results from chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that HSF1, HSF2, and SP1 are bound to the
Hspa1b promoter in epididymal spermatozoa. Furthermore, we observed an increase
in HSF2 binding to the Hspa1b promoter in late spermatids versus early
spermatids, suggesting a likely period during spermatogenesis when transcription 
factor binding could occur. These results support a model in which the binding of
HSF1, HSF2, and SP1 to the promoter of Hspa1b would allow the rapid formation of 
a transcription-competent state during the minor ZGA, thereby allowing Hspa1b
expression.

PMCID: PMC2574705
PMID: 18434628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Jun 12;34(1):78-87. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00215.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 22.

Physiological and molecular evidence of heat acclimation memory: a lesson from
thermal responses and ischemic cross-tolerance in the heart.

Tetievsky A(1), Cohen O, Eli-Berchoer L, Gerstenblith G, Stern MD, Wapinski I,
Friedman N, Horowitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Physiology, Faculty of Dental Medicine, The Hebrew
University, Jerusalem, Israel.

Sporadic findings in humans suggest that reinduction of heat acclimation (AC)
after its loss occurs markedly faster than that during the initial AC session.
Animal studies substantiated that the underlying acclimatory processes are
molecular. Here we test the hypothesis that faster reinduction of AC (ReAC)
implicates "molecular memory." In vivo measurements of colonic temperature
profiles during heat stress and ex vivo assessment of cross-tolerance to
ischemia-reperfusion or anoxia insults in the heart demonstrated that ReAC only
needs 2 days vs. the 30 days required for the initial development of AC. Stress
gene profiling in the experimental groups highlighted clusters of
transcriptionally activated genes (37%), which included heat shock protein (HSP) 
genes, antiapoptotic genes, and chromatin remodeling genes. Despite a return of
the physiological phenotype to its preacclimation state, after a 1 mo
deacclimation (DeAC) period, the gene transcripts did not resume their
preacclimation levels, suggesting a dichotomy between genotype and phenotype in
this system. Individual detection of hsp70 and hsf1 transcripts agreed with these
findings. HSP72, HSF1/P-HSF1, and Bcl-xL protein profiles followed the observed
dichotomized genomic response. In contrast, HSP90, an essential cytoprotective
component mismatched transcriptional activation upon DeAC. The uniform activation
of the similarly responding gene clusters upon De-/ReAC implies that
reacclimatory phenotypic plasticity is associated with upstream denominators.
During AC, DeAC, and ReAC, the maintenance of elevated/phosphorylated HSF1
protein levels and transcriptionally active chromatin remodeling genes implies
that chromatin remodeling plays a pivotal role in the transcriptome profile and
in preconditioning to rapid cytoprotective acclimatory memory.

PMID: 18430807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cancer Sci. 2008 Jun;99(6):1109-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00809.x. Epub
2008 Apr 21.

Resveratrol induces apoptosis in K562 (chronic myelogenous leukemia) cells by
targeting a key survival protein, heat shock protein 70.

Chakraborty PK(1), Mustafi SB, Ganguly S, Chatterjee M, Raha S.

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography and Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata-700064, India.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disease associated
with a characteristic chromosomal translocation called the Philadelphia
chromosome. This results in the expression of the Bcr-Abl fusion protein, a
constitutively active protein tyrosine kinase. Although there are a few treatment
options with Bcr-Abl kinase inhibitors, drug resistance is often encountered. One
of the major obstacles in overcoming drug resistance in CML is the high
endogenous levels of heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70). Resveratrol is a phytoalexin 
produced by several plants. We studied the chemotherapeutic effects and mode of
action of resveratrol on K562 (CML) cells. Resveratrol induced apoptosis in K562 
cells in a time-dependent manner. This was established by increased annexin V
binding, corroborated with an enhanced caspase-3 activity and a rise in the
sub-G(0)/G(1) population. Resveratrol treatment also caused suppression of Hsp70 
both in mRNA and protein levels. The downregulation of Hsp70 by resveratrol
exposure was correlated with a diminished presence of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) 
in the nucleus, and the downregulation of transcriptional activity of HSF1. High 
endogenous levels of Hsp70 have been found to be a deterrent for sensitivity to
chemotherapy. We show here that resveratrol could considerably enhance the
apoptosis induction in K562 cells by 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin, an
anticancer agent that inhibits Hsp90 but augments Hsp70 levels. We conclude that 
resveratrol significantly downregulated Hsp70 levels through inhibition of HSF1
transcriptional activity and appreciably augmented the pro-apoptotic effects of
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin.

PMID: 18429957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mol Ther. 2008 Jun;16(6):1048-55. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.68. Epub 2008 Apr 8.

HSP70 and constitutively active HSF1 mediate protection against CDCrel-1-mediated
toxicity.

Jung AE(1), Fitzsimons HL, Bland RJ, During MJ, Young D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medical and Health 
Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Defects in cellular quality control mechanisms are thought to contribute to the
neuropathology of Parkinson's disease (PD). Overexpressing heat shock proteins
(HSPs) may constitute a powerful therapeutic strategy for PD, because they boost 
the ability of the cell to eliminate unwanted proteins. We investigated the
neuroprotective potential of HSP70, HSP40, and H-BH, a constitutively active form
of heat shock factor 1, in a rat model of PD based on adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vector-mediated overexpression of CDCrel-1, a parkin substrate known to be 
toxic to dopaminergic neurons. AAV vector-mediated overexpression of H-BH and of 
HSP70 afforded similar levels of protection against CDCrel-1 toxicity, with
approximately 20% improvement in survival of dopaminergic neurons as compared to 
the controls. The assessment of protection conferred was made using tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) and HuC/D immunohistochemistry and Fluoro-Gold retrograde
tracing, and by observing the extent of preservation of spontaneous function and 
also the extent of drug-induced motor function. In contrast to H-BH and HSP70,
HSP40 overexpression exacerbated CDCrel-1-mediated cell death. Real-time reverse 
transcriptase (RT)-PCR analysis showed that H-BH had the effect of upregulating
endogenous HSP70 and HSP40 mRNA levels 10-fold and 4-fold over basal levels,
respectively, whereas AAV vector-mediated HSP70 and HSP40 mRNA levels were over
100-fold higher. Our results suggest that a comparatively modest upregulation of 
multiple HSPs may be an effective approach for achieving significant
neuroprotection in PD.

PMCID: PMC3793395
PMID: 18398426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Zhonghua Shao Shang Za Zhi. 2007 Oct;23(5):331-4.

[Influence of heat shock factor 1 gene transfection on the expression of
inflammatory mediators in macrophages induced by burn serum].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo CQ(1), Yin CQ, Zhou JD, He QY, Zhu J, Li P, Chen TF, Peng H, Xu YC, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central
South University, Changsha, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of heat shock factor1 (HSF1) on gene
expression of inflammatory mediators in RAW264.7 murine macrophage cells induced 
by burn serum.
METHODS: Sera were separated from blood of normal rats and rats with severe
burns, and the recombinant vector pcDNA3. 1/HSF1 was constructed. RAW264.7
macrophages were divided into non-transfection group, vacant vector group (with
burn and normal sera stimulation, respectively after vacant vector transfection) 
and recombinant vector group (with burn and normal sera stimulation, respectively
after recombinant vector transfection). Some recombinant vector transfected
macrophages without serum stimulation were prepared for the determination of HSF 
1 expression with Western blotting. The mRNA expressions of TNF-alpha, HMGB 1 and
IL-10 were determined with RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The cell line attained after recombinant vector transfection was
comparatively stable,with partial activation of HSF 1. Burn sera markedly
upregulated TNF-alpha, HMGB1 mRNA expression (0.910 +/- 0.100, 0.860 +/- 0.020,
respectively), but downregulated IL-10 expression (0.430 +/- 0.010, respectively)
in normal macrophages, while these genes maintained in a very low level in normal
macrophages with normal serum stimulation . macrophages with recombinant vector
transfection and burn serum stimulation could obviously inhibit the expression of
TNF-alpha and HMGB 1, but enhance the IL-10 gene expression (0.130 +/- 0.100,
0.450 +/- 0.020 , 0.450 +/- 0.020, respectively )when compared with that with
vacant vector transfection and burn serum stimulation (0.800 +/- 0.050, 0.880 +/-
0.030, 0.420 +/- 0.010, respectively).
CONCLUSION: HSF1 can inhibit the expression of some pro-inflammatory mediators in
macrophages after a severe burns, indicating that appropriate upregulation of
anti-inflammatory mediators might exert protective effects on the organism.

PMID: 18396756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2008 Sep;13(3):347-55. doi: 10.1007/s12192-008-0034-4.
Epub 2008 Apr 8.

Bicyclol: a novel antihepatitis drug with hepatic heat shock protein
27/70-inducing activity and cytoprotective effects in mice.

Bao XQ(1), Liu GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Materia Medica, Peking Union Medical 
College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 1 Xian Nong Tan Street, Beijing,
China.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are the best-known endogenous factors that protect
against cell injury under various pathological conditions and that can be induced
by various physical, chemical, and biological stressors. New research seeks to
discover a compound that is clinically safe and can induce the accumulation of
HSPs in patients. This paper reports that the oral administration of three doses 
of bicyclol, a novel antihepatitis drug, induced hepatic HSP27 and HSP70
expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner, and that bicyclol treatment
stimulated heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) activation in mice. The inducing effects of
bicyclol on HSP27, HSP70 and HSF1 were all blocked by quercetin, an inhibitor of 
HSP biosynthesis. The cytoprotective effect of HSP27/70 induced by bicyclol
against hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen (AP) was assessed in mice. The prior
administration of bicyclol markedly suppressed AP-induced liver injury as
indicated by the reduction in the elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase and
aspartate aminotransferase, in liver necrosis, in the release of cytochrome c and
apoptosis-inducing factor from mitochondria, as well as in hepatic
deoxyribonucleic acid fragmentation in mice. However, all the above actions of
bicyclol against AP-induced mouse liver injuries were significantly attenuated by
quercetin. This is the first report to show that bicyclol induces hepatic
HSP27/70 expression via activation of HSF1 and that the cytoprotective action of 
bicyclol against liver injury is mediated by its induction of HSP27/70. These
results provide new evidence for elucidating the mechanism of the
hepatoprotective action of bicyclol in animals and patients.

PMCID: PMC2673939
PMID: 18392951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Stem Cells. 2008 Jun;26(6):1484-9. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0993. Epub 2008
Mar 27.

Copy number variant analysis of human embryonic stem cells.

Wu H(1), Kim KJ, Mehta K, Paxia S, Sundstrom A, Anantharaman T, Kuraishy AI, Doan
T, Ghosh J, Pyle AD, Clark A, Lowry W, Fan G, Baxter T, Mishra B, Sun Y, Teitell 
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1732, USA.

Differences between individual DNA sequences provide the basis for human genetic 
variability. Forms of genetic variation include single-nucleotide polymorphisms, 
insertions/duplications, deletions, and inversions/translocations. The genome of 
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has been characterized mainly by karyotyping
and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), techniques whose relatively low
resolution at 2-10 megabases (Mb) cannot accurately determine most copy number
variability, which is estimated to involve 10%-20% of the genome. In this brief
technical study, we examined HSF1 and HSF6 hESCs using array-comparative genomic 
hybridization (aCGH) to determine copy number variants (CNVs) as a
higher-resolution method for characterizing hESCs. Our approach used five samples
for each hESC line and showed four consistent CNVs for HSF1 and five consistent
CNVs for HSF6. These consistent CNVs included amplifications and deletions that
ranged in size from 20 kilobases to 1.48 megabases, involved seven different
chromosomes, were both shared and unique between hESCs, and were maintained
during neuronal stem/progenitor cell differentiation or drug selection. Thirty
HSF1 and 40 HSF6 less consistently scored but still highly significant candidate 
CNVs were also identified. Overall, aCGH provides a promising approach for
uniquely identifying hESCs and their derivatives and highlights a potential
genomic source for distinct differentiation and functional potentials that
lower-resolution karyotype and CGH techniques could miss. Disclosure of potential
conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMCID: PMC3901366
PMID: 18369100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2008 Aug;39(2):235-42. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2007-0294OC. 
Epub 2008 Mar 26.

Heat shock co-activates interleukin-8 transcription.

Singh IS(1), Gupta A, Nagarsekar A, Cooper Z, Manka C, Hester L, Benjamin IJ, He 
JR, Hasday JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The heat shock (HS) response is a phylogenetically ancient cellular response to
stress, including heat, that shifts gene expression to a set of conserved HS
protein (HSP) genes. In our earlier studies, febrile-range hyperthermia (FRH) not
only activated HSP gene expression, but also increased expression of CXC
chemokines in mice, leading us to hypothesize that the CXC chemokine family of
genes might be HS-responsive. To address this hypothesis we analyzed the effect
of HS on the expression of IL-8/CXCL-8, a member of the human CXC family of
ELR(+) chemokines. HS markedly enhanced TNF-alpha-induced IL-8 secretion in human
A549 respiratory epithelial-like cells and in primary human small airway
epithelial cells. IL-8 mRNA was also up-regulated by HS, but the stability of
IL-8 mRNA was not affected. TNF-alpha-induced reporter activity of an IL-8
promoter construct IL8(-1471/+44)-luc stably transfected in A549 cells was also
enhanced by HS. Electrophoretic mobility and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
showed that the stress-activated transcription factor heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1)
binds to at least two putative heat shock response elements (HSE) present in the 
IL-8 promoter. Deletional reporter constructs lacking either one or both of these
sites showed reduced HS responsiveness. Furthermore, depletion of HSF-1 using
siRNA also reduced the effects HS on TNF-alpha-induced IL-8 expression,
demonstrating that HSF-1 could also act to regulate IL-8 gene transcription. We
speculate that during evolution the CXC chemokine genes may have co-opted
elements of the HS response to amplify their expression and enhance neutrophil
delivery during febrile illnesses.

PMCID: PMC2542457
PMID: 18367728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biochem Cell Biol. 2008 Feb;86(1):37-45. doi: 10.1139/o07-154.

A comparison of Hsp90alpha and Hsp90beta interactions with cochaperones and
substrates.

Taherian A(1), Krone PH, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, 107 Wiggins Rd., Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Hsp90 chaperone complexes function in assembly, folding, and activation of
numerous substrates. The 2 vertebrate homologues encoded by the genes hsp90a and 
hsp90b are differentially expressed in embryonic and adult tissues and during
stress; however, it is not known whether they possess identical functional
activities in chaperone complexes. This question was addressed by examining
potential differences between the Hsp90 isoforms with respect to both cochaperone
and substrate interactions. Epitope-tagged proteins were expressed in mammalian
cells or Xenopus oocytes and subjected to immunoprecipitation with an array of
co-chaperones. Both isoforms were shown to participate equally in multichaperone 
complexes, and no significant differences in cochaperone distribution were
observed. The substrates Raf-1, HSF1, Cdc37, and MEK1 interacted with both
Hsp90alpha and Hsp90beta, and the relative patterns of these interactions were
not affected by heat shock. The substrate kinases c-Src, CKIIB, A-raf, and Erk
interacted with both isoforms; however, significantly more Hsp90alpha was
recovered after heat shock. The data demonstrate that Hsp90alpha and Hsp90beta
exhibit similar interactions with co-chaperones, but significantly different
behaviors with respect to substrate interactions under stress conditions. These
results reveal both functional similarities and key functional differences in the
individual members of this protein family.

PMID: 18364744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Eukaryot Cell. 2008 May;7(5):783-90. doi: 10.1128/EC.00029-08. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Regulation of thermotolerance by stress-induced transcription factors in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Yamamoto N(1), Maeda Y, Ikeda A, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

The heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 and the general stress transcription
factors Msn2 and Msn4 (Msn2/4) are major regulators of the heat shock response in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here, we show that transcriptional activation of their 
target genes, including HSP104, an antistress chaperone gene, is obligatory for
thermotolerance. Although Hsf1 activity might be necessary before the exposure of
cells to high temperature, severe heat shock induced the binding of
hyperphosphorylated Hsf1 to its target promoters. However, promoter-bound,
phosphorylated Hsf1 was inactive for transcription because RNA polymerase II was 
inactive at high temperatures. Rather, our results suggest that Hsf1 activates
the transcription of most of its target genes during the recovery period
following severe heat shock. This delayed upregulation by Hsf1, which would be
induced by misfolded proteins that accumulate in severely heat-shocked cells, is 
required for the resumption of normal cell growth. In contrast, the factors
Msn2/4 were not involved in the delayed upregulation of genes and were
dispensable for cell growth during the recovery period, suggesting that they play
a role before the exposure to high temperature. These results show that Hsf1 and 
Msn2/4 act differentially before and after exposure to extreme temperatures to
ensure cell survival and growth.

PMCID: PMC2394977
PMID: 18359875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biostatistics. 2008 Oct;9(4):668-85. doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxm058. Epub 2008
Mar 18.

A transdimensional Bayesian model for pattern recognition in DNA sequences.

Li SM(1), Wakefield J, Self S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology Biostatistics, Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205-2013, USA.

Identification of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) is essential to
elucidate gene regulatory networks. This article is focused on the recognition of
overpresented short patterns, called "motifs", that may correspond to regulatory 
binding sites in the DNA sequences upstream of genes. An integrated Bayesian
model is proposed to incorporate all unknown characteristics in motif discovery, 
including the number of motifs, motif widths, motif compositions, the number of
motif sites, and locations of motif sites. Reversible jump Markov chain Monte
Carlo is used to obtain posterior inference in the transdimensional parameter
space. We present a number of suggestions for graphical summarization of the
posterior distribution over the complex parameter space. The basic model is
extended using a third-order Markov structure for nonmotif bases and allowing
positions within a motif to be switched between 2 types: "conserved" and
"degenerate." We evaluate the prediction accuracy for the simulated data with 3
motifs and apply the model to upstream sequences in high signal-to-noise regions 
in a human ChIP-chip study. The performance of the Bayesian model is assessed
using yeast data sets of various numbers of sequences and background structures, 
with and without true TFBSs. The performance is also compared to other
computational methods, including 2 statistical approaches, AlignACE and multiple 
expectation maximization for motif elicitation, and 1 word numeration-based
approach, yeast motif finder (YMF).

PMID: 18349034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Aug 1;104(5):1771-80. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21743.

Differential regulation of HSP70 expression by the JNK kinases SEK1 and MKK7 in
mouse embryonic stem cells treated with cadmium.

Nishitai G(1), Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene and Public Health I, School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.
nishitai@research.twmu.ac.jp

JNK, a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), is activated by
the MAPK kinases SEK1 and MKK7 in response to environmental stresses. In the
present study, the effects of CdCl2 treatment on MAPK phosphorylation and HSP70
expression were examined in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells lacking the sek1
gene, the mkk7 gene, or both. Following CdCl2 exposure, the phosphorylation of
JNK, p38, and ERK was suppressed in sek1-/- mkk7-/- cells. When sek1-/- or
mkk7-/- cells were treated with CdCl2, JNK phosphorylation, but not the
phosphorylation of either p38 or ERK, was markedly reduced, while a weak
reduction in p38 phosphorylation was observed in sek1-/- cells. Thus, both SEK1
and MKK7 are required for JNK phosphorylation, whereas their role in p38 and ERK 
phosphorylation could overlap with that of another kinase. We also observed that 
CdCl2-induced HSP70 expression was abolished in sek1-/- mkk7-/- cells, was
reduced in sek1-/- cells, and was enhanced in mkk7-/- cells. Similarly, the
phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) was decreased in sek1-/- mkk7-/-
and sek1-/- cells, but was increased in mkk7-/- cells. Transfection with siRNA
specific for JNK1, JNK2, p38, ERK1, or ERK2 suppressed CdCl2-induced HSP70
expression. In contrast, silencing of p38 or p38 resulted in further accumulation
of HSP70 protein. These results suggest that HSP70 expression is up-regulated by 
SEK1 and down-regulated by MKK7 through distinct MAPK isoforms in mouse ES cells 
treated with CdCl2.

PMID: 18348256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Exp Gerontol. 2008 Apr;43(4):307-16. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2008.01.004. Epub 2008 
Jan 29.

Electromagnetic field therapy delays cellular senescence and death by enhancement
of the heat shock response.

Perez FP(1), Zhou X, Morisaki J, Jurivich D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Section of Geriatric Medicine, University of
Illinois Mail Code 717, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Hormesis may result when mild repetitive stress increases cellular defense
against diverse injuries. This process may also extend in vitro cellular
proliferative life span as well as delay and reverse some of the age-dependent
changes in both replicative and non-replicative cells. This study evaluated the
potential hormetic effect of non-thermal repetitive electromagnetic field shock
(REMFS) and its impact on cellular aging and mortality in primary human T
lymphocytes and fibroblast cell lines. Unlike previous reports employing
electromagnetic radiation, this study used a long wave length, low energy, and
non-thermal REMFS (50MHz/0.5W) for various therapeutic regimens. The primary
outcomes examined were age-dependent morphological changes in cells over time,
cellular death prevention, and stimulation of the heat shock response. REMFS
achieved several biological effects that modified the aging process. REMFS
extended the total number of population doublings of mouse fibroblasts and
contributed to youthful morphology of cells near their replicative lifespan.
REMFS also enhanced cellular defenses of human T cells as reflected in lower cell
mortality when compared to non-treated T cells. To determine the mechanism of
REMFS-induced effects, analysis of the cellular heat shock response revealed
Hsp90 release from the heat shock transcription factor (HSF1). Furthermore, REMFS
increased HSF1 phosphorylation, enhanced HSF1-DNA binding, and improved Hsp70
expression relative to non-REMFS-treated cells. These results show that
non-thermal REMFS activates an anti-aging hormetic effect as well as reduces cell
mortality during lethal stress. Because the REMFS configuration employed in this 
study can potentially be applied to whole body therapy, prospects for translating
these data into clinical interventions for Alzheimer's disease and other
degenerative conditions with aging are discussed.

PMID: 18325704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. EMBO J. 2008 Apr 9;27(7):1049-59. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.42. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Heat shock response relieves ER stress.

Liu Y(1), Chang A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48104, USA.

Accumulation of misfolded protein in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) causes
stress. The unfolded protein response (UPR), a transcriptional induction pathway,
is activated to relieve ER stress. Although UPR is not essential for viability,
UPR-deficient cells are more sensitive to ER stress; ire1Delta cells cannot grow 
when challenged with tunicamycin or by overexpression of misfolded CPY(*). In
these cells, multiple functions are defective, including translocation,
ER-associated degradation (ERAD), and ER-to-Golgi transport. We tested whether
heat shock response (HSR) can relieve ER stress. Using a constitutively active
Hsf1 transcription factor to induce HSR without temperature shift, we find that
HSR rescues growth of stressed ire1Delta cells, and partially relieves defects in
translocation and ERAD. Cargo-specific effects of constitutively active Hsf1 on
ER-to-Golgi transport are correlated with enhanced protein levels of the
respective cargo receptors. In vivo, HSR is activated by ER stress, albeit to a
lower level than that caused by heat. Genomic analysis of HSR targets reveals
that >25% have function in common with UPR targets. We propose that HSR can
relieve stress in UPR-deficient cells by affecting multiple ER activities.

PMCID: PMC2323268
PMID: 18323774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jul 1;104(4):1286-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21705.

Concerted actions of multiple transcription elements confer differential
transactivation of HSP90 isoforms in geldanamycin-treated 9L rat gliosarcoma
cells.

Chao CC(1), Sun FC, Wang CH, Lo CW, Chang YS, Chang KC, Chang MD, Lai YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Institute of Biotechnology, National Tsing Hua
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, ROC.

HSP90 chaperones are transducer proteins of many signaling pathways in cells.
Using a highly specific inhibitor, geldanamycin (GA), an increasing number of the
HSP90 client proteins have been identified. Nevertheless, there is little
information on the differential transactivation of the two isoforms of the hsp90 
genes, hsp90alpha and beta, in cells under stress conditions. Here, we
demonstrate the differential expression of the HSP90 isoforms, HSP90alpha and
beta, in rat gliosarcoma 9L cells using a modified SDS-PAGE system that allowed
us to distinguish the isoforms. We subsequently assessed the transcriptional
controls involving the transcription elements located in the promoter regions of 
the hsp90 genes. At the protein level, HSP90alpha is more responsive to GA in
terms of rate of de novo synthesis and amount of accumulation, as shown by
metabolic-labeling and Western-blotting analyses. Upregulation of the hsp90 genes
was demonstrated by real-time qPCR. The promoter elements hsp90alpha-HSE2 and
hsp90beta-HSE1 were also identified to be the major transcription elements
involved in GA-activated gene expression, as shown by EMSA, whereas the results
of supershift showed that the transcription factor HSF1 is also involved.
Moreover, EMSA results of analysis of the GC box showed differences in both the
initial amounts and inductive response of hsp90s transcripts, whereas analysis of
the TATA box showed GA responsiveness in hsp90alpha only. Collectively, these
results indicate that GA exerts its regulatory effects through transcription
elements including heat-shock elements (HSEs), GC boxes and TATA boxes, resulting
in differential transactivation of hsp90alpha and hsp90beta in rat gliosarcoma 9L
cells.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18320580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2008 Summer;13(2):207-20. doi: 10.1007/s12192-007-0007-z.
Epub 2008 Mar 5.

P-cadherin and beta-catenin are useful prognostic markers in breast cancer
patients; beta-catenin interacts with heat shock protein Hsp27.

Fanelli MA(1), Montt-Guevara M, Diblasi AM, Gago FE, Tello O, Cuello-Carrión FD, 
Callegari E, Bausero MA, Ciocca DR.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biology of Cuyo,
Regional Center for Scientific and Technological Research, National Research
Council (CONICET), Mendoza, Argentina. mfanelli@lab.cricyt.edu.ar

The cadherin-catenin proteins have in common with heat shock proteins (HSP) the
capacity to bind/interact proteins of other classes. Moreover, there are common
molecular pathways that connect the HSP response and the cadherin-catenin protein
system. In the present study, we have explored whether in breast cancer the HSP
might interact functionally with the cadherin-catenin cell adhesion system.
Beta-catenin was immunoprecipitated from breast cancer biopsy samples, and the
protein complexes isolated in this way were probed with antibodies against HSP
family members. We are thus the first to demonstrate a specific interaction
between beta-catenin and Hsp27. However, beta-catenin did not bind Hsp60, Hsp70, 
Hsp90, gp96, or the endoplasmic reticulum stress response protein CHOP. To
confirm the finding of Hsp27-beta-catenin interaction, the 27-kDa
immunoprecipitated band was excised from one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis gels and submitted to liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry with electrospray ionization, confirming a role for Hsp27. In
addition, beta-catenin interacted with other proteins including heat shock
transcription factor 1, P-cadherin, and caveolin-1. In human breast cancer biopsy
samples, beta-catenin was coexpressed in the same tumor areas and in the same
tumor cells that expressed Hsp27. However, this coexpression was strong when
beta-catenin was present in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells and not when
beta-catenin was expressed at the cell surface only. Furthermore, murine breast
cancer cells transfected with hsp25 showed a redistribution of beta-catenin from 
the cell membrane to the cytoplasm. When the prognostic significance of
cadherin-catenin expression was examined by immunohistochemistry in breast cancer
patients (n = 215, follow-up = >10 years), we found that the disease-free
survival and overall survival were significantly shorter for patients expressing 
P-cadherin and for patients showing expression of beta-catenin in the cytoplasm
only (not at the cell surface). The interactions of beta-catenin with Hsp27 and
with HSF1 may explain some of the molecular pathways that influence tumor cell
survival and the clinical significance in the prognosis of the breast cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC2673888
PMID: 18320359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Brain Res. 2008 Apr 8;1203:39-50. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.01.082. Epub 2008 
Feb 12.

Neural differentiation and the attenuated heat shock response.

Yang J(1), Oza J, Bridges K, Chen KY, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers State University of New
Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.

Differentiation of neural progenitor cells of neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma,
and surrogate stem cell lineages from a state resembling stem cells to a state
resembling neurons is accompanied by a marked attenuation in induction of the
heat shock protein 70 promoter driven-luciferase reporter gene, and induction of 
the reporter gene in primary embryonic neurons from hippocampus, cortex, and
spinal cord is lower still when compared to the differentiated cells. Neural
specificity of this phenotype is demonstrated by a negative correlation of
hsp70-reporter gene expression and neurite extension under various experimental
conditions. Analysis of biochemical events involved in induction of the heat
shock response (HSR) reveal a blunted activation of HSF1 DNA-binding activity,
and decreased induction of the mRNA(hsp70) and the 72 kDa HSP70 protein.
Immunocytochemical staining for HSP70 demonstrates a cytoplasmic staining
pattern; heat shock greatly increased the HSP70 staining intensity in the
undifferentiated cells and less so in the differentiated cells. Vulnerability of 
the differentiated cells towards the oxidizer, arsenite, and the excitotoxic
glutamate/glycine is demonstrated by the dose-dependent cytotoxic effects of
these agents on cell viability and activation of caspase 3/7. Importantly,
conditioning heat shock as well as increased expression of HSP70 by gene transfer
conferred protection against such cytotoxicity. Together, our results show that
neural differentiation is associated with a decreased induction of the heat shock
response and an increased vulnerability to stress induced pathologies and death.

PMID: 18316066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Jun;215(3):575-7. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21397.

Bag3 gene expression is regulated by heat shock factor 1.

Franceschelli S(1), Rosati A, Lerose R, De Nicola S, Turco MC, Pascale M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences (DiFarma), University of Salerno,
Salerno, Italy.

BAG3 protein, a member of the BAG co-chaperones family, sustains cell survival,
through its interaction with the heat shock protein (HSP) 70, in a variety of
normal and neoplastic cell types. bag3 gene expression is induced by stressful
stimuli. Here we report for the first time that two of the three putative heat
shock-responsive elements (HSEs) in bag3 promoter interact with the heat shock
factor (HSF) 1 in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, downmodulation of HSF1 protein 
levels by specific small interfering (si) RNAs results in reducing BAG3 protein
levels, indicating that the transcription factor plays a major role in bag3 gene 
expression. Because of the anti-apoptotic role of BAG3 protein, these results
disclose a previously unrecognized pathway, through which HSF1 maintains cell
survival.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18286539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2008 Feb 13;3(2):e1598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001598.

Hsf1 activation inhibits rapamycin resistance and TOR signaling in yeast revealed
by combined proteomic and genetic analysis.

Bandhakavi S(1), Xie H, O'Callaghan B, Sakurai H, Kim DH, Griffin TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

TOR kinases integrate environmental and nutritional signals to regulate cell
growth in eukaryotic organisms. Here, we describe results from a study combining 
quantitative proteomics and comparative expression analysis in the budding yeast,
S. cerevisiae, to gain insights into TOR function and regulation. We profiled
protein abundance changes under conditions of TOR inhibition by rapamycin
treatment, and compared this data to existing expression information for
corresponding gene products measured under a variety of conditions in yeast.
Among proteins showing abundance changes upon rapamycin treatment, almost 90% of 
them demonstrated homodirectional (i.e., in similar direction) transcriptomic
changes under conditions of heat/oxidative stress. Because the known downstream
responses regulated by Tor1/2 did not fully explain the extent of overlap between
these two conditions, we tested for novel connections between the major
regulators of heat/oxidative stress response and the TOR pathway. Specifically,
we hypothesized that activation of regulator(s) of heat/oxidative stress
responses phenocopied TOR inhibition and sought to identify these putative TOR
inhibitor(s). Among the stress regulators tested, we found that cells
(hsf1-R206S, F256S and ssa1-3 ssa2-2) constitutively activated for heat shock
transcription factor 1, Hsf1, inhibited rapamycin resistance. Further analysis of
the hsf1-R206S, F256S allele revealed that these cells also displayed multiple
phenotypes consistent with reduced TOR signaling. Among the multiple Hsf1 targets
elevated in hsf1-R206S, F256S cells, deletion of PIR3 and YRO2 suppressed the
TOR-regulated phenotypes. In contrast to our observations in cells activated for 
Hsf1, constitutive activation of other regulators of heat/oxidative stress
responses, such as Msn2/4 and Hyr1, did not inhibit TOR signaling. Thus, we
propose that activated Hsf1 inhibits rapamycin resistance and TOR signaling via
elevated expression of specific target genes in S. cerevisiae. Additionally,
these results highlight the value of comparative expression analyses between
large-scale proteomic and transcriptomic datasets to reveal new regulatory
connections.

PMCID: PMC2225505
PMID: 18270585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Apr;294(4):H1736-44. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.91507.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 8.

HSP27 regulates p53 transcriptional activity in doxorubicin-treated fibroblasts
and cardiac H9c2 cells: p21 upregulation and G2/M phase cell cycle arrest.

Venkatakrishnan CD(1), Dunsmore K, Wong H, Roy S, Sen CK, Wani A, Zweier JL,
Ilangovan G.

Author information: 
(1)The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Treatment of cancer patients with anthracyclin-based chemotherapeutic drugs
induces congestive heart failure by a mechanism involving p53. However, it is not
known how p53 aggravates doxorubicin (Dox)-induced toxicity in the heart. On the 
basis of in vitro acute toxicity assay using heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1)
wild-type (HSF-1(+/+)) and HSF-1-knockout (HSF-1(-/-)) mouse embryonic
fibroblasts and neonatal rat cardiomyocyte-derived H9c2 cells, we demonstrate a
novel mechanism whereby heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) regulates transcriptional
activity of p53 in Dox-treated cells. Inhibition of p53 by pifithrin-alpha
(PFT-alpha) provided different levels of protection from Dox that correlate with 
HSP27 levels in these cells. In HSF-1(+/+) cells, PFT-alpha attenuated
Dox-induced toxicity. However, in HSF-1(-/-) cells (which express a very low
level of HSP27 compared with HSF-1(+/+) cells), there was no such attenuation,
indicating an important role of HSP27 in p53-dependent cell death. On the other
hand, immunoprecipitation of p53 was found to coimmunoprecipitate HSP27 and vice 
versa (confirmed by Western blotting and matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time of flight), demonstrating HSP27 binding to p53 in
Dox-treated cells. Moreover, upregulation of p21 was observed in HSF-1(+/+) and
H9c2 cells, indicating that HSP27 binding transactivates p53 and enhances
transcription of p21 in response to Dox treatment. Further analysis with flow
cytometry showed that increased expression of p21 results in G(2)/M phase cell
cycle arrest in Dox-treated cells. Overall, HSP27 binding to p53 attenuated the
cellular toxicity by upregulating p21 and prevented cell death.

PMID: 18263706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng Xue Bao. 2007 Nov;23(6):971-5.

[Human HSF1 mutants and their applications].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang YH(1), Gong SF, Zou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Guangzhou 510663, China.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the key protein in regulating stress response. It
can be activated under heat, oxidative or another stress conditions.
Dominant-positive and dominant-negative HSF1 are two types of HSF1 mutants. Both 
of them gain the DNA binding activity in the absence of stress. In addition,
dominant-positive HSF1 acquires transcriptional activity, which dominant-negative
HSF1 does not acquire. In this paper, the progress of using these HSF1 mutants in
the research of cancer, neurodegenerative disorders and cardiovascular diseases
will be discussed.

PMID: 18257221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Genes Dev. 2008 Feb 1;22(3):331-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.453808.

Differential display of DNA-binding proteins reveals heat-shock factor 1 as a
circadian transcription factor.

Reinke H(1), Saini C, Fleury-Olela F, Dibner C, Benjamin IJ, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva,
Switzerland.

The circadian clock enables the anticipation of daily recurring environmental
changes by presetting an organism's physiology and behavior. Driven and
synchronized by a central pacemaker in the brain, circadian output genes
fine-tune a wide variety of physiological parameters in peripheral organs.
However, only a subset of circadianly transcribed genes seems to be directly
regulated by core clock proteins. Assuming that yet unidentified transcription
factors may exist in the circadian transcriptional network, we set out to develop
a novel technique, differential display of DNA-binding proteins (DDDP), which we 
used to screen mouse liver nuclear extracts. In addition to several established
circadian transcription factors, we found DNA binding of heat-shock factor 1
(HSF1) to be highly rhythmic. HSF1 drives the expression of heat-shock proteins
at the onset of the dark phase, when the animals start to be behaviorally active.
Furthermore, Hsf1-deficient mice have a longer free-running period than wild-type
littermates, suggesting a combined role for HSF1 in the mammalian timekeeping and
cytoprotection systems. Our results also suggest that the new screening method
DDDP is not limited to the identification of circadian transcription factors but 
can be applied to discover novel transcriptional regulators in various biological
systems.

PMCID: PMC2216693
PMID: 18245447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Mar 5;433(1):11-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.12.045. Epub
2007 Dec 25.

Expression of heat shock transcription factors and heat shock protein 72 in rat
retina after intravitreal injection of low dose N-methyl-D-aspartate.

Ahn J(1), Piri N, Caprioli J, Munemasa Y, Kim SH, Kwong JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90075-7000, USA.

The heat shock response is a genetically well-ordered process for cell to
generate heat shock protein (HSP). Various stressors can trigger the response
through heat shock transcriptional factor (HSF) regulation. Recent studies
demonstrated that preconditioning of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) at non-lethal
levels has neuroprotective effects, but the exact mechanisms are unclear. We
hypothesize that the protective mechanisms of NMDA preconditioning could involve 
HSP expression. To understand the regulatory mechanisms of HSP under stress, we
examined the expression of Hsp72, HSF1 and HSF2 in the adult rat retina after
intravitreal injection of NMDA. Retinal ganglion cell (RGC) counting with
retrograde labeling showed that 8 nmol, but not 0.8 nmol, of intravitreal NMDA
reduced RGC survival. Western blotting and immunohistochemistry showed that
non-lethal (0.8 nmol) doses of NMDA induced a time-dependent expression of HSF1
and HSF2, and that the expression of HSF1 and HSF2 in the RGC layer peaked
between 9 and 18 h after injection. Parallel to the increased HSF expression,
immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization demonstrated that Hsp72 mRNA and
protein expression increased 9 and 12 h after non-lethal NMDA injection,
respectively. Our findings suggest that the expression of HSF1 and HSF2 is
associated with the Hsp72-related stress response.

PMID: 18242848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008 Mar;65(6):855-61. doi: 10.1007/s00018-008-7458-y.

New insights into the mechanism of heat shock response activation.

Shamovsky I(1), Nudler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

Heat shock (HS) response is a universal mechanism of protection against adverse
environmental conditions. It is manifested mainly by rapid and robust induction
of molecular chaperones and other cytoprotective proteins. In higher eukaryotes
the activation of the HS response is mediated by a master regulator, heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Here we outline recent progress in understanding
the early steps in HSF1 activation by heat in the context of existing models of
HSF1 regulation.

PMID: 18239856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genes Cells. 2008 Feb;13(2):105-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2007.01154.x.

Rsp5 is required for the nuclear export of mRNA of HSF1 and MSN2/4 under stress
conditions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Haitani Y(1), Takagi H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan.

Rsp5 is an essential and multi-functional E3 ubiquitin ligase in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. We previously isolated the Ala401Glu rsp5 mutant that is
hypersensitive to various stresses. In rsp5(A401E) cells, the transcription of
the stress protein genes was defective. To understand the mechanism by which Rsp5
regulates the expression of stress proteins, we analyzed the expression and
localization of two major transcription factors, Hsf1 and Msn2/4, required for
stress protein gene expression in S. cerevisiae. The mRNA levels of HSF1 and
MSN2/4 in rsp5(A401E) cells were slightly lower than those of wild-type cells. An
interesting finding is that the protein levels of HSF1 and Msn2/4 were remarkably
defective in rsp5(A401E) cells after exposure to temperature up-shift and
ethanol, although these proteins are mainly localized in the nucleus under these 
stress conditions. We also showed that the mRNAs of HSF1 and MSN2/4 were
accumulated in the nucleus of rsp5(A401E) cells after exposure to temperature
up-shift and ethanol, and even under non-stress conditions, suggesting that Rsp5 
is required for the nuclear export of these mRNAs. These results indicate that,
in response to environmental stresses, Rsp5 primarily regulates the expression of
Hsf1 and Msn2/4 at the post-transcriptional level and is involved in the repair
system of stress-induced abnormal proteins.

PMID: 18233954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2007 Winter;12(4):342-52.

Altered heat stress response following streptozotocin-induced diabetes.

Najemnikova E(1), Rodgers CD, Locke M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physical Education and Health, University of Toronto, 55 Harbord
Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 2W6.

The heat shock response involves activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 
(Hsf1) followed by the rapid synthesis of the protective heat shock proteins
(Hsps). To determine if the stress experienced during streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced diabetes altered the heat shock response, male Sprague-Dawley rats 
(n = 33; 280-300 g) were assigned to 4 groups: (1) control, (2) diabetic (30 days
after 55 mg/kg STZ i.v.), (3) heat stressed (42 degrees C for 15 minutes), and
(4) diabetic heat-stressed group (heat stressed 42 degrees C for 15 minutes, 30
days after 55 mg/kg STZ i.v.). The content of Hsp72, Hsp25, and Hsf1 in skeletal 
muscles, heart, kidney, and liver was assessed by Western blotting, while
electrophoretic mobility shift gel analysis was used to assess Hsf activation.
Without heat stress, the constitutive expression of Hsp25, Hsp72, and Hsf1 in
tissues from diabetic animals and controls was similar. However, 24 hours
following heat stress, the heart, kidney, and liver from diabetic animals showed 
an increased Hsp72 and Hsp25 content compared to the same tissues from
heat-stressed nondiabetic animals (P < 0.05). The white gastrocnemius and
plantaris muscles from heat-stressed animals (diabetic and nondiabetic) both
showed significant and similar elevations in Hsp72 content. Interestingly, while 
all muscles from nondiabetic animals showed significant (P < 0.05) increase in
Hsp25 content after heat stress, no increase in Hsp25 content was detected in
muscles from heat-stressed diabetic animals. As expected, Hsf activation was
undetectable in all tissues from non-heat-stressed animals but was detectable in 
tissues from both diabetic and nondiabetic animals following heat stress with the
exception of diabetic skeletal muscle, where it was attenuated. Hsf1 content was 
unaltered in all tissues examined except in the white gastrocnemius muscles from 
heat-stressed diabetic animals, where it was undetectable. These results suggest 
that when tissues from STZ-induced diabetic animals are heat stressed, the
Hsp/stress response is altered in a tissue-specific manner. This impaired ability
to activate the stress response may explain, at least in part, the selective
atrophy of certain muscles or muscle fiber types during diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2134796
PMID: 18229453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Dairy Sci. 2008 Feb;91(2):445-54. doi: 10.3168/jds.2007-0540.

Invited review: genes involved in the bovine heat stress response.

Collier RJ(1), Collier JL, Rhoads RP, Baumgard LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
rcollier@ag.arizona.edu

The cellular heat stress (HS) response is one component of the acute systemic
response to HS. Gene networks within and across cells and tissues respond to
environmental heat loads above the thermoneutral zone with both intra- and
extracellular signals that coordinate cellular and whole-animal metabolism.
Activation of these systems appears to be initiated at skin surface temperatures 
exceeding 35 degrees C as animals begin to store heat and rapidly increase
evaporative heat loss (EVHL) mechanisms. Gene expression changes include 1)
activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1); 2) increased expression
of heat shock proteins (HSP) and decreased expression and synthesis of other
proteins; 3) increased glucose and amino acid oxidation and reduced fatty acid
metabolism; 4) endocrine system activation of the stress response; and 5) immune 
system activation via extracellular secretion of HSP. If the stress persists,
these gene expression changes lead to an altered physiological state referred to 
as "acclimation," a process largely controlled by the endocrine system. In the
acclimated state, metabolism is adjusted to minimize detrimental effects of
increased thermal heat load. The role of secreted HSP in feedback regulation of
the immune and endocrine system has not yet been investigated. The variation in
EVHL among animals and the central role that HSF1 has in coordinating thermal
tolerance suggest that there is opportunity to improve thermal tolerance via gene
manipulation. Determining the basis for altered energy metabolism during thermal 
stress will lead to opportunities for improved animal performance via altered
nutritional management.

PMID: 18218730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2221-34. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01659-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Stress-dependent dynamics of global chromatin remodeling in yeast: dual role for 
SWI/SNF in the heat shock stress response.

Shivaswamy S(1), Iyer VR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology and Section of Molecular Genetics
and Microbiology, University of Texas at Austin, 1 University Station A4800,
Austin, TX 78712-0159, USA.

Although chromatin structure is known to affect transcriptional activity, it is
not clear how broadly patterns of changes in histone modifications and nucleosome
occupancy affect the dynamic regulation of transcription in response to
perturbations. The identity and role of chromatin remodelers that mediate some of
these changes are also unclear. Here, we performed temporal genome-wide analyses 
of gene expression, nucleosome occupancy, and histone H4 acetylation during the
response of yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) to different stresses and report
several findings. First, a large class of predominantly ribosomal protein genes, 
whose transcription was repressed during both heat shock and stationary phase,
showed strikingly contrasting histone acetylation patterns. Second, the SWI/SNF
complex was required for normal activation as well as repression of genes during 
heat shock, and loss of SWI/SNF delayed chromatin remodeling at the promoters of 
activated genes. Third, Snf2 was recruited to ribosomal protein genes and Hsf1
target genes, and its occupancy of this large set of genes was altered during
heat shock. Our results suggest a broad and direct dual role for SWI/SNF in
chromatin remodeling, during heat shock activation as well as repression, at
promoters and coding regions.

PMCID: PMC2268435
PMID: 18212068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Mar;19(3):1104-12. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E07-10-1004. Epub 2008
Jan 16.

Activation of heat shock and antioxidant responses by the natural product
celastrol: transcriptional signatures of a thiol-targeted molecule.

Trott A(1), West JD, Klaic L, Westerheide SD, Silverman RB, Morimoto RI, Morano
KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Stress response pathways allow cells to sense and respond to environmental
changes and adverse pathophysiological states. Pharmacological modulation of
cellular stress pathways has implications in the treatment of human diseases,
including neurodegenerative disorders, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. The
quinone methide triterpene celastrol, derived from a traditional Chinese
medicinal herb, has numerous pharmacological properties, and it is a potent
activator of the mammalian heat shock transcription factor HSF1. However, its
mode of action and spectrum of cellular targets are poorly understood. We show
here that celastrol activates Hsf1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae at a similar
effective concentration seen in mammalian cells. Transcriptional profiling
revealed that celastrol treatment induces a battery of oxidant defense genes in
addition to heat shock genes. Celastrol activated the yeast Yap1 oxidant defense 
transcription factor via the carboxy-terminal redox center that responds to
electrophilic compounds. Antioxidant response genes were likewise induced in
mammalian cells, demonstrating that the activation of two major cell stress
pathways by celastrol is conserved. We report that celastrol's biological
effects, including inhibition of glucocorticoid receptor activity, can be blocked
by the addition of excess free thiol, suggesting a chemical mechanism for
biological activity based on modification of key reactive thiols by this natural 
product.

PMCID: PMC2262981
PMID: 18199679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochemistry. 2008 Jan 8;47(1):143-56. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

4-Hydroxynonenal self-limits fas-mediated DISC-independent apoptosis by promoting
export of Daxx from the nucleus to the cytosol and its binding to Fas.

Sharma R(1), Sharma A, Dwivedi S, Zimniak P, Awasthi S, Awasthi YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555, USA. rsharma@hsc. unt.edu

Previously, we have shown that 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) induces Fas-mediated
apoptosis in HLE B-3 cells through a pathway which is independent of FasL, FADD, 
procaspase 8, and DISC (Li, J., et al. (2006) Biochemistry 45, 12253-12264). The 
involvement of Daxx has also been suggested in this pathway, but its role is not 
clear. Here, we report that Daxx plays an important regulatory role during
4-HNE-induced, Fas-mediated apoptosis in Jurkat cells. 4-HNE induces
Fas-dependent apoptosis in procaspase 8-deficient Jurkat cells via the activation
of ASK1, JNK, and caspase 3, and the apoptosis can be inhibited by masking Fas
with the antagonistic anti-Fas antibodies. We demonstrate that 4-HNE exposure to 
Jurkat cells leads to the induction of both Fas and Daxx. 4-HNE binds to both Fas
and Daxx and promotes the export of Daxx from the nucleus to the cytosol, where
it binds to Fas and inhibits apoptosis. Depletion of Daxx results in an increase 
in the activation of ASK1, JNK, and caspase 3 along with exacerbation of
4-HNE-induced apoptosis, suggesting that Daxx inhibits apoptosis by binding to
Fas. 4-HNE-induced translocation of Daxx is also accompanied by the activation of
the transcription factor HSF1. The results of these studies are consistent with a
model in which, by interacting with Fas, 4-HNE promotes proapoptotic signaling
via ASK1, JNK, and caspase 3. In parallel, 4-HNE induces Daxx and promotes its
export from the nucleus to the cytosol, where it interacts with Fas to self-limit
the extent of apoptosis by inhibiting the downstream proapoptotic signaling.
Cytoplasmic translocation of Daxx also results in up-regulation of
HSF1-associated stress-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC2564820
PMID: 18069800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Oncogene. 2008 May 8;27(21):2999-3009. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

A novel function for HSF1-induced mitotic exit failure and genomic instability
through direct interaction between HSF1 and Cdc20.

Lee YJ(1), Lee HJ, Lee JS, Jeoung D, Kang CM, Bae S, Lee SJ, Kwon SH, Kang D, Lee
YS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Effect, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Although heat-shock factor (HSF) 1 is a known transcriptional factor of
heat-shock proteins, other pathways like production of aneuploidy and increased
protein stability of cyclin B1 have been proposed. In the present study, the
regulatory domain of HSF1 (amino-acid sequence 212-380) was found to interact
directly with the amino-acid sequence 106-171 of Cdc20. The association between
HSF1 and Cdc20 inhibited the interaction between Cdc27 and Cdc20, the
phosphorylation of Cdc27 and the ubiquitination activity of anaphase-promoting
complex (APC). The overexpression of HSF1 inhibited mitotic exit and the
degradations of cyclin B1 and securin, which resulted in production of aneuploidy
and multinucleated cells, but regulatory domain-deficient HSF1 did not. Moreover,
HSF1-overexpressing cells showed elevated levels of micronuclei and genomic
alteration. The depletion of HSF1 from cells highly expressing HSF1 reduced
nocodazole-mediated aneuploidy in cells. These findings suggest a novel function 
of HSF1 frequently overexpressed in cancer cells, to inhibit APC/C activity by
interacting with Cdc20, and to result in aneuploidy development and genomic
instability.

PMID: 18059335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Immunol. 2007 Dec 15;179(12):8305-12.

Physiological fever temperature induces a protective stress response in T
lymphocytes mediated by heat shock factor-1 (HSF1).

Murapa P(1), Gandhapudi S, Skaggs HS, Sarge KD, Woodward JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington 40536, USA.

Heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) is a transcription factor that serves as the major
temperature-inducible sensor for eukaryotic cells. In most cell types, HSF1
becomes activated to the DNA binding form at 42 degrees C and mediates the
classical heat shock response, protecting the cells from subsequent lethal
temperatures. We have recently demonstrated that HSF1 is activated at a lower
temperature in T lymphocytes than in most other cell types (39 degrees C vs 42
degrees C), within the physiological range of fever. In this study, we show that 
T cell activation at fever temperatures not only activates HSF1 but induces the
up-regulation of the HSF1 protein and the HSF1-regulated protein, HSP70i. T cells
from HSF1 knockout mice proliferate normally under optimal conditions but are
impaired in proliferation at physiological fever temperatures and low CO2
concentrations, conditions that do not impair wild-type T cells. This defect in
proliferation appears to be mediated by a block in the G1/S transition of the
cell cycle and is independent of HSP70. Elevated temperature and low CO2
concentrations resulted in a dramatic reduction of the intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS) levels in both normal and knockout T cells. Wild-type T
cells were able to restore ROS levels to normal within 5 h, whereas HSF1-/- T
cells were not. These results suggest that the proliferation defect seen in T
cells from HSF1-/- mice at fever temperatures was because of dysregulated ROS
levels and that HSF1 is important in maintaining ROS homeostasis and cell cycle
progression under the stressful conditions encountered during fever.

PMID: 18056375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Neurosci. 2007 Nov 21;27(47):12957-66.

Alcohol regulates gene expression in neurons via activation of heat shock factor 
1.

Pignataro L(1), Miller AN, Ma L, Midha S, Protiva P, Herrera DG, Harrison NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Drinking alcohol causes widespread alterations in gene expression that can result
in long-term physiological changes. Although many alcohol-responsive genes (ARGs)
have been identified, the mechanisms by which alcohol alters transcription are
not well understood. To elucidate these mechanisms, we investigated Gabra4, a
neuron-specific gene that is rapidly and robustly activated by alcohol (10-60
mM), both in vitro and in vivo. Here we show that alcohol can activate elements
of the heat shock pathway in mouse cortical neurons to enhance the expression of 
Gabra4 and other ARGs. The activation of Gabra4 by alcohol or high temperature is
dependent on the binding of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) to a short downstream DNA 
sequence, the alcohol response element (ARE). Alcohol and heat stimulate the
translocation of HSF1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and the induction of
HSF1-dependent genes, Hsp70 and Hsp90, in cultured neurons and in the mouse
cerebral cortex in vivo. The reduction of HSF1 levels using small interfering RNA
prevented the stimulation of Gabra4 and Hsp70 by alcohol and heat shock.
Microarray analysis showed that many ARGs contain ARE-like sequences and that
some of these genes are also activated by heat shock. We suggest that alcohol
activates phylogenetically conserved pathways that involve intermediates in the
heat shock cascade and that sequence elements similar to the ARE may mediate some
of the changes in gene expression triggered by alcohol intake, which could be
important in a variety of pathophysiological responses to alcohol.

PMID: 18032669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2008 Mar;192(3):403-11. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Heat shock protein accumulation and heat shock transcription factor activation in
rat skeletal muscle during compensatory hypertrophy.

Locke M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Physical Education and Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. marius.locke@utoronto.ca

AIM: To assess the stress/heat shock protein (HSP) and heat shock factor
activation response in overloaded (hypertrophied) plantaris muscles.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 5 per time point) underwent unilateral
removal of the left gastrocnemius muscle. After 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 14 and 28 days,
plantaris muscles were removed, weighted rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total
protein content was determined and HSP 25 and HSP 72 contents were assessed by
Western blotting. Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) activation was assessed
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS: While plantaris muscle mass was significantly increased 3 days after the
imposition of overload and remained elevated thereafter confirming muscle
hypertrophy, muscle protein content was not increased until 7 days after the
imposition of overload. HSP 72 content was significantly increased at 3 days,
while HSP 25 content was not significantly increased until 7 days after
synergistic muscle removal. HSF activation was detected at 1, 2 and 3 days of
overload but undetectable thereafter. The addition of HSF1- and HSF2-specific
antibodies to extracts prior to EMSA failed to supershift the HSF-heat shock
element complex.
CONCLUSION: The temporal pattern of both HSF activation and HSP expression in
skeletal muscle undergoing hypertrophy suggests the increased level of the
observed HSPs may be both a consequence of both the immediate stress of overload 
and the hypertrophic process. The inability of HSF1- and HSF2-specific antibodies
to cause supershifts suggests the HSF detected during overload may not be HSF1 or
HSF2.

PMID: 17973955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 21;282(51):37285-92. Epub 2007 Oct 27.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 is required for maintenance of ciliary beating 
in mice.

Takaki E(1), Fujimoto M, Nakahari T, Yonemura S, Miyata Y, Hayashida N, Yamamoto 
K, Vallee RB, Mikuriya T, Sugahara K, Yamashita H, Inouye S, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Otolaryngology, Yamaguchi University
School of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) maintain protein homeostasis through
regulating expression of heat shock proteins, especially in stressed conditions. 
In addition, HSFs are involved in cellular differentiation and development by
regulating development-related genes, as well as heat shock genes. Here, we
showed chronic sinusitis and mild hydrocephalus in postnatal HSF1-null mice,
which are associated with impaired mucociliary clearance and cerebrospinal flow, 
respectively. Analysis of ciliary beating revealed that the amplitude of the
beating was significantly reduced, and ciliary beat frequencies were lower in the
respiratory epithelium, ependymal cells, oviduct, and trachea of HSF1-null mice
than those of wild-type mice. Cilia possess a common axonema structure composed
of microtubules of alpha- and beta-tubulin. We found a marked reduction in alpha-
and ciliary betaiv-tubulin in the HSF1-null cilia, which is developmentally
associated with reduced Hsp90 expression in HSF1-null mice. Treatment of the
respiratory epithelium with geldanamycin resulted in rapid reduction of ciliary
beating in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, Hsp90 was physically associated 
with ciliary betaiv-tubulin, and Hsp90 stabilizes tubulin polymerization in
vitro. These results indicate that HSF1 is required to maintain ciliary beating
in postnatal mice, probably by regulating constitutive expression of Hsp90 that
is important for tubulin polymerization.

PMID: 17965413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Dec;85(12):1421-8. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

Celastrol inhibits polyglutamine aggregation and toxicity though induction of the
heat shock response.

Zhang YQ(1), Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, 741
S. Limestone Street, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Heat shock proteins (hsps) are protective against the harmful effects of mutant
expanded polyglutamine repeat proteins that occur in diseases such as
Huntington's, prompting the search for pharmacologic compounds that increase hsp 
expression in cells as potential treatments for this and related diseases. In
this paper, we show that celastrol, a compound recently shown to up-regulate hsp 
gene expression, significantly decreases killing of cells expressing mutant
polyglutamine protein. This effect requires the presence of the transcription
factor responsible for mediating inducible hsp gene expression, HSF1, and is
correlated with decreased amounts and increased sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
solubility of polyglutamine aggregates. These results suggest the potential of
celastrol as a therapeutic agent in the treatment of human polyglutamine
expansion diseases.

PMCID: PMC2262918
PMID: 17943263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proteomics. 2007 Nov;7(21):3906-18.

Pro-oxidative DEP chemicals induce heat shock proteins and an unfolding protein
response in a bronchial epithelial cell line as determined by DIGE analysis.

Jung EJ(1), Avliyakulov NK, Boontheung P, Loo JA, Nel AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, and David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Ambient particulate matter (PM) induces adverse health effects through the
ability of pro-oxidative chemicals to induce the production of oxygen radicals
and oxidant injury. Utilizing a proteomics strategy involving 2-D DIGE,
immunoblotting, and real-time PCR, we demonstrate that organic diesel exhaust
particle (DEP) chemicals induce an unfolding protein response (UPR) and
proinflammatory effects in the human bronchial epithelial cell line, BEAS-2B.
DIGE and MS showed the induction of at least 14 proteins, among which heat shock 
protein 70 (HSP70), HSP40, TPR2, and T-complex protein 1 (zeta-subunit) are known
to play a role in the UPR. Demonstrating increased HSP70 mRNA expression and
nuclear translocation of HSF1, the key transcription factor responsible for HSP
expression, further strengthened this notion. Immunoblotting demonstrated
increased expression of ATF4, an ER stress-associated transcriptional enhancer
responsible for differential protein translation under conditions of ER stress.
Finally, the DEP extract induced the expression of IL-6 and IL-8 in the culture
supernatant. The role of oxidative stress was demonstrated further by response
subtraction in the presence of the thiol antioxidant, N-acetyl cysteine. Our data
suggest that pro-oxidative DEP chemicals induce protein unfolding/misfolding that
lead to UPR and proinflammatory effects in a cell type that is targeted by PM in 
the lung.

PMID: 17922515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 20;27(13):1886-93. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Heat shock factor 1 represses estrogen-dependent transcription through
association with MTA1.

Khaleque MA(1), Bharti A, Gong J, Gray PJ, Sachdev V, Ciocca DR, Stati A, Fanelli
M, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 2215, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the transcriptional activator of the heat shock
genes, is increasingly implicated in cancer. We have shown that HSF1 binds to the
corepressor metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) in vitro and in human breast
carcinoma samples. HSF1-MTA1 complex formation was strongly induced by the
transforming ligand heregulin and complexes incorporated a number of additional
proteins including histone deacetylases (HDAC1 and 2) and Mi2alpha, all
components of the NuRD corepressor complex. These complexes were induced to
assemble on the chromatin of MCF7 breast carcinoma cells and associated with the 
promoters of estrogen-responsive genes. Such HSF1 complexes participate in
repression of estrogen-dependent transcription in breast carcinoma cells treated 
with heregulin and this effect was inhibited by MTA1 knockdown. Repression of
estrogen-dependent transcription may contribute to the role of HSF1 in cancer.

PMID: 17922035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Dec;293(6):H3692-8. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Exercise-mediated regulation of Hsp70 expression following aerobic exercise
training.

Melling CW(1), Thorp DB, Milne KJ, Krause MP, Noble EG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

An issue central to understanding the biological benefits associated with regular
exercise training is to elucidate the intracellular mechanisms governing
exercise-conferred cardioprotection. Heat shock proteins (HSPs), most notably the
inducible 70-kDa HSP family member Hsp70, are believed to participate in the
protection of the myocardium during cardiovascular stress. Following acute
exercise, activation of PKA mediates the suppression of an intermediary protein
kinase, ERK1/2, which phosphorylates and suppresses the activation of the heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). However, following exercise training, ERK1/2
has been reported to regulate the transcriptional activation of several genes
involved in cell growth and proliferation and has been shown to be associated
with training-mediated myocardial hypertrophy. The present project examined the
transcriptional activation of hsp70 gene expression in acutely exercised (60 min 
at 30 m/min) naïve sedentary and aerobically trained (8 wk, low intensity) male
Sprague-Dawley rats. Following acute exercise stress, no significant differences 
were demonstrated in the expression of myocardial Hsp70 mRNA and activation of
PKA between sedentary and trained animals. However, trained animals elicited
expression of the hsp70 gene (P < 0.05) in the presence of elevated ERK1/2
activation. Given the association of ERK1/2 and the suppression of hsp70 gene
expression following acute exercise in naïve sedentary rats, these results
suggest that training results in adaptations that allow for the simultaneous
initiation of both proliferative and protective responses. While it is unclear
what factors are associated with this training-related shift, increases in HSF1
DNA binding affinity (P < 0.05) and posttranscriptional modifications of the
Hsp70 transcript are suggested.

PMID: 17921326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 23;282(47):33902-7. Epub 2007 Sep 25.

HSF1-TPR interaction facilitates export of stress-induced HSP70 mRNA.

Skaggs HS(1), Xing H, Wilkerson DC, Murphy LA, Hong Y, Mayhew CN, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center,
University of Kentucky, 741 S. Limestone Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0084, USA.

Stress conditions inhibit mRNA export, but mRNAs encoding heat shock proteins
continue to be efficiently exported from the nucleus during stress. How HSP mRNAs
bypass this stress-associated export inhibition was not known. Here, we show that
HSF1, the transcription factor that binds HSP promoters after stress to induce
their transcription, interacts with the nuclear pore-associating TPR protein in a
stress-responsive manner. TPR is brought into proximity of the HSP70 promoter
after stress and preferentially associates with mRNAs transcribed from this
promoter. Disruption of the HSF1-TPR interaction inhibits the export of mRNAs
expressed from the HSP70 promoter, both endogenous HSP70 mRNA and a luciferase
reporter mRNA. These results suggest that HSP mRNA export escapes stress
inhibition via HSF1-mediated recruitment of the nuclear pore-associating protein 
TPR to HSP genes, thereby functionally connecting the first and last nuclear
steps of the gene expression pathway, transcription and mRNA export.

PMCID: PMC2266631
PMID: 17897941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cell. 2007 Sep 21;130(6):1005-18.

Heat shock factor 1 is a powerful multifaceted modifier of carcinogenesis.

Dai C(1), Whitesell L, Rogers AB, Lindquist S.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2007 Sep 21;130(6):986-8.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the master regulator of the heat shock response in 
eukaryotes, a very highly conserved protective mechanism. HSF1 function increases
survival under a great many pathophysiological conditions. How it might be
involved in malignancy remains largely unexplored. We report that eliminating
HSF1 protects mice from tumors induced by mutations of the RAS oncogene or a hot 
spot mutation in the tumor suppressor p53. In cell culture, HSF1 supports
malignant transformation by orchestrating a network of core cellular functions
including proliferation, survival, protein synthesis, and glucose metabolism. The
striking effects of HSF1 on oncogenic transformation are not limited to mouse
systems or tumor initiation; human cancer lines of diverse origins show much
greater dependence on HSF1 function to maintain proliferation and survival than
their nontransformed counterparts. While it enhances organismal survival and
longevity under most circumstances, HSF1 has the opposite effect in supporting
the lethal phenomenon of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2586609
PMID: 17889646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cell. 2007 Sep 21;130(6):986-8.

Non-oncogene addiction and the stress phenotype of cancer cells.

Solimini NL(1), Luo J, Elledge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, Center for
Genetics and Genomics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2007 Sep 21;130(6):1005-18.

Heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a transcription factor that is activated upon
proteotoxic stress and coordinates induction of the heat-shock response. In this 
issue, Dai et al. (2007) show that HSF1 is a potent modifier of tumorigenesis and
is required for tumor initiation and maintenance in a variety of cancer models.
These findings add HSF1 to a growing list of non-oncogenes that could be
exploited as cancer drug targets.

PMID: 17889643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Shock. 2008 May;29(5):623-30.

Transcriptional profiles of human epithelial cells in response to heat:
computational evidence for novel heat shock proteins.

Laramie JM(1), Chung TP, Brownstein B, Stormo GD, Cobb JP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics, Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
laramiej@bu.edu

We hypothesized that broad-scale expression profiling would provide insight into 
the regulatory pathways that control gene expression in response to stress and
potentially identify novel heat-responsive genes. HEp2 cells, a human malignant
epithelial cell line, were heated at 37 degrees C to 43 degrees C for 60 min to
gauge the heat shock response, using as a proxy inducible Hsp70 quantified by
Western blot analysis. Based on these results, microarray experiments were
conducted at 37 degrees C, 40 degrees C, 41 degrees C, 42 degrees C, and 43
degrees C. Using linear modeling, we compared the sets of microarrays at 40
degrees C, 41 degrees C, 42 degrees C, and 43 degrees C with the 37 degrees C
baseline temperature and took the union of the genes exhibiting differential gene
expression signal to create two sets of "heat shock response" genes, each set
reflecting either increased or decreased RNA abundance. Leveraging human and
mouse orthologous alignments, we used the two lists of coexpressed genes to
predict transcription factor binding sites in silico, including those for heat
shock factor (HSF) 1 and HSF2 transcription factors. We discovered HSF1 and HSF2 
binding sites in 15 genes not previously associated with the heat shock response.
We conclude that microarray experiments coupled with upstream promoter analysis
can be used to identify novel genes that respond to heat shock. Additional
experiments are required to validate these putative heat shock proteins and
facilitate a deeper understanding of the mechanisms involved during the stress
response.

PMID: 17885648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Sep;27(9):1447-50.

[Expression of HSF1 and XAF1 in gastro-intestinal cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Li T(1), Chen CL, Wang JD, Cui SD, Cui DY, Guo W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. E-mail: ivyliting@yahoo.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) To gastrointestinal
(GI) investigate the expression of XAF1 and heat-shock transcription factors 1
èHSF1éand their relationship in human gastrointestinal cancers.
METHODS: Immunoblotting was used to analyze the expression of HSF1 and XAF1 in
either gastric or colon cancer tissue and GI cancer cell line. Transient
expression of the HSF1-containing vector in GI cell lines and RNA interference
were used to up/down-regulae the expression of the HSF1, and the subsequent
expression of XAF1 was measured.
RESULTS: The expression of HSF1 was higher in GI cancers than in normal tissues. 
The expression of XAF1 and HSF1 was negatively correlated in GI cancer cell
lines. Stress stimuli up-regulated the expression of HSF1 while the alteration of
XAF1 expression was negatively correlated with HSF1 expression.
CONCLUSION: The high expression of HSF1 in GI cancers is associated with
suppressed expression of XAF1, which can be one of the mechanisms for
low-expression of XAF1 and insufficient apoptosis in GI cancers.

PMID: 17884799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Dec;92(4):315-24. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Spontaneous development of intestinal and colonic atrophy and inflammation in the
carnitine-deficient jvs (OCTN2(-/-)) mice.

Shekhawat PS(1), Srinivas SR, Matern D, Bennett MJ, Boriack R, George V, Xu H,
Prasad PD, Roon P, Ganapathy V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. 
pshekhawat@mail.mcg.edu

Carnitine is essential for transport of long-chain fatty acids into mitochondria 
for their subsequent beta-oxidation, but its role in the gastrointestinal tract
has not been well described. Recently several genetic epidemiologic studies have 
shown strong association between mutations in carnitine transporter genes OCTN1
and OCTN2 and a propensity to develop Crohn's disease. This study aims to
investigate role of carnitine and beta-oxidation in the GI tract. We have studied
the gastrointestinal tract effects of carnitine deficiency in a mouse model with 
loss-of-function mutation in the OCTN2 carnitine transporter. juvenile visceral
steatosis (OCTN2(-/-)) mouse spontaneously develops intestinal villous atrophy,
breakdown and inflammation with intense lymphocytic and macrophage infiltration, 
leading to ulcer formation and gut perforation. There is increased apoptosis of
jvs (OCTN2(-/-)) gut epithelial cells. We observed an up-regulation of heat shock
factor-1 (HSF-1) and several heat shock proteins (HSPs) which are known to
regulate OCTN2 gene expression. Intestinal and colonic epithelial cells in wild
type mice showed high expression and activity of the enzymes of beta-oxidation
pathway. These studies provide evidence of an obligatory role for carnitine in
the maintenance of normal intestinal and colonic structure and morphology. Fatty 
acid oxidation, a metabolic pathway regulated by carnitine-dependent entry of
long-chain fatty acids into mitochondrial matrix, is likely essential for normal 
gut function. Our studies suggest that carnitine supplementation, as a means of
boosting fatty acid oxidation, may be therapeutically beneficial in patients with
inflammation of the intestinal tract.

PMCID: PMC2170531
PMID: 17884651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 16;282(46):33412-20. Epub 2007 Sep 16.

Heat shock factor 1 attenuates 4-Hydroxynonenal-mediated apoptosis: critical role
for heat shock protein 70 induction and stabilization of Bcl-XL.

Jacobs AT(1), Marnett LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology, Center
in Molecular Toxicology, Vanderbilt-Ingram Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0146, USA.

Lipid peroxidation is a consequence of both normal physiology and oxidative
stress that generates various reactive metabolites, a principal end product being
4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). As a diffusible electrophile, HNE reacts extensively with
cellular nucleophiles. Consequently, HNE alters cellular signaling and activates 
the intrinsic apoptotic cascade. We have previously demonstrated that in addition
to promoting apoptosis, HNE activates stress response pathways, including the
antioxidant, endoplasmic reticulum stress, DNA damage, and heat shock responses. 
Here we demonstrate that activation of the heat shock response by HNE is
dependent on the expression and nuclear translocation of heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), which promotes the expression of heat shock protein 40 (Hsp40) and
Hsp70-1. Ectopic expression and immunoprecipitation of c-Myc-tagged Hsp70-1
indicates that HNE disrupts the inhibitory interaction between Hsp70-1 and HSF1, 
leading to the activation heat shock gene expression. Using siRNA to silence HSF1
expression, we observe that HSF1 is necessary for the induction of Hsp40 and
Hsp70-1 by HNE, and the lack of Hsp expression is correlated with an increase in 
apoptosis. Nrf2, the transcription factor that mediates the antioxidant response,
was also silenced using siRNA. Silencing Nrf2 also enhanced the cytotoxicity of
HNE, but not as effectively as HSF1. Silencing HSF1 expression facilitates the
activation of JNK pro-apoptotic signaling and selectively decreases expression of
the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bcl-X(L). Overexpression of Bcl-X(L)
attenuates HNE-mediated apoptosis in HSF1-silenced cells. Overall, activation of 
HSF1 and stabilization of Bcl-X(L) mediate a protective response that may
contribute significantly to the cellular biology of lipid peroxidation.

PMID: 17873279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 2007 May-Jun;47(3):273-9.

[Preirradiation heat shock protein induction increases cellular radioresistance].

[Article in Russian]

Maliutina IaV, Kabakov AE.

It was studied how does the transcriptional stress response and the heat shock
protein (HSP) overexpression affect cellular radioresistance. For this purpose,
normal murine fibroblasts and fibroblasts devoid of HSF1-gene (HSF1 is a
transcriptional factor initiating stress-responsive HSP expression) were
compared. Some cell samples were infected with specific vectors for expression of
the constitutively active (mutant) HSF1 or individual HSP (HSP70, HSP56, HSP27). 
It was found that heat stress (43 degrees C, 30 min) increased the HSP level in
normal fibroblasts and improved their survival following exposure to
gamma-radiation, with both the effects being suppressed by quercetin (an
inhibitor of HSF1-mediated HSP induction). In the HSF1-deprived cells, heat
stress caused neither the up-regulation of HSP levels nor the enhancement of
radioresistance, although both the effects were well manifested following the
active HSF1 expression in those cells. The vector-induced over-expression of
HSP70 or/and HSP27 equally enhanced the radioresistance in both cell cultures
infected.

PMID: 17867494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hepatology. 2007 Dec;46(6):1810-20.

Association of human APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases with the generation of hepatitis
virus B x antigen mutants and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu R(1), Zhang X, Zhang W, Fang Y, Zheng S, Yu XF.

Author information: 
(1)Second Affiliated Hospital, Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

Human APOBEC3 (apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide 3)
cytidine deaminases have been shown to be potent inhibitors of diverse
retroviruses including Vif-deficient human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1),
hepatitis virus B (HBV), adeno-associated virus, and endogenous retroelements.
Despite the fact that these enzymes are known to be potential DNA mutators and to
target retroviral DNA for cytidine deamination, the pathological effects of their
deregulated expression in human diseases are not yet clear. Mutants of the viral 
HBx protein have been implicated in the carcinogenesis of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC); however, little is known about how or why such mutants are
generated in the human liver. Here, we report that a number of APOBEC3 deaminases
preferentially edit the HBx region of HBV DNA and generate C-terminally truncated
HBx mutants. Our functional studies indicated that APOBEC3-mediated HBx mutants, 
especially the C-terminally truncated mutants, cause a gain of function that
enhances the colony-forming ability and proliferative capacity of neoplastic
cells. Furthermore, we detected G-to-A hypermutation-mediated HBx mutants in
preneoplastic liver tissues of selected patients with active chronic HBV
infections. We also observed that the APOBEC3B (A3B) cytidine deaminase was
widely up-regulated in HCC tumor tissues; it also promoted the growth of
neoplastic human HepG2 liver cells and up-regulated heat shock transcription
factor1 (HSF1) expression.CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that some of the
APOBEC3 deaminases play a role in the carcinogenesis of HCC through the
generation of HBx mutants, providing preneoplastic and neoplastic hepatocytes
with a selective clonal growth advantage. Deregulated expression of A3B in liver 
tissues may also have the potential to promote genetic instability and
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17847074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Genes Dev. 2007 Sep 1;21(17):2172-81.

HDAC6 controls major cell response pathways to cytotoxic accumulation of protein 
aggregates.

Boyault C(1), Zhang Y, Fritah S, Caron C, Gilquin B, Kwon SH, Garrido C, Yao TP, 
Vourc'h C, Matthias P, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U823,
Institut Albert Bonniot, Grenoble F-38706, France.

A cellular defense mechanism counteracts the deleterious effects of misfolded
protein accumulation by eliciting a stress response. The cytoplasmic deacetylase 
HDAC6 (histone deacetylase 6) was previously shown to be a key element in this
response by coordinating the clearance of protein aggregates through aggresome
formation and their autophagic degradation. Here, for the first time, we
demonstrate that HDAC6 is involved in another crucial cell response to the
accumulation of ubiquitinated protein aggregates, and unravel its molecular
basis. Indeed, our data show that HDAC6 senses ubiquitinated cellular aggregates 
and consequently induces the expression of major cellular chaperones by
triggering the dissociation of a repressive HDAC6/HSF1 (heat-shock factor
1)/HSP90 (heat-shock protein 90) complex and a subsequent HSF1 activation. HDAC6 
therefore appears as a master regulator of the cell protective response to
cytotoxic protein aggregate formation.

PMCID: PMC1950856
PMID: 17785525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 9;282(45):33210-7. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 opens chromatin structure of interleukin-6
promoter to facilitate binding of an activator or a repressor.

Inouye S(1), Fujimoto M, Nakamura T, Takaki E, Hayashida N, Hai T, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) not only regulates expression of heat
shock genes in response to elevated temperature, but is also involved in
developmental processes by regulating genes such as cytokine genes. However, we
did not know how HSF1 regulates non-heat shock genes. Here, we show that
constitutive HSF1 binding to the interleukin (IL)-6 promoter is necessary for its
maximal induction by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation in mouse embryo
fibroblasts and peritoneal macrophages. Lack of HSF1 inhibited LPS-induced in
vivo binding of an activator NF-kappaB and a repressor ATF3 to IL-6 promoter.
Neither NF-kappaB nor ATF3 binds to the IL-6 promoter in unstimulated HSF1-null
cells even if they were overexpressed. Treatment with histone deacetylase
inhibitor or a DNA methylation inhibitor restored LPS-induced IL-6 expression in 
HSF1-null cells, and histone modification enzymes were recruited on the IL-6
promoter in the presence of HSF1. Consistently, chromatin structure of the IL-6
promoter in the presence of HSF1 was more open than that in its absence. These
results indicate that HSF1 partially opens the chromatin structure of the IL-6
promoter for an activator or a repressor to bind to it, and provides a novel
mechanism of gene regulation by HSF1.

PMID: 17766920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Plant J. 2007 Oct;52(2):286-95. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Heat shock factor 1 is a key regulator of the stress response in Chlamydomonas.

Schulz-Raffelt M(1), Lodha M, Schroda M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology II, University of Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany.

We report here on the characterization of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), encoded by 
one of two HSF genes identified in the genome of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.
Chlamydomonas HSF1 shares features characteristic of class A HSFs of higher
plants. HSF1 is weakly expressed under non-stress conditions and rapidly induced 
by heat shock. Heat shock also resulted in hyperphosphorylation of HSF1, and the 
extent of phosphorylation correlated with the degree of induction of heat shock
genes, suggesting a role for phosphorylation in HSF1 activation. HSF1, like HSFs 
in yeasts, forms high-molecular-weight complexes, presumably trimers, under
non-stress, stress and recovery conditions. Immunoprecipitation of HSF1 under
these conditions led to the identification of cytosolic HSP70A as a protein
constitutively interacting with HSF1. Strains in which HSF1 was strongly
under-expressed by RNAi were highly sensitive to heat stress. 14C-labelling of
nuclear-encoded proteins under heat stress revealed that synthesis of members of 
the HSP100, HSP90, HSP70, HSP60 and small HSP families in the HSF1-RNAi strains
was dramatically reduced or completely abolished. This correlated with a complete
loss of HSP gene induction at the RNA level. These data suggest that HSF1 is a
key regulator of the stress response in Chlamydomonas.

PMID: 17711413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 21;104(34):13821-6. Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Integrative genomic and functional analyses reveal neuronal subtype
differentiation bias in human embryonic stem cell lines.

Wu H(1), Xu J, Pang ZP, Ge W, Kim KJ, Blanchi B, Chen C, Südhof TC, Sun YE.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at
University of California, Los Angeles, Neuroscience Research Building Room 351,
635 Charles E. Young Drive South, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The self-renewal and differentiation potential of human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) suggests that hESCs could be used for regenerative medicine, especially
for restoring neuronal functions in brain diseases. However, the functional
properties of neurons derived from hESC are largely unknown. Moreover, because
hESCs were derived under diverse conditions, the possibility arises that neurons 
derived from different hESC lines exhibit distinct properties, but this
possibility remains unexplored. To address these issues, we developed a protocol 
that allows stepwise generation from hESCs of cultures composed of approximately 
70-80% human neurons that exhibit spontaneous synaptic network activity.
Comparison of neurons derived from the well characterized HSF1 and HSF6 hESC
lines revealed that HSF1- but not HSF6-derived neurons exhibit forebrain
properties. Accordingly, HSF1-derived neurons initially form primarily GABAergic 
synaptic networks, whereas HSF6-derived neurons initially form glutamatergic
networks. microRNA profiling revealed significant expression differences between 
the two hESC lines, suggesting that microRNAs may influence their distinct
differentiation properties. These observations indicate that although both HSF1
and HSF6 hESCs differentiate into functional neurons, the two hESC lines exhibit 
distinct differentiation potentials, suggesting that they are preprogrammed.
Information on hESC line-specific differentiation biases is crucial for neural
stem cell therapy and establishment of novel disease models using hESCs.

PMCID: PMC1959466
PMID: 17693548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2007 Summer;12(2):151-62.

Characterizing the role of Hsp90 in production of heat shock proteins in motor
neurons reveals a suppressive effect of wild-type Hsf1.

Taylor DM(1), Tradewell ML, Minotti S, Durham HD.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 3801 University St.,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Induction of heat shock proteins (Hsps) is under investigation as treatment for
neurodegenerative disorders, yet many types of neurons, including motor neurons
that degenerate in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), have a high threshold for
activation of the major transcription factor mediating stress-induced Hsp
upregulation, heat shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1). Hsf1 is tightly regulated
by a series of inhibitory checkpoints that include sequestration in
multichaperone complexes governed by Hsp90. This study examined the role of
multichaperone complexes in governing the heat shock response in motor neurons.
Hsp90 inhibitors induced expression of Hsp70 and Hsp40 and transactivation of a
human inducible hsp70 promoter-green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter construct
in motor neurons of dissociated spinal cord-dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cultures. 
On the other hand, overexpression of activator of Hsp90 adenosine triphosphatase 
([ATPase 1], Aha1), which should mobilize Hsf1 by accelerating turnover of
mature, adenosine triphosphate-(ATP) bound Hsp90 complexes, and death
domain-associated protein (Daxx), which in cell lines has been shown to promote
transcription of heat shock genes by relieving inhibition exerted by interactions
between nuclear Hsp90/multichaperone complexes and trimeric Hsf1, failed to
induce Hsps in the absence or presence of heat shock. These results indicate that
disruption of multichaperone complexes alone is not sufficient to activate the
neuronal heat shock response. Furthermore, in motor neurons, induction of Hsp70
by Hsp90-inhibiting drugs was prevented by overexpression of wild-type Hsfl,
contrary to what would be expected for a classical Hsf1-mediated pathway. These
results point to additional differences in regulation of hsp genes in neuronal
and nonneuronal cells.

PMCID: PMC1949336
PMID: 17688194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Neurochem. 2007 Nov;103(4):1344-54. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

Inhibition of heat shock proteins (HSP) expression by quercetin and differential 
doxorubicin sensitization in neuroblastoma and Ewing's sarcoma cell lines.

Zanini C(1), Giribaldi G, Mandili G, Carta F, Crescenzio N, Bisaro B, Doria A,
Foglia L, di Montezemolo LC, Timeus F, Turrini F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Turin, Turin, 
Italy. cristina.zanini@unito.it

Neuroblastoma (NB) and Ewing's sarcoma (ES) represent the most common
extracranial solid tumors of childhood. Heat shock proteins (HSP) are elevated in
cancer cells and their over-expression was correlated to drug-resistance. In this
work we identified the HSP by a sensitive proteomic analysis of NB and ES cell
lines, then, we studied the HSP response to doxorubicin. Some identified HSP were
constitutively more expressed in NB than in ES cells. Doxorubicin-stimulated HSP 
response only in NB cells. Quercetin was found to inhibit HSP expression
depleting heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) cellular stores. Quercetin caused a higher
anti-proliferative effect in NB (IC(50): 6.9 +/- 5.8 mumol/L) than in ES cells
(IC(50): 85.5 +/- 53.1 mumol/L). Moreover, quercetin caused a very pronounced
doxorubicin sensitizing effect in NB cells (241 fold IC(50) decrease) and a
moderate effect in ES cells. HSP involvement in NB cells sensitization was
confirmed by the silencing of HSF1. Quercetin treatment and HSF1 silencing
increased the pro-apoptotic effect of doxorubicin. In conclusion, the higher HSP 
levels, observed in NB cells, did not confer increased resistance to doxorubicin;
on the contrary, HSP inhibition by quercetin or gene silencing caused higher
sensitization to doxorubicin. These results may have a potential application in
the treatment of NB.

PMID: 17680992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):C1103-11. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Mechanisms of interleukin-1beta-induced Ca2+ signals in mouse cortical
astrocytes: roles of store- and receptor-operated Ca2+ entry.

Beskina O(1), Miller A, Mazzocco-Spezzia A, Pulina MV, Golovina VA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Physiology, Univ. of Maryland School of Medicine, 685 W. Baltimore
St., HSF1, Rm. 565, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Many neurodegenerative disorders are accompanied by chronic glial activation,
which is characterized by the abundant production of proinflammatory cytokines,
such as IL-1beta. IL-1beta disrupts Ca(2+) homeostasis and stimulates astrocyte
reactivity. The mechanisms by which IL-1beta induces Ca(2+) dysregulation are not
completely defined. Here, we examined how acute and chronic (24-48 h) treatment
with IL-1beta affect Ca(2+) homeostasis in freshly dissociated and primary
cultured mouse cortical astrocytes. Cytosolic free Ca(2+) concentration
([Ca(2+)](cyt)) was measured with fura-2 using digital imaging. An acute
application of 10 ng/ml IL-1beta induced Ca(2+) mobilization from intracellular
stores and activated store-operated Ca(2+) entry (SOCE) and receptor-operated
Ca(2+) entry (ROCE) in both freshly dissociated and cultured actrocytes.
Treatment of cultured astrocytes with IL-1beta for 24 and 48 h elevated resting
[Ca(2+)](cyt), decreased Ca(2+) store content [associated with sarco(endo)plasmic
reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 2b downregulation], and augmented ROCE. Based on evidence
that receptor-operated, but not store-operated Ca(2+) channels are Ba(2+)
permeable, Ba(2+) entry was used to distinguish receptor-operated Ca(2+) channels
from store-operated Ca(2+) channels. ROCE was activated by the diacylglycerol
analog, 1-oleoyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol (OAG). In the presence of extracellular
Ba(2+), OAG-induced elevations of cytosolic Ba(2+) (fura-2 340-to-380-nm ratio)
were significantly larger in astrocytes treated with IL-1beta. These changes in
IL-1beta-treated astrocytes correlate with augmented expression of transient
receptor potential cation channel (TRPC)6 protein, which likely mediates ROCE.
Knockdown of the TRPC6 gene markedly reduced ROCE. The data suggest that
IL-1beta-induced dysregulation of Ca(2+) homeostasis is the result of enhanced
ROCE and TRPC6 expression. The disruption of Ca(2+) homeostasis appears to be an 
upstream component in the cascade of IL-1beta-activated pathways leading to
neurodegeneration.

PMID: 17670890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Neurosci. 2007 Jul 25;27(30):7974-86.

Demyelination, astrogliosis, and accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins,
hallmarks of CNS disease in hsf1-deficient mice.

Homma S(1), Jin X, Wang G, Tu N, Min J, Yanasak N, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The heat shock transcription factors (Hsfs) are responsible for the heat shock
response, an evolutionarily conserved process for clearance of damaged and
aggregated proteins. In organisms such as Caenorhabditis elegans, which contain a
single Hsf, reduction in the level of Hsf is associated with the appearance of
age-related phenotypes and increased accumulation of protein aggregates.
Mammalian cells express three hsfs (hsf1, hsf2, hsf4) and their role in CNS
homeostasis remains unclear. In this study, we examined the effects of deletion
of single or multiple hsf genes in the CNS using mutant mice. Our results show
that hsf1-/- mice display progressive myelin loss that accompanies severe
astrogliosis and this is exacerbated in the absence of either the hsf2 or hsf4
gene. Magnetic resonance imaging and behavioral studies indicate reduction in the
white matter tracts of the corpus callosum, and deficiencies in motor activity,
respectively, in aged hsf1-/- mice. Concomitantly, hsf1-/- aged CNS exhibit
increased activated microglia and apoptotic cells that are mainly positive for
GFAP, an astrocyte-specific marker. Studies based on the expression of
short-lived ubiquitinated green fluorescent protein (GFPu) in living hsf1-/-
cells indicate that they exhibit reduced ability to degrade ubiquitinated
proteins, accumulate short-lived GFPu, and accumulate aggregates of the
Huntington's model of GFP containing trinucleotide repeats (Q103-GFP). Likewise, 
hsf1-/- brain and astrocytes exhibit higher than wild-type levels of
ubiquitinated proteins, increased levels of protein oxidation, and increased
sensitivity to oxidative stress. These studies indicate a critical role for
mammalian hsf genes, but specifically hsf1, in the quality control mechanisms and
maintenance of CNS homeostasis during the organism's lifetime.

PMID: 17652588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 7;282(36):26140-9. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Cytoplasmic Hsp70 promotes ubiquitination for endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation of a misfolded mutant of the yeast plasma membrane ATPase, PMA1.

Han S(1), Liu Y, Chang A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Cells have a variety of strategies for dealing with misfolded proteins. Heat
shock response involves transcriptional induction of chaperones to promote and/or
correct folding, and also activation of the ubiquitin/proteasome system to
degrade defective proteins. In the secretory pathway, it is primarily luminal
misfolded or unassembled proteins that trigger the unfolded protein response
which, like heat shock, induces chaperones and components of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway. To understand cellular
response to a misfolded polytopic membrane protein of the secretory pathway, we
studied Pma1-D378S, a model ERAD substrate. Expression of misfolded Pma1 induces 
heat shock response in the absence of increased temperature. Overexpression of
HSF1, the transcription factor that mediates heat shock response, increases
degradation of Pma1-D378S without temperature upshift. Nevertheless, efficient
Pma1-D378S degradation occurs in an hsf1 mutant that maintains basal
transcription levels but cannot mediate transcriptional activation. Thus, heat
shock protein induction enhances but is not necessary for ERAD. The Ssa group of 
cytoplasmic Hsp70 chaperones is required for ERAD of both Pma1-D378S and another 
transmembrane ERAD substrate, Ste6*. In the absence of Ssa chaperones,
ubiquitination of both substrates is impaired, resulting in stabilization. We
suggest a role for Hsp70 cytoplasmic chaperones in recognition by the endoplasmic
reticulum-associated ubiquitination machinery.

PMID: 17631501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Hum Mutat. 2007 Aug;28(8):830.

Genetic variant in the HSPB1 promoter region impairs the HSP27 stress response.

Dierick I(1), Irobi J, Janssens S, Theuns J, Lemmens R, Jacobs A, Corsmit E,
Hersmus N, Van Den Bosch L, Robberecht W, De Jonghe P, Van Broeckhoven C,
Timmerman V.

Author information: 
(1)Peripheral Neuropathy Group, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1,
Antwerpen, Belgium.

The 27 kDa heat shock protein 1 (HSP27) is a member of the ubiquitously expressed
small heat shock protein family and has pleiotropic cytoprotective functions.
Since HSP27 may act as a motor neuron survival factor, we analyzed the genetic
contribution of the human HSPB1 gene (HSPB1) to the etiology of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS). In a cohort of sporadic ALS patients, we identified
three rare genetic variations and one of which (c.-217T>C) targeted a conserved
nucleotide of the Heat Shock Element (HSE) in the HSPB1 promoter. Since binding
of Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1) to this HSE is essential for stress-induced
transcription of HSPB1, we examined the effect of the c.-217C allele on
transcriptional activity and HSF binding. The basal promoter activity of the
HSPB1 c.-217C mutant allele decreased to 50% as compared to the wild-type
promoter in neuronal and non-neuronal cells. Following heat shock, the HSE
variant attenuated significantly the stress-related increase in transcription.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated a dramatically reduced
HSF-binding to the c.-217C mutant allele as compared to the c.-217T wild-type
allele. In conclusion, our study underscores the importance of the c.-217T
nucleotide for HSF binding and heat inducibility of HSPB1. Therefore, our study
suggests that the functional HSPB1 variant may represent a genetic modifier in
the pathogenesis of motor neuron disease; however, it is necessary to confirm
this HSPB1 variant in additional ALS patients.

PMID: 17623484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. BMC Genomics. 2007 Jul 6;8:219.

Inference of transcription modification in long-live yeast strains from their
expression profiles.

Cheng C(1), Fabrizio P, Ge H, Longo VD, Li LM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Computational biology program, Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-2910, USA.
lilei@usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Three kinases: Sch9, PKA and TOR, are suggested to be involved in
both the replicative and chronological ageing in yeast. They function in pathways
whose down-regulation leads to life span extension. Several stress response
proteins, including two transcription factors Msn2 and Msn4, mediate the
longevity extension phenotype associated with decreased activity of either Sch9, 
PKA, or TOR. However, the mechanisms of longevity, especially the underlying
transcription program have not been fully understood.
RESULTS: We measured the gene expression profiles in wild type yeast and three
long-lived mutants: sch9Delta, ras2Delta, and tor1Delta. To elucidate the
transcription program that may account for the longevity extension, we identified
the transcription factors that are systematically and significantly associated
with the expression differentiation in these mutants with respect to wild type by
integrating microarray expression data with motif and ChIP-chip data,
respectively. Our analysis suggests that three stress response transcription
factors, Msn2, Msn4 and Gis1, are activated in all the three mutants. We also
identify some other transcription factors such as Fhl1 and Hsf1, which may also
be involved in the transcriptional modification in the long-lived mutants.
CONCLUSION: Combining microarray expression data with other data sources such as 
motif and ChIP-chip data provides biological insights into the transcription
modification that leads to life span extension. In the chronologically long-lived
mutant: sch9Delta, ras2Delta, and tor1Delta, several common stress response
transcription factors are activated compared with the wild type according to our 
systematic transcription inference.

PMCID: PMC1949827
PMID: 17617911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 24;360(2):447-52. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

TC1 (C8orf4) is upregulated by cellular stress and mediates heat shock response.

Park J(1), Jung Y, Kim J, Kim KY, Ahn SG, Song K, Lee I.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea.

TC1 (C8orf4) is associated with aggressive behavior and poor survival in cancer. 
We have recently reported that it is a target gene of NF-kappaB and regulates the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Here, we show that TC1 is upregulated by various
cellular stresses and mediates heat shock response. Heat shock and other cellular
stresses including H2O2, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA),
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and UV enhance TC1 transcription in HeLa, KATO-III,
HEK293T, and HK cells. TC1 protein then moves into the nuclei independently of
NF-kappaB activation. TC1 upregulates heat shock proteins, and TC1-knockdown
inhibits stress-induced downstream regulation significantly. Heat shock factor
1(HSF1) and TC1 upregulate each other, suggesting a potential positive feedback
in the heat shock response regulation. Our data suggest that TC1 is a novel heat 
shock response regulator.

PMID: 17603013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Eukaryot Cell. 2007 Aug;6(8):1373-9. Epub 2007 Jun 22.

Role of heat shock transcription factor in Saccharomyces cerevisiae oxidative
stress response.

Yamamoto A(1), Ueda J, Yamamoto N, Hashikawa N, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

The heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
regulates the transcription of a set of genes that contain heat shock elements
(HSEs) in their promoters and function in diverse cellular processes, including
protein folding. Here, we show that Hsf1 activates the transcription of various
target genes when cells are treated with oxidizing reagents, including the
superoxide anion generators menadione and KO(2) and the thiol oxidants diamide
and 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB). Similar to heat shock, the oxidizing
reagents are potent inducers of both efficient HSE binding and extensive
phosphorylation of Hsf1. The inducible phosphorylation of Hsf1 is regulated by
the intramolecular domain-domain interactions and affects HSE structure-specific 
transcription. Unlike the heat shock, diamide, or CDNB response, menadione or
KO(2) activation of Hsf1 is inhibited by cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKA) activity, which negatively regulates the activator functions of other
transcriptional regulators implicated in the oxidative stress response. These
results demonstrate that Hsf1 is a member of the oxidative stress-responsive
activators and that PKA is a general negative regulator in the superoxide anion
response.

PMCID: PMC1951129
PMID: 17586717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 10;282(32):23240-52. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

Genetic evidence for a protective role for heat shock factor 1 and heat shock
protein 70 against colitis.

Tanaka K(1), Namba T, Arai Y, Fujimoto M, Adachi H, Sobue G, Takeuchi K, Nakai A,
Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) involves infiltration of leukocytes into
intestinal tissue, resulting in intestinal damage induced by reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) play
important roles in this infiltration of leukocytes. The roles of heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1) and heat shock proteins (HSPs) in the development of IBD are
unclear. In this study, we examined the roles of HSF1 and HSPs in an animal model
of IBD, dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis. The colitis worsened or was
ameliorated in HSF1-null mice or transgenic mice expressing HSP70 (or HSF1),
respectively. Administration of DSS up-regulated the expression of HSP70 in
colonic tissues in an HSF1-dependent manner. Expression of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and CAMs and the level of cell death observed in colonic tissues were
increased or decreased in DSS-treated HSF1-null mice or transgenic mice
expressing HSP70, respectively, relative to control wild-type mice. Relative to
macrophages from control wild-type mice, macrophages prepared from HSF1-null mice
or transgenic mice expressing HSP70 displayed enhanced or reduced activity,
respectively, for the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to
lipopolysaccharide stimulation. Suppression of HSF1 or HSP70 expression in vitro 
stimulated lipopolysaccharide-induced up-regulation of CAMs or ROS-induced cell
death, respectively. This study provides the first genetic evidence that HSF1 and
HSP70 play a role in protecting against DSS-induced colitis. Furthermore, this
protective role seems to involve various mechanisms, such as suppression of
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and CAMs and ROS-induced cell death.

PMID: 17556362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biosci. 2007 Apr;32(3):585-93.

Heat shock transcription factors regulate heat induced cell death in a rat
histiocytoma.

Prasad KV(1), Taiyab A, Jyothi D, Srinivas UK, Sreedhar AS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad 500 007, India.

Heat shock response is associated with the synthesis of heat shock proteins
(Hsps) which is strictly regulated by different members of heat shock
transcription factors (HSFs). We previously reported that a rat histiocytoma,
BC-8 failed to synthesize Hsps when subjected to typical heat shock conditions
(42 degrees C, 60 min). The lack of Hsp synthesis in these cells was due to a
failure in HSF1 DNA binding activity. In the present study we report that BC-8
tumor cells when subjected to heat shock at higher temperature (43 degrees C, 60 
min) or incubation for longer time at 42 degrees C, exhibited necrosis
characteristics; however,under mild heat shock (42 degrees C, 30 min) conditions 
cells showed activation of autophagy. Mild heat shock treatment induced
proteolysis of HSF1, and under similar conditions we observed an increase in HSF2
expression followed by its enhanced DNA binding activity. Inhibiting HSF1
proteolysis by reversible proteasome inhibition failed to inhibit heat shock
induced autophagy. Compromising HSF2 expression but not HSF1 resulted in the
inhibition of autophagy, suggesting HSF2 dependent activation of autophagy. We
are reporting for the first time that HSF2 is heat inducible and functions in
heat shock induced autophagic cell death in BC-8 tumor cells.

PMID: 17536178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. BMC Urol. 2007 May 22;7:7.

Bladder inflammatory transcriptome in response to tachykinins: neurokinin 1
receptor-dependent genes and transcription regulatory elements.

Saban R(1), Simpson C, Vadigepalli R, Memet S, Dozmorov I, Saban MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. ricardo-saban@ouhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Tachykinins (TK), such as substance P, and their neurokinin receptors
which are ubiquitously expressed in the human urinary tract, represent an
endogenous system regulating bladder inflammatory, immune responses, and visceral
hypersensitivity. Increasing evidence correlates alterations in the TK system
with urinary tract diseases such as neurogenic bladders, outflow obstruction,
idiopathic detrusor instability, and interstitial cystitis. However, despite
promising effects in animal models, there seems to be no published clinical study
showing that NK-receptor antagonists are an effective treatment of pain in
general or urinary tract disorders, such as detrusor overactivity. In order to
search for therapeutic targets that could block the tachykinin system, we set
forth to determine the regulatory network downstream of NK1 receptor activation. 
First, NK1R-dependent transcripts were determined and used to query known
databases for their respective transcription regulatory elements (TREs).
METHODS: An expression analysis was performed using urinary bladders isolated
from sensitized wild type (WT) and NK1R-/- mice that were stimulated with saline,
LPS, or antigen to provoke inflammation. Based on cDNA array results,
NK1R-dependent genes were selected. PAINT software was used to query TRANSFAC
database and to retrieve upstream TREs that were confirmed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: The regulatory network of TREs driving NK1R-dependent genes presented
cRel in a central position driving 22% of all genes, followed by AP-1, NF-kappaB,
v-Myb, CRE-BP1/c-Jun, USF, Pax-6, Efr-1, Egr-3, and AREB6. A comparison between
NK1R-dependent and NK1R-independent genes revealed Nkx-2.5 as a unique
discriminator. In the presence of NK1R, Nkx2-5 _01 was significantly correlated
with 36 transcripts which included several candidates for mediating bladder
development (FGF) and inflammation (PAR-3, IL-1R, IL-6, alpha-NGF, TSP2). In the 
absence of NK1R, the matrix Nkx2-5_02 had a predominant participation driving 8
transcripts, which includes those involved in cancer (EYA1, Trail, HSF1, and
ELK-1), smooth-to-skeletal muscle trans-differentiation, and Z01, a
tight-junction protein, expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
confirmed that, in the mouse urinary bladder, activation of NK1R by substance P
(SP) induces both NKx-2.5 and NF-kappaB translocations.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report describing a role for Nkx2.5 in the urinary 
tract. As Nkx2.5 is the unique discriminator of NK1R-modulated inflammation, it
can be imagined that in the near future, new based therapies selective for
controlling Nkx2.5 activity in the urinary tract may be used in the treatment in 
a number of bladder disorders.

PMCID: PMC1888709
PMID: 17519035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Oct;1113:15-27. Epub 2007 May 4.

Heat shock factors at a crossroad between stress and development.

Akerfelt M(1), Trouillet D, Mezger V, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, P.O. Box 123, FI-20521 Turku, Finland.

Organisms must be able to sense and respond rapidly to changes in their
environment in order to maintain homeostasis and survive. Induction of heat shock
proteins (Hsps) is a common cellular defense mechanism for promoting survival in 
response to various stress stimuli. Heat shock factors (HSFs) are transcriptional
regulators of Hsps, which function as molecular chaperones in protecting cells
against proteotoxic damage. Mammals have three different HSFs that have been
considered functionally distinct: HSF1 is essential for the heat shock response
and is also required for developmental processes, whereas HSF2 and HSF4 are
important for differentiation and development. Specifically, HSF2 is involved in 
corticogenesis and spermatogenesis, and HSF4 is needed for maintenance of sensory
organs, such as the lens and the olfactory epithelium. Recent evidence, however, 
suggests a functional interplay between HSF1 and HSF2 in the regulation of Hsp
expression under stress conditions. In lens formation, HSF1 and HSF4 have been
shown to have opposite effects on gene expression. In this chapter, we present
the different roles of the mammalian HSFs as regulators of cellular stress and
developmental processes. We highlight the interaction between different HSFs and 
discuss the discoveries of novel target genes in addition to the classical Hsps.

PMID: 17483205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):7945-50. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

Hyperfluidization-coupled membrane microdomain reorganization is linked to
activation of the heat shock response in a murine melanoma cell line.

Nagy E(1), Balogi Z, Gombos I, Akerfelt M, Björkbom A, Balogh G, Török Z,
Maslyanko A, Fiszer-Kierzkowska A, Lisowska K, Slotte PJ, Sistonen L, Horváth I, 
Vígh L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, P.O. Box 521, H-6701, Szeged, Hungary.

Targeting of the Hsp function in tumor cells is currently being assessed as
potential anticancer therapy. An improved understanding of the molecular signals 
that trigger or attenuate the stress protein response is essential for advances
to be made in this field. The present study provides evidence that the membrane
fluidizer benzyl alcohol (BA), a documented nondenaturant, acts as a chaperone
inducer in B16(F10) melanoma cells. It is demonstrated that this effect relies
basically on heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) activation. Under the
conditions tested, the BA-induced Hsp response involves the up-regulation of a
subset of hsp genes. It is shown that the same level of membrane fluidization
(estimated in the core membrane region) attained with the closely analogous
phenethyl alcohol (PhA) does not generate a stress protein signal. BA, at a
concentration that activates heat shock genes, exerts a profound effect on the
melting of raft-like cholesterol-sphingomyelin domains in vitro, whereas PhA, at 
a concentration equipotent with BA in membrane fluidization, has no such effect. 
Furthermore, through the in vivo labeling of melanoma cells with a fluorescein
labeled probe that inserts into the cholesterol-rich membrane domains
[fluorescein ester of polyethylene glycol-derivatized cholesterol (fPEG-Chol)],
we found that, similarly to heat stress per se, BA, but not PhA, initiates
profound alterations in the plasma membrane microdomain structure. We suggest
that, apart from membrane hyperfluidization in the deep hydrophobic region, a
distinct reorganization of cholesterol-rich microdomains may also be required for
the generation and transmission of stress signals to activate hsp genes.

PMCID: PMC1876552
PMID: 17470815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Nov 1;102(4):1036-42.

Effect of thermal stress on early and late passaged mouse lens epithelial cells.

Bagchi M(1), Besser D, Reddy TR, Skoff R, Maisel H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Wayne State
University, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA. mbagchi@med.wayne.edu

Cataract is an age related disease of protein aggregation. It has been suggested 
that aging affects the cells ability to protect protein integrity. The protein
integrity, which is essential for cellular homeostasis, is maintained by a
complex system of refolding or degradation of damaged proteins. The heat shock
proteins (hsps) are the major contributors in the maintenance of protein
integrity. The heat shock transcription factor (HSF-1) is the master regulator of
all hsp synthesis in response to stress. This investigation examined the role of 
HSF-1 in the regulation of hsp synthesis in early and late passaged alphaTN-4
cells. Data collected in this study revealed that the nucleotide sequence of
HSF-1 mRNA obtained from early and late passaged alphaTN-4 cells were identical. 
When early and late passaged cell were exposed to thermal stress, their hsp
expression were also similar. HSP-40 expression was detected after 2 h of heat
stress, whereas HSP-70 and low molecular weight heat shock protein alphabeta
crystallin showed significantly increased synthesis 18 h post heat stress. The
late passaged alphaTN-4 cells ability to upregulate hsps in response to heat
stress could be due to its high replicative activities. The data presented here
suggests a relationship between the presence of functional HSF-1 and sustained
proliferative activities of the late passaged alphaTN-4 cell.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17427954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Nov 1;102(4):1059-66.

Diverse effects of Stat1 on the regulation of hsp90alpha gene under heat shock.

Chen XS(1), Zhang Y, Wang JS, Li XY, Cheng XK, Zhang Y, Wu NH, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular
Biology and Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, China.

Stat1 has been known as a regulator of gene expression and a mediator of IFNgamma
signaling in mammalian cells, while its effect in a heat shock response remains
unclear. We used RNAi knockdown, point mutations, ChIP and promoter activity
assays to study the effect of Stat1 on the heat-shock induction of the hsp90alpha
gene under heat shock conditions. We found that Stat1 regulates the heat shock
induction of its target genes, the hsp90alpha gene in a heat shock response while
the constitutive activity of the gene remains unaffected. The result of Stat1 in 
complex with Stat3 and HSF1 that bound at the GAS to lead a moderate heat shock
induction was designated as an "intrinsic" induction of the hsp90alpha gene.
Additionally a reduced or an elevated level of heat shock induction was also
controlled by the Stat1 on hsp90alpha. These diverse effects on the hsp90alpha
gene were a "reduced" induction with over-expressed Stat1 elicited by
transfection of wild-type Stat1 or IFNgamma treatment, bound at the GAS as
homodimer; and an "enhanced" heat shock induction with a mutation-mediated
prohibition of Stat1/GAS binding. In conclusion, the status and efficacy of Stat1
bound at the GAS of its target gene are pivotal in determining the impact of
Stat1 under heat shock. The results provided the first evidence on the tumor
suppressor Stat1 that it could play diverse roles on its target genes under heat 
shock that also shed lights on patients with fever or under thermotherapy.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17427945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nat Protoc. 2006;1(6):2681-7.

Preparation of primary cultured mesenteric artery smooth muscle cells for
fluorescent imaging and physiological studies.

Golovina VA(1), Blaustein MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 685 West 
Baltimore St., HSF1, Room 571, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.
vgolovin@umaryland.edu

In this protocol, we describe a method for isolation and culture of smooth muscle
cells derived from the adult rat (or mouse) superior mesenteric artery. Arterial 
myocytes are obtained by enzymatic dissociation and established in primary
culture. The cultured cells retain expression of smooth muscle-specific
alpha-actin and physiological responses to agonists. Cultured arterial myocytes
(prepared from wild-type or transgenic animals) provide a useful model for
studying the regulation of a wide range of vascular smooth muscle responses at
the cellular and subcellular levels. Plasmids, RNA interference and antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides can be readily introduced into the cells to alter protein
expression. Fluorescent dyes can also be introduced to visualize a variety of
activities, some of which may be specific to vascular smooth muscle cells. This
protocol requires about 3 h on each of 2 consecutive days to complete.

PMID: 17406524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Genes Cells. 2007 Apr;12(4):487-99.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 down-regulates spermatocyte-specific 70 kDa
heat shock protein expression prior to the induction of apoptosis in mouse
testes.

Widlak W(1), Vydra N, Malusecka E, Dudaladava V, Winiarski B, Scieglinska D,
Widlak P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Maria Sklodowksa-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, 44-101 Gliwice, Poland.
wwidlak@io.gliwice.pl

Expression of constitutively active heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in
mouse spermatocytes induces apoptosis and leads to male infertility. We report
here that prior to the onset of massive apoptosis caused by expression of active 
HSF1 in spermatocytes a marked reduction in spermatocyte-specific Hsp70.2 mRNA
and protein levels occurs. In addition, HSP70.2 protein relocalizes from a
predominant cytoplasmic to a nuclear position in developing spermatocytes that
express active HSF1. Later in the developmental stages, cells undergoing
HSF1-induced apoptosis essentially lack the HSP70.2 protein. The down-regulation 
of Hsp70.2 gene expression by HSF1 is paradoxical because HSF1 is the
prototypical activator of HSP genes. Furthermore, HSF1-mediated repression
neither involved a heat shock element (HSE)-like sequence adjacent to the Hsp70.2
gene nor were Hsp70.2 promoter sequences associated directly with HSF1.
Interestingly, other spermatocyte- and spermatid-specific transcripts are also
down-regulated in testes of transgenic mice expressing active HSF1, suggesting
involvement of a putative HSF1-dependent block of development of spermatogenic
cells. Importantly however, transcription of the Hsp70.2 gene is down-regulated
in testes of wild-type mice subjected to a hyperthermia that induces transient
activation of HSF1, indicating that the spermatocyte-specific activity of HSF1
might misdirect a network of transcription factors required for proper regulation
of Hsp70.2.

PMID: 17397396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 4;282(18):13334-41. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Interaction between heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) and divergent binding
sequences: binding specificities of yeast HSFs and human HSF1.

Sakurai H(1), Takemori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.
sakurai@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The target genes of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF) contain a
cis-acting sequence, the heat shock element (HSE), which consists of multiple
inverted repeats of the sequence 5'-nGAAn-3'. Using data acquired in this and a
previous study, we have identified the HSEs in 59 of 62 target genes of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsf1. The Hsf1 protein recognizes continuous and
discontinuous repeats of the nGAAn unit; the nucleotide sequences and
configuration of the units diverge slightly among functional HSEs. When
Schizosaccharomyces pombe HSF was expressed in S. cerevisiae cells, heat shock
induced S. pombe HSF to bind to various HSE types, which properly activated
transcription from almost all target genes, suggesting that the S. pombe genome
also contains divergent HSEs. Human HSF1 induced the heat shock response via HSEs
with continuous units in S. cerevisiae cells but failed to do so via HSEs with
discontinuous units. Binding of human HSF1 to the discontinuous type of HSE was
observed in vitro but was significantly inhibited in vivo. These results show
that human HSF1 recognizes HSEs in a slightly different way than yeast HSFs and
suggest that the configuration of the unit is an important determinant for
HSF-HSE interactions.

PMID: 17347150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Retrovirology. 2007 Mar 7;4:16.

Antagonistic interaction of HIV-1 Vpr with Hsf-mediated cellular heat shock
response and Hsp16 in fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe).

Benko Z(1), Liang D, Agbottah E, Hou J, Taricani L, Young PG, Bukrinsky M, Zhao
RY.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Research Center, Departments of Pediatrics,
Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois, USA. benkozigi@freemail.hu

BACKGROUND: Expression of the HIV-1 vpr gene in human and fission yeast cells
displays multiple highly conserved activities, which include induction of cell
cycle G2 arrest and cell death. We have previously characterized a yeast heat
shock protein 16 (Hsp16) that suppresses the Vpr activities when it is
overproduced in fission yeast. Similar suppressive effects were observed when the
fission yeast hsp16 gene was overexpressed in human cells or in the context of
viral infection. In this study, we further characterized molecular actions
underlying the suppressive effect of Hsp16 on the Vpr activities.
RESULTS: We show that the suppressive effect of Hsp16 on Vpr-dependent viral
replication in proliferating T-lymphocytes is mediated through its C-terminal
end. In addition, we show that Hsp16 inhibits viral infection in macrophages in a
dose-dependent manner. Mechanistically, Hsp16 suppresses Vpr activities in a way 
that resembles the cellular heat shock response. In particular, Hsp16 activation 
is mediated by a heat shock factor (Hsf)-dependent mechanism. Interestingly, vpr 
gene expression elicits a moderate increase of endogenous Hsp16 but prevents its 
elevation when cells are grown under heat shock conditions that normally
stimulate Hsp16 production. Similar responsive to Vpr elevation of Hsp and
counteraction of this elevation by Vpr were also observed in our parallel
mammalian studies. Since Hsf-mediated elevation of small Hsps occurs in all
eukaryotes, this finding suggests that the anti-Vpr activity of Hsps is a
conserved feature of these proteins.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that fission yeast could be used as a model to
further delineate the potential dynamic and antagonistic interactions between
HIV-1 Vpr and cellular heat shock responses involving Hsps.

PMCID: PMC1828740
PMID: 17341318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochemistry. 2007 Mar 20;46(11):3405-15. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

The carboxy-terminal domain of heat-shock factor 1 is largely unfolded but can be
induced to collapse into a compact, partially structured state.

Pattaramanon N(1), Sangha N, Gafni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is a key regulator of the expression of 
heat-shock proteins during the heat-shock response. The C terminus of HSF1 (CT)
contains both the regulatory and transcriptional activation domains. Predictors
of natural disordered regions analysis predicts and our study demonstrates that
CT is predominantly natively unfolded under physiological conditions but can be
induced to fold into a number of structured states under different conditions.
Under physiological conditions, CT exhibits a very low abundance of secondary and
tertiary structures as observed by circular dichroism, no hydrophobic core as
monitored by the 6-p-toluidino-2-naphthalenesulfonic acid (TNS)-binding assay, a 
large hydrodynamic radius as measured by size-exclusion
chromatography-high-performance liquid chromatography, and high structural
flexibility as probed by limited proteolysis. However, secondary-structure
content significantly increases at high temperatures, in acidic pH, or in the
presence of trimethylamine N-oxide, trifluoroethanol, or a cationic surfactant.
Interestingly, the hydrophobicity of "folded" CT, as monitored by the TNS-binding
assay, is enhanced by acidic pH and a cationic surfactant but not by
trifluoroethanol. CT also displays different patterns in the proteolytic cleavage
in acidic pH and in the presence of a cationic surfactant compared with that
under native condition, suggesting that CT undergoes distinct structural
rearrangements.

PMID: 17323918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 2;26(35):5086-97. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Selective suppression of lymphomas by functional loss of Hsf1 in a p53-deficient 
mouse model for spontaneous tumors.

Min JN(1), Huang L, Zimonjic DB, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

A hallmark in the pathogenesis of cancer is the increased expression of heat
shock proteins (Hsps) and other molecular chaperones observed in many tumor
types, which is considered to be an adaptive response to enhance tumor cell
survival. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1) is a major transactivator of
Hsp induction and has been proposed to affect tumor initiation and progression,
regulating expression of Hsps and other molecular targets. In this report, we
provide direct in vivo evidence that Hsf1 plays a critical role in the evolution 
of spontaneous tumors arising in p53(-/-) mice. Thus, loss of Hsf1 function did
not prolong tumor-free survival, but surprisingly altered the spectrum of tumors 
that arose in p53(-/-) mice. Tumor development is rapid in p53(-/-) mice, which
predominantly (about 70%) succumb to lymphomas. In contrast, hsf1(-/-)p53(-/-)
mice rarely develop lymphomas (<8%), but succumb to other tumor types including
testicular carcinomas and soft tissue sarcomas. Our findings suggest that an
increase in p53-independent apoptotic cell death in association with altered
cytokine signaling and suppressed production of inflammatory factors in hsf1(-/-)
mice may contribute to selective lymphoma suppression. In conclusion, the data
presented here link the loss of Hsf1-dependent function to decreased
susceptibility to spontaneous lymphomagenesis, which may have implications for
cancer prevention and therapy.

PMID: 17310987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Clin Invest. 2007 Mar;117(3):648-58. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

The high-affinity HSP90-CHIP complex recognizes and selectively degrades
phosphorylated tau client proteins.

Dickey CA(1), Kamal A, Lundgren K, Klosak N, Bailey RM, Dunmore J, Ash P, Shoraka
S, Zlatkovic J, Eckman CB, Patterson C, Dickson DW, Nahman NS Jr, Hutton M,
Burrows F, Petrucelli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville,
Florida, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Mar;117(3):590-2.

A primary pathologic component of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the formation of
neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau). Expediting
the removal of these p-tau species may be a relevant therapeutic strategy. Here
we report that inhibition of Hsp90 led to decreases in p-tau levels independent
of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) activation. A critical mediator of this mechanism
was carboxy terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP), a tau ubiquitin ligase.
Cochaperones were also involved in Hsp90-mediated removal of p-tau, while those
of the mature Hsp90 refolding complex prevented this effect. This is the first
demonstration to our knowledge that blockade of the refolding pathway promotes
p-tau turnover through degradation. We also show that peripheral administration
of a novel Hsp90 inhibitor promoted selective decreases in p-tau species in a
mouse model of tauopathy, further suggesting a central role for the Hsp90 complex
in the pathogenesis of tauopathies. When taken in the context of known
high-affinity Hsp90 complexes in affected regions of the AD brain, these data
implicate a central role for Hsp90 in the development of AD and other tauopathies
and may provide a rationale for the development of novel Hsp90-based therapeutic 
strategies.

PMCID: PMC1794119
PMID: 17304350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Eukaryot Cell. 2007 Apr;6(4):744-52. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

In the yeast heat shock response, Hsf1-directed induction of Hsp90 facilitates
the activation of the Slt2 (Mpk1) mitogen-activated protein kinase required for
cell integrity.

Truman AW(1), Millson SH, Nuttall JM, Mollapour M, Prodromou C, Piper PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.
Peter.Piper@sheffield.ac.uk.

Yeast is rendered temperature sensitive with loss of the C-terminal (CT) domain
of heat shock transcription factor (Hsf1). This domain loss was found to abrogate
heat stimulation of Slt2 (Mpk1), the mitogen-activated protein kinase that
directs the reinforced cell integrity gene expression needed for high-temperature
growth. In Hsf1 CT domain-deficient cells, Slt2 still undergoes Mkk1/2-directed
dual-Thr/Tyr phosphorylation in response to the heat stimulation of cell
integrity pathway signaling, but the low Hsp90 expression level suppresses any
corresponding increase in Slt2 kinase activity due to Slt2 being a "client" of
the Hsp90 chaperone. A non-Hsf1-directed Hsp90 overexpression restored the heat
induction of Slt2 activity in these cells, as well as both Slt2-dependent (Rlm1, 
Swi4) and Slt2-independent (MBF) transcriptional activities. Their
high-temperature growth was also rescued, not just by this Hsp90 overexpression
but by osmotic stabilization, by the expression of a Slt2-independent form of the
Rlm1 transcriptional regulator of cell integrity genes, and by a multicopy SLT2
gene vector. In providing the elevated Hsp90 needed for an efficient activation
of Slt2, heat activation of Hsf1 indirectly facilitates (Slt2-directed) heat
activation of yet another transcription factor (Rlm1). This provides an
explanation as to why, in earlier transcript analysis compared to chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies, many more genes of yeast displayed an Hsf1-dependent
transcriptional activation by heat than bound Hsf1 directly. The levels of Hsp90 
expression affecting transcription factor regulation by Hsp90 client protein
kinases also provides a mechanistic model for how heat shock factor can influence
the expression of several non-hsp genes in higher organisms.

PMCID: PMC1865661
PMID: 17293484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 6;282(14):10333-40. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Different mechanisms are involved in the transcriptional activation by yeast heat
shock transcription factor through two different types of heat shock elements.

Hashikawa N(1), Yamamoto N, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

The hydrophobic repeat is a conserved structural motif of eukaryotic heat shock
transcription factor (HSF) that enables HSF to form a homotrimer. Homotrimeric
HSF binds to heat shock elements (HSEs) consisting of three inverted repeats of
the sequence nGAAn. Sequences consisting of four or more nGAAn units are bound
cooperatively by two HSF trimers. We show that in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells 
oligomerization-defective Hsf1 is not able to bind HSEs with three units and is
not extensively phosphorylated in response to stress; it is therefore unable to
activate genes containing this type of HSE. Several lines of evidence indicate
that oligomerization is a prerequisite for stress-induced hyperphosphorylation of
Hsf1. In contrast, oligomerization and hyperphosphorylation are not necessary for
gene activation via HSEs with four units. Intragenic suppressor screening of
oligomerization-defective hsf1 showed that an interface between adjacent
DNA-binding domains is important for the binding of Hsf1 to the HSE. We suggest
that Saccharomyces cerevisiae HSEs with different structures are regulated
differently; HSEs with three units require Hsf1 to be both oligomerized and
hyperphosphorylated, whereas HSEs with four or more units do not require either.

PMID: 17289668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2006 Winter;11(4):379-89.

Induction of KLF4 in response to heat stress.

Liu Y(1), Wang J, Yi Y, Zhang H, Liu J, Liu M, Yuan C, Tang D, Benjamin IJ, Xiao 
X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Shock, Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410008,
People's Republic of China.

Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is an evolutionarily conserved zinc
finger-containing transcription factor with diverse regulatory functions in cell 
growth, proliferation, differentiation, and embryogenesis. However, little is
known about the response of KLF4 to heat stress. In this study, Western blot and 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction were performed to determine the
changes in KLF4 expression in response to heat stress. The results showed that
heat stress up-regulated KLF4 messenger RNA and protein levels in a
time-dependent manner in vivo and in 4 cell lines. Moreover, a study with heat
shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1) gene knockout mice indicated that the
induction of KLF4 in response to heat stress was mediated by Hsf1. This process
occurred rapidly, indicating that KLF4 is an immediate early response gene of
heat stress. Next, the roles of KLF4 under heat stress conditions were analyzed
for cells overexpressing or deficient in KLF4. The results showed overexpression 
of KLF4 increased the death rate of C2C12 cells, whereas KLF4 deficiency
decreased the injury of C2C12 cells from heat stress conditions, suggesting that 
KLF4 might play an important role in cell injury induced by heat stress. KLF4
might be an immediate early response gene and could play an important role in
cell injury induced by heat stress.

PMCID: PMC1712684
PMID: 17278886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Diabetes. 2007 May;56(5):1436-44. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Involvement of heat shock factor-1 in glycated LDL-induced upregulation of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in vascular endothelial cells.

Zhao R(1), Shen GX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada.

Coronary artery disease is the predominant cause of death in diabetic patients.
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is the major physiological inhibitor of
plasminogen activators. Heat shock protein (Hsp) was upregulated in uncontrolled 
diabetic patients. Our previous studies demonstrated that glycated LDL stimulated
the generation of PAI-1 from vascular endothelial cells. The present study
examined the effect of glycated LDL on the expression of heat shock factor-1
(HSF1), a physiological transcription factor of Hsp, and the involvement of HSF-1
in glycated LDL-induced production of PAI-1 in cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) and coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs).
Treatment with glycated LDL increased the expression of HSF1 and Hsp-70 compared 
with LDL in subconfluent HCAECs or HUVECs, and that was associated with an
increase of PAI-1 expression. The transfection of HSF1 gene enhanced the
expression of PAI-1 in endothelial cells. Small interference RNA against HSF1
prevented glycated LDL-induced upregulation of PAI-1 in HCAECs or HUVECs.
Glycated LDL increased the binding of a nuclear protein to the PAI-1 promoter.
The nuclear protein-DNA complex was supershifted by HSF1 antibody. The presence
of an antioxidant, butylated hydroxytulene, during the glycation of LDL prevented
glycated LDL-induced increases of the expression of HSF1 or PAI-1 in endothelial 
cells. The results suggest that HSF-1 is involved in glycated LDL-induced
upregulation of PAI-1 in subconfluent vascular endothelial cells through the
binding of HSF1 to PAI-1 promoter. Glyco-oxidation may contribute to glycated
LDL-induced expression of HSF1 and PAI-1 in endothelial cells.

PMID: 17259369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 23;282(12):8715-23. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

Cadmium-responsive element of the human heme oxygenase-1 gene mediates heat shock
factor 1-dependent transcriptional activation.

Koizumi S(1), Gong P, Suzuki K, Murata M.

Author information: 
(1)Mechanism of Health Effect Research Group, National Institute of Occupational 
Safety and Health, Kawasaki 214-8585, Japan. koizumi@h.jniosh.go.jp

Transcription of a number of mammalian genes is activated by heavy metals, but
mechanisms of signaling and transcriptional regulation are not well understood.
From a comparison of heavy metal responses of several human genes, it was noted
that the heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene is quite similar in the spectrum of metal
response and induction kinetics to the heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) gene,
suggesting a common regulatory mechanism shared by these genes. The
cadmium-responsive element (CdRE) known to be responsible for the metal
regulation of ho-1 formed complexes with proteins from heavy metal-treated HeLa
cells in an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). These complexes were
indistinguishable in mobility from those formed by the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
and the heat shock element involved in hsp70 regulation, suggesting the
involvement of HSF1 also in the CdRE complexes. Competitive EMSA and supershift
analysis with an anti-HSF1 antibody revealed that HSF1 was in fact a component of
the CdRE complexes. A fine analysis on the affinity of HSF1 to a series of mutant
CdRE sequences showed that HSF1 recognizes a sequence motif TnCTAGA. Transient
transfection analysis with overexpressed recombinant HSF1 demonstrated that CdRE 
has HSF1-dependent enhancer-like activity that requires direct binding of HSF1.
In the absence of overexpressed HSF1, however, CdRE by itself was insufficient to
mediate heavy metal-induced transcription, suggesting requirement of additional
regulatory sequences. The finding that HSF1 is directly involved in the
regulation of ho-1 with an anti-oxidative role revealed a new aspect of the
biological defense mechanism.

PMID: 17244614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 15;67(2):695-701.

Novel chemical enhancers of heat shock increase thermal radiosensitization
through a mitotic catastrophe pathway.

Sekhar KR(1), Sonar VN, Muthusamy V, Sasi S, Laszlo A, Sawani J, Horikoshi N,
Higashikubo R, Bristow RG, Borrelli MJ, Crooks PA, Lepock JR, Roti Roti JL,
Freeman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology/Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA, and Princess
Margaret Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Radiation therapy combined with adjuvant hyperthermia has the potential to
provide outstanding local-regional control for refractory disease. However,
achieving therapeutic thermal dose can be problematic. In the current
investigation, we used a chemistry-driven approach with the goal of designing and
synthesizing novel small molecules that could function as thermal
radiosensitizers.
(Z)-(+/-)-2-(1-Benzenesulfonylindol-3-ylmethylene)-1-azabicyclo[2.2.2]octan-3-ol 
was identified as a compound that could lower the threshold for Hsf1 activation
and thermal sensitivity. Enhanced thermal sensitivity was associated with
significant thermal radiosensitization. We established the structural
requirements for activity: the presence of an N-benzenesulfonylindole or
N-benzylindole moiety linked at the indolic 3-position to a
2-(1-azabicyclo[2.2.2]octan-3-ol) or 2-(1-azabicyclo[2.2.2]octan-3-one) moiety.
These small molecules functioned by exploiting the underlying biophysical events 
responsible for thermal sensitization. Thermal radiosensitization was
characterized biochemically and found to include loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, followed by mitotic catastrophe. These studies identified a novel
series of small molecules that represent a promising tool for the treatment of
recurrent tumors by ionizing radiation.

PMID: 17234780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Biosyst. 2006 Dec;2(12):627-39. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

Genome-wide analysis of human HSF1 signaling reveals a transcriptional program
linked to cellular adaptation and survival.

Page TJ(1), Sikder D, Yang L, Pluta L, Wolfinger RD, Kodadek T, Thomas RS.

Author information: 
(1)CIIT Centers for Health Research, 6 Davis Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709-2137, USA.

Although HSF1 plays an important role in the cellular response to proteotoxic
stressors, little is known about the structure and function of the human HSF1
signaling network under both stressed and unstressed conditions. In this study,
we used a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray analysis and
time course gene expression microarray analysis with and without siRNA-mediated
inhibition of HSF1 to comprehensively identify genes regulated directly and
indirectly by HSF1. The correlation between promoter binding and gene expression 
was not significant for all genes bound by HSF1, suggesting that HSF1 binding per
se is not sufficient for expression. However, the correlation with promoter
binding was significant for genes identified as HSF1-regulated following siRNA
knockdown. Among promoters bound by HSF1 following heat shock, a gene ontology
analysis showed significant enrichment only in categories related to protein
folding. In contrast, analysis of the extended HSF1 signaling network following
siRNA knockdown showed enrichment in a variety of categories related to protein
folding, anti-apoptosis, RNA splicing, ubiquitinylation and others, highlighting 
a complex transcriptional program regulated directly and indirectly by HSF1.

PMID: 17216044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 16;104(3):985-90. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

A functional SNP of interferon-gamma gene is important for
interferon-alpha-induced and spontaneous recovery from hepatitis C virus
infection.

Huang Y(1), Yang H, Borg BB, Su X, Rhodes SL, Yang K, Tong X, Tang G, Howell CD, 
Rosen HR, Thio CL, Thomas DL, Alter HJ, Sapp RK, Liang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 13;104(11):4770.

Cytokine polymorphisms are associated with disease outcome and interferon (IFN)
treatment response in hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. We genotyped eight SNPs 
spanning the entire IFN-gamma gene in two cohorts and assessed the association
between those polymorphisms and treatment response or spontaneous viral
clearance. The first cohort was composed of 284 chronically HCV-infected patients
who had received IFN-alpha-based therapy and the second was 251 i.v. drug users
who had either spontaneously cleared HCV or become chronically infected. A SNP
variant located in the proximal IFN-gamma promoter region next to the binding
motif of heat shock transcription factor (HSF), -764G, was significantly
associated with sustained virological response [P = 0.01, odds ratio (OR) = 2.66 
[corrected] (confidence interval 1.3-5.6)[corrected]]. The association was
independently significant in multiple logistic regression (P = 0.04) along with
race, viral titer, and genotype. This variant was also significantly associated
with spontaneous recovery [P = 0.04, OR = 3.51 (1.0-12.5)] in the second cohort. 
Functional analyses show that the G allele confers a two- to three-fold higher
promoter activity and stronger binding affinity to HSF1 than the C allele. Our
study suggests that the IFN-gamma promoter SNP -764G/C is functionally important 
in determining viral clearance and treatment response in HCV-infected patients
and may be used as a genetic marker to predict sustained virological response in 
HCV-infected patients.

PMCID: PMC1783426
PMID: 17215375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):7077-86. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) contributes to inducible expression of hsp genes
through interplay with HSF1.

Ostling P(1), Björk JK, Roos-Mattjus P, Mezger V, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Abo Akademi University, Turku, Finland.

The heat shock response is a defense reaction activated by proteotoxic damage
induced by physiological or environmental stress. Cells respond to the
proteotoxic damage by elevated expression of heat shock proteins (Hsps) that
function as molecular chaperones and maintain the vital homeostasis of protein
folds. Heat shock factors (HSFs) are the main transcriptional regulators of the
stress-induced expression of hsp genes. Mammalian HSF1 was originally identified 
as the transcriptional regulator of the heat shock response, whereas HSF2 has not
been implicated a role in the stress response. Previously, we and others have
demonstrated that HSF1 and HSF2 interact through their trimerization domains, but
the functional consequence of this interaction remained unclear. We have now
demonstrated on chromatin that both HSF1 and HSF2 were able to bind the hsp70
promoter not only in response to heat shock but also during hemin-induced
differentiation of K562 erythroleukemia cells. In both cases an intact HSF1 was
required in order to reach maximal levels of promoter occupancy, suggesting that 
HSF1 influences the DNA binding activity of HSF2. The functional consequence of
the HSF1-HSF2 interplay was demonstrated by real-time reverse transcription-PCR
analyses, which showed that HSF2 was able to modulate the HSF1-mediated
expression of major hsp genes. Our results reveal, contrary to the predominant
model, that HSF2 indeed participates in the transcriptional regulation of the
heat shock response.

PMID: 17213196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2007;594:89-99.

Chaperone regulation of the heat shock protein response.

Voellmy R(1), Boellmann F.

Author information: 
(1)HSF Pharmaceuticals SA, Avenue des Cerisiers 39B, 1009 Pully, Switzerland.
rvoellmy@hsfpharma.com

The heat shock protein response appears to be triggered primarily by nonnative
proteins accumulating in a stressed cell and results in increased expression of
heat shock proteins (HSPs). Many heat shock proteins prevent protein aggregation 
and participate in refolding or elimination of misfolded proteins in their
capacity as chaperones. Even though several mechanisms exist to regulate the
abundance of cytosolic and nuclear chaperones, activation of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is an essential aspect of the heat shock protein
response. HSPs and co-chaperones that are assembled into multichaperone complexes
regulate HSF1 activity at different levels. HSP90-containing multichaperone
complexes appear to be the most relevant repressors of HSF1 activity. Because
HSP90-containing multichaperone complexes interact not only specifically with
client proteins including HSF1 but also generically with nonnative proteins, the 
concentration of nonnative proteins influences assembly on HSF1 of
HSP90-containing complexes that repress activation, and may play a role in
inactivation, of the transcription factor. Proteins that are unable to achieve
stable tertiary structures and remain chaperone substrates are targeted for
proteasomal degradation through polyubiquitination by co-chaperone CHIP. CHIP can
activate HSF1 to regulate the protein quality control system that balances
protection and degradation of chaperone substrates.

PMID: 17205678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2007;594:78-88.

Heat shock factor 1 as a coordinator of stress and developmental pathways.

Anckar J(1), Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Abo Akademi University, P.O. Box 123 FI-20521 Turku,
Finland.

The transition from normal growth conditions to stressful conditions is
accompanied by a robust upregulation of heat shock proteins, which dampen the
cytotoxicity caused by misfolded and denatured proteins. The most prominent part 
of this transition occurs on the transcriptional level. In mammals,
protein-damaging stress leads to the activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1),
which binds to upstream regulatory sequences in the promoters of heat shock
genes. The activation of HSF1 proceeds through a multi-step pathway, involving a 
monomer-to-trimer transition, nuclear accumulation and extensive
posttranslational modifications. In addition to its established role as the main 
regulator of heat shock genes, new data link HSF 1 to developmental pathways. In 
this chapter, we examine the established stress-related functions and prospect
the intriguing role of HSF 1 as a developmental coordinator.

PMID: 17205677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Postepy Biochem. 2006;52(3):289-95.

[The heat shock response and HSP70 gene expression in male germ cells].

[Article in Polish]

Widlak W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, 15 Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej St., 44-101
Gliwice, Poland. wwidlak@io.gliwice.pl

Apoptosis of spermatogenic cells is an essential process that allows to maintain 
correct proportion between somatic and germ cells. In addition, apoptosis induced
by cellular stress is an important checkpoint mechanism that eliminates damaged
male germ cells. The response to cellular stress (e.g. hyperthermia) in somatic
cells includes activation of the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) leading
to induction and accumulation of the heat shock proteins (HSPs), mainly HSP70i,
which allows cell survival. In major contrast, in meiotic and post-meiotic germ
cells Hsp70i genes are not induced in elevated temperature. Instead, activation
of HSF1 leads to caspase-3-dependent apoptosis and spermatogenic cells are
actively eliminated. Although HSP70i proteins are repressed in spermatocytes and 
spermatids, another HSP70 proteins are specifically expressed in those cells,
which are necessary for spermatogenesis. However, Hsp70.2/Hst70 gene, the major
testis-specific Hsp70 expressed mostly in spermatocytes, is down-regulated by
HSF1 and spermatogenic cells undergoing stress-induced apoptosis lack
HSP70.2/HST70 protein.

PMID: 17201064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Apr;71(4):985-93. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Genetic evidence for a protective role of heat shock factor 1 against
irritant-induced gastric lesions.

Tanaka K(1), Tsutsumi S, Arai Y, Hoshino T, Suzuki K, Takaki E, Ito T, Takeuchi
K, Nakai A, Mizushima T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Gastric lesions result from an imbalance between aggressive and defensive
factors. Indirect lines of evidence suggest that heat shock proteins (HSPs)
induced by various aggressive factors provide a major protective mechanism. In
this study, we compared gastric ulcerogenic response in wild-type mice and in
those lacking heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a transcription factor for hsp genes.
The severity of gastric lesions induced by ethanol or hydrochloric acid was
worsened in HSF1-null mice. Immunoblotting, real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemical analysis, and
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling assay revealed that 
the ethanol administration up-regulated gastric mucosal HSPs, in particular
HSP70, in an HSF1-dependent manner, and more apoptotic cells were observed in the
gastric mucosa of HSF1-null mice than in wild-type mice. In contrast, other
parameters governing the gastric ulcerogenic response, including gastric acid
secretion, gastric mucosal blood flow, and prostaglandin E(2) levels, were not
significantly affected by the absence of the hsf1 gene. Geranylgeranylacetone
(GGA), a clinically used antiulcer drug with HSP-inducing activity, suppressed
ethanol-induced gastric lesions in wild-type mice but not in heat shock factor 1 
(HSF1)-null mice. The results suggest that the aggravation of irritant-induced
gastric lesions in HSF1-null mice is due to their inability to up-regulate HSPs, 
leading to apoptosis. It is also suggested that the HSP-inducing activity of GGA 
contributes to the drug's antiulcer activity. This study provides direct genetic 
evidence that HSPs, after their HSF1-dependent up-regulation, confer gastric
protection against the irritant-induced lesions.

PMID: 17189318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochem Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;84(5):703-12.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation regulates heat shock factor-1 activity and the heat shock 
response in murine fibroblasts.

Fossati S(1), Formentini L, Wang ZQ, Moroni F, Chiarugi A.

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1)-dependent poly(ADP-ribose) formation is
emerging as a key regulator of transcriptional regulation, even though the
targets and underlying molecular mechanisms have not yet been clearly identified.
In this study, we gathered information on the role of PARP-1 activity in the heat
shock response of mouse fibroblasts. We show that DNA binding of heat shock
factor (HSF)-1 was impaired by PARP-1 activity in cellular extracts, and was
higher in PARP-1(-/-) than in PARP-1+/+ cells. No evidence for HSF-1
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation or PARP-1 interaction was found, but a poly(ADP-ribose)
binding motif was identified in the transcription factor amino acid sequence.
Consistent with data on HSF-1, the expression of heat-shock protein (HSP)-70 and 
HSP-27 was facilitated in cells lacking PARP-1. Thermosensitivity, however, was
higher in PARP-1(-/-) than in PARP-1+/+ cells. Accordingly, we report that
heat-shocked PARP-1 null fibroblasts showed an increased activation of
proapoptotic JNK and decreased transcriptional efficiency of prosurvival
NF-kappaB compared with wild-type counterparts. The data indicate that
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation finely regulates HSF-1 activity, and emphasize the complex
role of PARP-1 in the heat-shock response of mammalian cells.

PMID: 17167533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(4):1505-15. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

The natural osmolyte trehalose is a positive regulator of the heat-induced
activity of yeast heat shock transcription factor.

Conlin LK(1), Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and 
Biophysics, 813A Stellar-Chance, 422 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104-6059,
USA.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the intracellular concentration of trehalose
increases rapidly in response to many environmental stresses, including heat
shock. These high trehalose levels have been correlated with tolerance to adverse
conditions and led to the model that trehalose functions as a chemical
cochaperone. Here, we show that the transcriptional activity of Hsf1 during the
heat shock response depends on trehalose. Strains with low levels of trehalose
have a diminished transcriptional response to heat shock, while strains with high
levels of trehalose have an enhanced transcriptional response to heat shock. The 
enhanced transcriptional response does not require the other heat-responsive
transcription factors Msn2/4 but is dependent upon heat and Hsf1. In addition,
the phosphorylation levels of Hsf1 correlate with both transcriptional activity
and the presence of trehalose. These in vivo results support a new role for
trehalose, where trehalose directly modifies the dynamic range of Hsf1 activity
and therefore influences heat shock protein mRNA levels in response to stress.

PMCID: PMC1800720
PMID: 17145780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2007 Jan;146(1):131-40. Epub 2006 Oct 
6.

Heat shock factor 1 is required for constitutive Hsp70 expression and normal lens
development in embryonic zebrafish.

Evans TG(1), Belak Z, Ovsenek N, Krone PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, 107
Wiggins Road, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5E5.

Heat shock factors (HSFs) are the major transcription factors responsible for
heat-induced upregulation of heat shock protein (Hsp) genes. All three mammalian 
HSFs (HSF1, HSF2, HSF4) have also been shown to be required for normal mammalian 
development. It is currently unknown if HSFs play similarly important roles
during normal development of non-mammalian vertebrates. In the present study, a
morpholino modified antisense oligonucleotide (MO) approach targeted against hsf1
mRNA (hsf1-MO) was used to examine the requirement of HSF1 in zebrafish
development. Embryos depleted of HSF1 displayed a reproducible small eye
phenotype characterized by an immature lens and a disorganized retinal structure.
These defects were strikingly similar to those observed when constitutive, lens
specific Hsp70 expression was reduced through the microinjection of MO targeting 
hsp70. The data suggest that HSF1 is involved in regulating constitutive lens
specific expression of hsp70 in the embryonic zebrafish. This conclusion is
supported by a marked reduction in Hsp70 protein in hsf1-MO injected embryos.
Microinjection of MO targeted to hsf2 mRNA (hsf2-MO) did not result in a small
eye phenotype in a significant number of embryos. These data also suggest that
HSF1 and HSF2 play distinct roles in non-mammalian vertebrates, similarly to what
has been demonstrated previously in mouse.

PMID: 17134927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2007 Jan;34(1):20-33. Epub 2006 Nov 20.

Manipulation of protein kinases reveals different mechanisms for upregulation of 
heat shock proteins in motor neurons and non-neuronal cells.

Taylor DM(1), De Koninck P, Minotti S, Durham HD.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 3801 University St.,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

Motor neurons have a high threshold for induction of heat shock proteins (Hsps)
in response to stress, a property associated with impaired ability to activate
heat shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1). Hyperphosphorylation of Hsf1 has been
established as a requirement for transactivation of heat shock genes. This study 
demonstrated that the impaired heat shock response in motor neurons is not due to
altered phosphorylation of Hsf1 by kinases previously shown to affect activation 
of Hsf1 in other cells (PKC, GSK3beta, ERK1, CaMKIIalpha). However, a
constitutively active form of CaMKIV induced robust expression of Hsp70, as well 
as transcription of a GFP reporter gene driven by the human inducible Hsp70
promoter in unstressed motor neurons, but not in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. The
results point to novel mechanisms of activation of heat shock genes in motor
neurons that have relevance to exploitation of endogenous stress responses
therapeutically.

PMID: 17113785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Circ Res. 2006 Dec 8;99(12):1411-8. Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Upregulation of heat shock transcription factor 1 plays a critical role in
adaptive cardiac hypertrophy.

Sakamoto M(1), Minamino T, Toko H, Kayama Y, Zou Y, Sano M, Takaki E, Aoyagi T,
Tojo K, Tajima N, Nakai A, Aburatani H, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Feb 16;100(3):e45-6.

Exercise-induced cardiac hypertrophy has been reported to have better prognosis
than pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Cardiac hypertrophy induced
by exercise was associated with less cardiac fibrosis and better systolic
function, suggesting that the adaptive mechanisms may exist in exercise-induced
hypertrophy. Here, we showed a critical role of heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1), an important transcription factor for heat shock proteins, in the
adaptive mechanism of cardiac hypertrophy. We examined expression of 8800 genes
in the heart of exercise-induced hypertrophy model using DNA chip technique and
compared with pressure overload-induced hypertrophy. Expression of HSF1 and its
target molecule heat shock proteins was significantly upregulated in the heart by
exercise but not by chronic pressure overload. Constitutive activation of HSF1 in
the heart significantly ameliorated death of cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibrosis 
and thereby prevented cardiac dysfunction as well as hypertrophy induced by
chronic pressure overload. Conversely, decreased activity of HSF1 in the heart
promoted cardiac dysfunction in response to exercise, a load that normally leads 
to adaptive hypertrophy with preserved systolic function. Likewise, cardiac
function was significantly impaired from the early phase of pressure overload,
when HSF1 activation was inhibited. These results suggest that HSF1 plays a
critical role in the transition between adaptive and maladaptive hypertrophy.

PMID: 17095722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Nov;22(4):445-9.

[The relationship between the polymerization of HSF1 and the expression of
IL-1beta, TNF-alpha mRNA of monocytes in fever rabbits].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma ZN(1), Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

AIM: For further investigating of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) action
in thermoregulation and its physiological mechanism.
METHODS: The relationship among the expression of HSF1 and interleukin 1beta
(IL-1beta) mRNA and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) mRNA in monocytes was
studied during the different fever stages in rabbit fever model induced by LPS.
The expressions of IL-1beta and TNF-alpha mRNA were measured by RT-PCR assay;
HSF1 expression was measured by Western blot.
RESULTS: (1) Intravenous injection of LPS produced a double-peak temperature
arisen at 60 min and 180 min. (2) The expression of IL-1beta mRNA in monocytes
had a peak at 160 min, while the peak of TNF-alpha mRNA expression occurred at 80
min after intravenous injection of LPS. (3) The content of the HSF1 trimer
increased gradually after 160 min intravenous injection of LPS. The results
indicated that the content of the HSF1 trimer was negative correlation with the
expressions of IL-1beta mRNA and TNF-alpha mRNA, and the change in body
temperature was a positive correlation with IL-1beta mRNA.
CONCLUSION: It is possible that HSF1 limits the rise in body temperature by
repressing the gene expressions of the endogenous pyrogen, IL-1beta and
TNF-alpha.

PMID: 21155271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Neurochem. 2006 Dec;99(5):1351-62. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

The heat-shock protein 90 inhibitor 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin
suppresses glial inflammatory responses and ameliorates experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis.

Dello Russo C(1), Polak PE, Mercado PR, Spagnolo A, Sharp A, Murphy P, Kamal A,
Burrows FJ, Fritz LC, Feinstein DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Illinois, and Jesse Brown
Veteran's Affairs Research Division, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

The heat-shock response (HSR), a highly conserved cellular response, is
characterized by rapid expression of heat-shock proteins (HSPs), and inhibition
of other synthetic activities. The HSR can attenuate inflammatory responses, via 
suppression of transcription factor activation. A HSR can be induced
pharmacologically by HSP90 inhibitors, through activation of the transcription
factor Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1). In the present study we characterized the
effects of 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG), a less toxic
derivative of the naturally occurring HSP90 inhibitor geldanamycin, on glial
inflammatory responses and the development of experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. In primary enriched glial cultures, 17-AAG dose dependently
reduced lipopolysaccharide-dependent expression and activity of inducible nitric 
oxide synthase, attenuated interleukin (IL)-1beta expression and release,
increased inhibitor of kappaB protein levels, and induced HSP70 expression.
17-AAG administration to mice immunized with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
peptide prevented disease onset when given at an early time, and reduced clinical
symptoms when given during ongoing disease. T cells from treated mice showed a
reduced response to immunogen re-stimulation, and 17-AAG reduced CD3- and
CD28-dependent IL-2 production. Together, these data suggest that HSP90
inhibitors could represent a new approach for therapeutic intervention in
autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis.

PMID: 17064348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2006 Dec;102(1-5):32-40. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

Co-expression of steroid receptors (estrogen receptor alpha and/or progesterone
receptors) and Her-2/neu: Clinical implications.

Ciocca DR(1), Gago FE, Fanelli MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, Institute of Experimental Medicine and Biology of Cuyo
(IMBECU-CONICET), Casilla de Correo 855, 5500 Mendoza, Argentina.
dciocca@lab.cricyt.edu.ar

The response of breast cancer patients to endocrine therapy is guided by the
expression of two steroid hormone receptors (HR): estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and/or progesterone receptors (PR). In most laboratories the expression
of these predictive markers is studied by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in the
breast cancer biopsy samples. Another molecular marker that is being increasingly
examined in breast cancer is the oncoprotein Her-2/neu, whose
expression/amplification predicts the response to anti-Her-2/neu immunotherapy.
The co-expression of HR with that of Her-2/neu is infrequent (most reports agree 
on this), however, there are some conflicting reports about the clinical
implications in term of response to endocrine therapy in the patients that
co-express HR and Her-2/neu. We have examined these molecular markers for a
number of years in our tumor bank, in this dissertation we will present the
method and cut-off to study these markers, the correlations between their
expression, and the follow-up of the patients that received tamoxifen-based
endocrine therapy, alone or following chemotherapy. We confirmed that the
co-expression of HR with Her-2/neu is infrequent, and that these patients
presented both a shorter disease free survival and overall survival. Our results 
will be compared with others related recently published. For example, the
aromatase inhibitor anastrozole appears to be an effective endocrine treatment in
HR+ patients, irrespective of the Her-2/neu status. We will present data on the
molecular mechanisms that could explain the relatively poor outcome of these
patients. Heregulin has been found to be a potent inducer of heat shock factor 1 
(HSF1) activity and of heat shock protein (Hsp) synthesis in breast cancer cells 
and HSF1 activation plays a role in the tumorigenic changes induced by heregulin,
heregulin exerts its tumorigenic changes through the cell surface tyrosine kinase
receptors c-erbB-3 and c-erbB-4 which are able to form dimers with the
"ligandless" Her-2/neu. We found that HSF1 associates with metastasis associated 
protein 1 (MTA1) on the promoters of genes as well as other molecules involved in
gene repression (HDAC1, HDAC2) in a manner that is enhanced by either heregulin
exposure or heat shock. ERs, although promoting the growth of breast cancer cells
are less associated with invasion/metastasis and ER-induced gene expression is
involve in this effect. Heregulin can overcome the protective effects of ER and
at least a component of this appears to be due to MTA1 repression of ERE
dependent transcription, HSF1 and MTA1 cooperate in gene repression. The
co-expression of HSF1 and MTA1 was confirmed by IHC in human breast cancer biopsy
samples.

PMID: 17049840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. EMBO J. 2006 Oct 18;25(20):4773-83. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

A novel HSF1-mediated death pathway that is suppressed by heat shock proteins.

Hayashida N(1), Inouye S, Fujimoto M, Tanaka Y, Izu H, Takaki E, Ichikawa H, Rho 
J, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

Heat shock response is an adoptive response to proteotoxic stress, and a major
heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) has been believed to protect cells from 
cell death by inducing heat shock proteins (Hsps) that assist protein folding and
prevent protein denaturation. However, it is revealed recently that HSF1 also
promotes cell death of male germ cells. Here, we found a proapoptotic Tdag51
(T-cell death associated gene 51) gene as a direct target gene of HSF1. Heat
shock and other stresses induced different levels of Hsps and Tdag51, which
depend on cell types. Hsps bound directly to the N-terminal pleckstrin-homology
like (PHL) domain of Tdag51, and suppressed death activity of the C-terminal
proline/glutamine/histidine-rich domain. Tdag51, but not major Hsps, were induced
in male germ cells exposed to high temperatures. Analysis of Tdag51-null testes
showed that Tdag51 played substantial roles in promoting heat shock-induced cell 
death in vivo. These data suggest that cell fate on proteotoxic condition is
determined at least by balance between Hsp and Tdag51 levels, which are
differently regulated by HSF1.

PMCID: PMC1618102
PMID: 17024176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007 Jan;292(1):R432-9. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Increased temperature, not cardiac load, activates heat shock transcription
factor 1 and heat shock protein 72 expression in the heart.

Staib JL(1), Quindry JC, French JP, Criswell DS, Powers SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.

The expression of myocardial heat shock protein 72 (HSP72) postexercise is
initiated by the activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). However,
it remains unknown which physiological stimuli govern myocardial HSF1 activation 
during exercise. These experiments tested the hypothesis that thermal stress and 
mechanical load, concomitant with simulated exercise, provide independent stimuli
for HSF1 activation and ensuing cardiac HSP72 gene expression. To elucidate the
independent roles of increased temperature and cardiac workload in the
exercise-mediated upregulation of left-ventricular HSP72, hearts from adult male 
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly assigned to one of five simulated exercise
conditions. Upon reaching a surgical plane of anesthesia, each experimental heart
was isolated and perfused using an in vitro working heart model, while
independently varying temperatures (i.e., 37 degrees C vs. 40 degrees C) and
cardiac workloads (i.e., low preload and afterload vs. high preload and
afterload) to mimic exercise responses. Results indicate that hyperthermia,
independent of cardiac workload, promoted an increase in nuclear translocation
and phosphorylation of HSF1 compared with normothermic left ventricles.
Similarly, hyperthermia, independent of workload, resulted in significant
increases in cardiac levels of HSP72 mRNA. Collectively, these data suggest that 
HSF1 activation and HSP72 gene transcriptional competence during simulated
exercise are linked to elevated heart temperature and are not a direct function
of increased cardiac workload.

PMID: 16990482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Toxicol Lett. 2006 Oct 25;166(3):229-36. Epub 2006 Jul 25.

Benzo(a)pyrene inhibits expression of inducible heat shock protein 70 in vascular
endothelial cells.

Gong Z(1), Yang J, Yang M, Wang F, Wei Q, Tanguay RM, Wu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health and Ministry of Education 
Key Lab for Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), a ubiquitous environmental pollutant known to cause many
diseases including atherosclerosis, induces a dose-dependent reduction in the
levels of the inducible Hsp70. To explore the mechanism underlying the reduction 
of Hsp70, we measured the levels of Hsp70, cytoplasmic and nuclear heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1) in porcine aortic endothelial cells using Western blot, and then 
further characterized the binding ability of HSF1 and heat shock element (HSE) by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. We found that when porcine aortic
endothelial cells were treated by 0.1-10 microM of BaP for 24 h, there was a
significant reduction of Hsp70, cytoplasmic and nuclear HSF1 and the binding rate
of HSF1 and HSE at 5, 10 microM of BaP but less effective at lower
concentrations. The effect of BaP on the Hsp70 expression level was markedly
attenuated by co-treatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), an
activator of protein kinase C (PKC). Staurosporine (STP), an inhibitor of PKC,
blocked the effect of PMA treatment in combination with BaP. These results
suggest that BaP might inhibit Hsp70 levels by reducing the expression of HSF1
and decreasing binding of HSF1 and HSE via PKC-dependent signaling pathways that 
might be involved in the regulation of Hsp70 gene expression under BaP.

PMID: 16962263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Neurobiol Dis. 2006 Nov;24(2):213-25. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Induction of multiple heat shock proteins and neuroprotection in a primary
culture model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Batulan Z(1), Taylor DM, Aarons RJ, Minotti S, Doroudchi MM, Nalbantoglu J,
Durham HD.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 3801 University St.,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

High threshold for stress-induced activation of the heat shock transcription
factor, Hsf1, may contribute to vulnerability of motor neurons to disease and
limit efficacy of agents promoting expression of neuroprotective heat shock
proteins (Hsps) through this transcription factor. Plasmid encoding a
constitutively active form of Hsf1, Hsf1act, and chemicals shown to activate Hsf1
in other cells were investigated in a primary culture model of familial
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hsf1act and the Hsp90 inhibitor, geldanamycin,
induced high expression of multiple Hsps in cultured motor neurons and conferred 
dramatic neuroprotection against SOD1G93A in comparison to Hsp70 or Hsp25 alone. 
Two other Hsp90 inhibitors, 17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) and
radicicol, and pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate induced robust expression of Hsp70 and
Hsp40 in motor neurons, but at cytotoxic concentrations. 17-AAG, which penetrates
the blood-brain barrier, has exhibited a higher therapeutic index than
geldanamycin, but this may not be the case when activation of Hsf1 in neurons is 
targeted.

PMID: 16950627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Fen Zi Xi Bao Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2006 Jun;39(3):258-64.

[Analysis of changes about hsbp1, hsf1, hsf2 AND hsp70's expression levels in
rat's regenerating liver].

[Article in Chinese]

Su LJ(1), Chang CF, Han HP, Ma H, Xu CS.

Author information: 
(1)Ocean University of China, Qingdao 260003.

Heat shock factor binding protein 1 (HSBP1), a recently discovered protein,
weakens and blocks transcription of the heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) gene when
binding to HSF1, but HSBP1 can promote cell growth, cell development and cell
differentiation when binding to HSF2. Partial hepatectomy (PH) in rat creates
injury stimulation and induces liver regeneration. How does hsbp1 coordinate two 
processes sequently is extremely interesting. This paper, based on cloning the
full-length cDNA of hsbpl in rat, applied in situ hybridration and Rat Genome 230
2.0 Array to analyze hsbp1, hsf1, hsf2 and hsp70 expression in liver after PH and
sham-operation. The results indicated that the hsbp1 expression level was
down-regulated meaningfully at 0.5-2h and up-regulated meaningfully at 8-16h
after sham-operation, while hsf2 expression level did not meaningfully change at 
0-144h after sham-operation. hsbp1 expression level was up-regulated meaningfully
at 6h and 66-144h,and hsf1 at 8-16h, hsf2 at 2-16h, hsp70 at 0.5-24h after PH.
Our data suggested that up-regulated expression of the hsp70 at 0.5-12h after
sham-operation was controlled by intracellular HSF1, and then controlled by hsbp1
down-regulated at 0.5-2h and hsf1 up-regulated at 8-16h. In the early phase of
liver regeneration in rats, hsbp1 and hsf2 expression levels were up-regulated,
which promoted cell proliferation through HSBP1 and HSF2 up-regulating,upa
activating,c-jun enhancing, intracellular matrix (ECM) degradation, activating
the hepatocyte-like growth factor (HGF) etc. In the late phase of liver
regeneration (66-144h), hsbp1 expression level was up-regulated, which promoted
reconstruction of liver structure and recovery of liver function through HSBP1
inhibiting hsp70 expression, up-regulating genes related to growth, development, 
differentiation. In conclusion, down-regulating of hsbp1 contributed to
interaction between HSF1 and HSE,increased hsp70 expression and enhanced
anti-injured capacity of liver and rats. HSBP1 and HSF2 activated the genes
related to growth, development, differentiation and then promoted liver
regeneration in rats.

PMID: 16944601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biochimie. 2006 Dec;88(12):1983-8. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Cloning of zebrafish (Danio rerio) heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) and similar
patterns of HSF2 and HSF1 mRNA expression in brain tissues.

Yeh FL(1), Hsu LY, Lin BA, Chen CF, Li IC, Tsai SH, Hsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology and Center for Marine Bioscience and
Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224, Taiwan, Republic 
of China.

The transcriptional activation of heat shock protein (HSP) genes is initiated by 
the binding of heat shock factors (HSFs) to heat shock elements (HSEs) located at
the promotor regions. Multiple HSFs exist in larger eukaryotic organisms in order
to sense various types of stress signals. Here we report the cloning of zebrafish
(Danio rerio) HSF2 (zHSF2) cDNA (GenBank accession number AF412833 ) that has an 
open reading frame of 1470 nucleotides, encoding a polypeptide of 489 amino
acids. Domain architecture analysis of the deduced zHSF2 sequence revealed the
presence of a DNA-binding domain at the N-terminal end, an adjacent
oligomerization domain and a vertebrate heat shock transcription factor domain.
Amino acid alignment showed a 70% sequence identity between zHSF2 and human or
mouse HSF2, while only a 45% identity was found between zHSF1a and zHSF2.
Recombinant zHSF2 bound with a very high specificity to HSEs arranged as inverted
arrays of 5'-nGAAn-3', as replacing one GAA with GTA almost abolished the
formation of HSE-binding complex. Similar patterns of zHSF1a and zHSF2 mRNA
expression in the brain regions of developing zebrafish were detected by whole
mount in situ hybridization and paraffin sectioning, suggesting that most of the 
two HSF gene activities were controlled by a common mechanism during the
embryonic development of zebrafish. The levels of both zHSF1a and zHSF2 mRNA in
zebrafish tissues were moderately increased after heat stress.

PMID: 16938384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2006 Sep-Oct;30(5):400-6; discussion 406-7.

Glutamine attenuation of cell death and inducible nitric oxide synthase
expression following inflammatory cytokine-induced injury is dependent on heat
shock factor-1 expression.

Peng ZY(1), Hamiel CR, Banerjee A, Wischmeyer PE, Friese RS, Wischmeyer P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado Health Science Center,
Denver, 80262, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glutamine (GLN) has been shown to improve outcome after experimental 
and clinical models of critical illness. Enhanced expression of heat shock
protein (HSP) has been hypothesized to be responsible for this protection. The
heat shock response has been shown to inhibit inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) gene expression and nitric oxide (NO) production. This study tested the
hypothesis that GLN-mediated activation of the HSP pathway is responsible for
improved survival and attenuation of iNOS expression after an inflammatory
cytokine-induced injury.
METHODS: Heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1) wild-type and knockout mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (HSF-1+/+ and HSF-1-/-) were used in all experiments. Cells were
treated with 0 mmol/L or 8 mmol/L GLN and cytomix (tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
lipopolysaccharide, and interferon-gamma) in a concurrent treatment model once
they had reached confluence. Cell viability was assayed with MTS/PMS mixture.
Apoptosis and necrosis were assayed via immunohistochemistry. iNOS and HSP-70
expression were detected via Western blotting. NO production was measured using
the Griess reagent.
RESULTS: GLN treatment significantly attenuated inflammatory cytokine-induced
cell death and apoptosis in HSF-1+/+ cells vs 0 mmol/L GLN treatment; however,
GLN's cellular protection was lost in HSF-1-/- cells. GLN supplementation
attenuated cytomix-induced iNOS expression and NO production only in HSF-1+/+
cells. Further, GLN induced HSP-70 expression only in HSF-1+/+ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first demonstration that GLN-mediated cellular
protection after inflammatory cytokine injury is due to HSF-1 expression and
cellular capacity to activate an HSP response.

PMID: 16931608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2006 Sep-Oct;30(5):373-8; discussion 379.

Glutamine-mediated attenuation of cellular metabolic dysfunction and cell death
after injury is dependent on heat shock factor-1 expression.

Peng ZY(1), Serkova NJ, Kominsky DJ, Brown JL, Wischmeyer PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, 80262, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cellular metabolic dysfunction is associated with occurrence of
multiple-organ failure after critical illness. Glutamine (GLN) attenuates
cellular metabolic dysfunction in critical illness models. The mechanism of this 
protection is unclear. We previously demonstrated that GLN's benefit in critical 
illness might be due to enhanced heat shock protein (HSP) expression. We
hypothesize that GLN's attenuation of cellular metabolic dysfunction is dependent
on presence of heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1).
METHODS: HSF-1 wild-type and knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts (HSF-1+/+ and
HSF-1-/-) were used in all experiments. Cells were not treated, or were treated
with 8 mmol/L GLN and immediately exposed to heat stress injury (45 degrees C for
45 minutes). Cells were harvested for metabolic analysis by nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) at 24 hours postinjury. Cell survival was assessed using the MTS 
assay.
RESULTS: GLN treatment in HSF-1+/+ cells led to significant attenuation of
decreases in adenosine triphosphate (ATP)/adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ratio,
phosphomonoester/phosphodiester (PME/PDE) ratio, and cell survival observed in
non-GLN-treated HSF-1+/+ cells. In HSF-1-/- cells, the beneficial effect of GLN
on preservation of ATP/ADP ratio, PME/PDE proliferation, and cell survival was
lost. GLN-treated HSF-1-/- cells had a significant increase in extracellular
lactate concentrations vs GLN-treated HSF+/+ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: GLN treatment attenuated cellular metabolic dysfunction and improved
cell membrane recovery only in HSF-1+/+ cells. Cellular injury, as measured by
lactate release and cell survival assay, was improved by GLN treatment in
HSF-1+/+ cells alone. Thus, GLN's beneficial effect on cellular metabolic
dysfunction and cell survival appears to be dependent on HSF-1 expression.

PMID: 16931604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 27;281(43):32909-21. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Genome-wide analysis reveals new roles for the activation domains of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae heat shock transcription factor (Hsf1) during the
transient heat shock response.

Eastmond DL(1), Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Rm. 814 Stellar-Chance Bldg., 422 Curie
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In response to elevated temperatures, cells from many organisms rapidly
transcribe a number of mRNAs. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, this protective
response involves two regulatory systems: the heat shock transcription factor
(Hsf1) and the Msn2 and Msn4 (Msn2/4) transcription factors. Both systems
modulate the induction of specific heat shock genes. However, the contribution of
Hsf1, independent of Msn2/4, is only beginning to emerge. To address this
question, we constructed an msn2/4 double mutant and used microarrays to
elucidate the genome-wide expression program of Hsf1. The data showed that 7.6%
of the genome was heat-induced. The up-regulated genes belong to a wide range of 
functional categories, with a significant increase in the chaperone and
metabolism genes. We then focused on the contribution of the activation domains
of Hsf1 to the expression profile and extended our analysis to include
msn2/4Delta strains deleted for the N-terminal or C-terminal activation domain of
Hsf1. Cluster analysis of the heat-induced genes revealed activation
domain-specific patterns of expression, with each cluster also showing distinct
preferences for functional categories. Computational analysis of the promoters of
the induced genes affected by the loss of an activation domain showed a distinct 
preference for positioning and topology of the Hsf1 binding site. This study
provides insight into the important role that both activation domains play for
the Hsf1 regulatory system to rapidly and effectively transcribe its regulon in
response to heat shock.

PMCID: PMC2243236
PMID: 16926161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Sep 25;405(3):191-5. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Co-expression of heat shock transcription factors 1 and 2 in rat retinal ganglion
cells.

Kwong JM(1), Lalezary M, Nguyen JK, Yang C, Khattar A, Piri N, Mareninov S,
Gordon LK, Caprioli J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-7000, USA. kwong@jsei.ucla.edu

Heat shock protein (HSP) plays an important role in the maintenance of neuronal
survival during harmful conditions. Previously, we reported that metabolic stress
induces HSP72 in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and protects against
excitotoxicity, hypoxia and experimental glaucoma. To understand heat shock
protein transcriptional mechanisms, we examined the cellular expression of heat
shock factors 1 (HSF1) and 2 (HSF2) in the unstressed adult rat retina. Western
blotting, immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR showed that mRNA and protein of HSF1
and HSF2 were present in the rat retina and predominantly expressed in RGC layer 
cells. Western blotting of dissociated RGC suspensions harvested with Thy-1
immuno-labeled magnetic beads confirmed that RGCs expressed HSF1, HSF2 and HSP72.
Our findings suggest that both heat shock transcription factors 1 and 2 are
linked to the heat shock response in retinal ganglion cells.

PMID: 16889897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Res. 2006 Aug 1;66(15):7678-85.

Targeting the heat shock factor 1 by RNA interference: a potent tool to enhance
hyperthermochemotherapy efficacy in cervical cancer.

Rossi A(1), Ciafrè S, Balsamo M, Pierimarchi P, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Rome, Italy.

Carcinoma of the uterine cervix is one of the highest causes of mortality in
female cancer patients worldwide, and improved treatment options for this type of
malignancy are highly needed. Local hyperthermia has been successfully used in
combination with systemic administration of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in phase
I/II clinical studies. Heat-induced expression of cytoprotective and
antiapoptotic heat shock proteins (HSP) is a known complication of hyperthermia, 
resulting in thermotolerance and chemoresistance and hindering the efficacy of
the combination therapy. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the master
regulator of heat-induced HSP expression. In the present report, we used small
interfering RNA (siRNA) to silence HSF1 and to examine the effect of HSF1 loss of
function on the response to hyperthermia and cisplatin-based chemotherapy in HeLa
cervical carcinoma. We have identified the 322-nucleotide to 340-nucleotide HSF1 
sequence as an ideal target for siRNA-mediated HSF1 silencing, have created a
pSUPER-HSF1 vector able to potently suppress the HSF1 gene, and have generated
for the first time human cancer cell lines with stable loss of HSF1 function. We 
report that, although it surprisingly does not affect cancer cell sensitivity to 
cisplatin or elevated temperatures up to 43 degrees C when administered
separately, loss of HSF1 function causes a dramatic increase in sensitivity to
hyperthermochemotherapy, leading to massive (>95%) apoptosis of cancer cells.
These findings indicate that disruption of HSF1-induced cytoprotection during
hyperthermochemotherapy may represent a powerful strategy to selectively amplify 
the damage in cancer cells and identify HSF1 as a promising therapeutic target in
cervical carcinoma.

PMID: 16885369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cell Cycle. 2006 Jul;5(13):1431-7. Epub 2006 Jul 1.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF1) plays a critical role in cell migration
via maintaining MAP kinase signaling.

O'Callaghan-Sunol C(1), Sherman MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Upon cancer progression in mouse models of prostate cancer, the heat shock
transcription factor Hsf1 becomes strongly upregulated, especially in metastases.
We hypothesized that Hsf1 plays a role in cell migration, a process necessary for
metastases. Using a cell culture model of migration in a scratch, we found that
immortalized MEF cells derived from hsf1-/- animals were deficient in both basal 
and EGF-induced migration. MEF cell migration was dependent on JNK and ERK
signaling, since inhibition of these pathways blocked EGF-stimulated cell
migration. ERK was activated at the edge of the scratch in parental cells, and
this activity was further increased after addition of EGF. Both basal and
EGF-stimulated ERK activation were suppressed in hsf1-/- cells at the edge of the
scratch. Furthermore, activation of ERK and JNK pathways by EGF was reduced in
hsf1-/- cells. The impairment of MAP kinase signaling in hsf1-/- cells was partly
due to the reduced expression of EGFR1. In addition, knockout of Hsf1 gene caused
a second defect in MAP kinase signaling probably at the level of Ras. We conclude
that HSF1 is necessary for MAP kinase signaling which in turn affects the
EGF-induced cell migration.

PMID: 16855393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Nov;41(5):816-22. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

PKA-mediated ERK1/2 inactivation and hsp70 gene expression following exercise.

Melling CW(1), Krause MP, Noble EG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, The University of Western
Ontario London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Nov;41(5):785-6.

Exercise induces the expression of the cardioprotective protein, Hsp70, through
the activation of its transcription factor HSF1. Recently, we reported that
administration of a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor suppressed exercise-induced 
hsp70 gene expression, suggesting a role for PKA in the regulation of HSF1
activation in vivo. While the mechanism by which PKA regulates HSF1 is unclear,
studies in vitro have reported that HSF1 is phosphorylated on two serine residues
by mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs); ERK1/2 (ser307) and JNK/SAPK
(ser363). As PKA is a regulator of these protein kinases, the current study
examined the role of PKA in their activation and subsequent regulation of
exercise-induced hsp70 gene expression. Following treadmill-running exercise (60 
min at 30 m/min; 2% grade), both ERK1/2 and JNK/SAPK demonstrated distinct
phosphorylation profiles. Increased phosphorylation of ERK1/2 was observed
immediately post-exercise, whereas JNK/SAPK phosphorylation was not significantly
elevated until 30 min post-exercise. Administration of the PKA inhibitor (H89;
0.360 mg/kg) maintained ERK1/2 phosphorylation to at least 30 min post exercise
(n = 5; P < 0.05) while JNK/SAPK phosphorylation was unaltered. Inhibition of
this PKA-mediated increase in ERK1/2 phosphorylation through the simultaneous
administration of an ERK1/2 inhibitor (UB-1026; 0.25 mg/kg) restored
exercise-induced hsp70 mRNA levels in PKA-inhibited rats that previously
demonstrated a suppressed response (P < 0.05). Given that ERK1/2 has been shown
to be a negative regulator of HSF1 in vitro, these results suggest a role for
ERK1/2 in the PKA-mediated regulation of HSF1 activation following exercise.

PMID: 16806261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Aug 11;346(4):1324-9. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

The DNA-binding domain of yeast Hsf1 regulates both DNA-binding and
transcriptional activities.

Yamamoto A(1), Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is a key regulator of the heat shock
response. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the transcription activating ability of
Hsf1 is repressed by its DNA-binding domain, but the detailed mechanism by which 
the inhibitory function is relieved in response to stress remains unknown. In
this study, we isolated and characterized three hsf1 mutants with
temperature-sensitive mutations in the DNA-binding domain. Two mutations
inhibited DNA-binding activity, leading to decreased expression of target genes. 
The third mutation caused transcriptional defects without affecting DNA binding, 
and its suppressor mutation was located in a region important for sensing heat
shock. These results indicate that the DNA-binding domain regulates both the
DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of Hsf1, and suggest that these
functions are located within discrete regions of the DNA-binding domain.

PMID: 16806072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Chromatogr A. 2006 Oct 20;1130(2):190-4. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

Single-cell protein analysis of a single mouse embryo by two-dimensional
capillary electrophoresis.

Harwood MM(1), Christians ES, Fazal MA, Dovichi NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, 98195, USA.

The characterization of protein expression from a single-cell mouse embryo using 
two-dimensional capillary electrophoresis (2D-CE) is described. These zygotes
were obtained from Hsf1 gene knockout mice. Single zygotes were lysed off-column 
and proteins were fluorescently labeled using the fluorogenic dye
3-(2-furoyl)quinoline-2-carboxaldehyde (FQ). After injection, analytes were
separated first according to molecular weight using capillary sieving
electrophoresis (CSE) and then by micellar electrokinetic capillary
chromatography (MEKC) to obtain protein expression fingerprints. Analytes were
detected in a sheath flow cuvette using laser-induced fluorescence. In a 1-h
2D-CE separation, over 100 components were resolved with a spot capacity of 380.

PMID: 16782116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Toxicology. 2006 Jul 25;224(3):210-8. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Cytotoxicity and cell signalling induced by continuous mild hyperthermia in
freshly isolated mouse hepatocytes.

Santos-Marques MJ(1), Carvalho F, Sousa C, Remião F, Vitorino R, Amado F,
Ferreira R, Duarte JA, de Lourdes Bastos M.

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE, Toxicology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Rua
Aníbal Cunha, 164, 4099-030 Porto, Portugal. mjsantosmarques@hotmail.com

An increasing body of data has been demonstrating that mammalian cells have
elaborate networks of molecular signalling in counteracting heat shock and in
developing adaptation to oxidative stress to avoid cell death. However, the
precise mechanisms linking heat shock, oxidative stress and cell survival/cell
death mechanisms are not yet clearly understood. The purpose of this study was
thus to study the time course of hyperthermia-induced oxidative stress and
cellular signalling through the activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and heat
shock protein 70 (HSP70), using freshly isolated mouse hepatocytes. The results
accomplished in this work demonstrated that mild continuous hyperthermia (41
degrees ) leads to oxidative stress and loss of cellular viability in a
time-dependent manner, with significant effects already observed at the first
hour of incubation. These toxic effects developed concomitantly with activation
of HSF1 and emerged before the formation of HSP70 levels. Thus, although cell
signalling was triggered through the transcriptional activation of HSP70 via
HSF1, this putative protective process did not modify the trend of hepatotoxic
effects mediated by this type of hyperthermic challenging.

PMID: 16781810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Exp Physiol. 2006 Sep;91(5):867-75. Epub 2006 May 25.

Gut myoelectrical activity induces heat shock response in Escherichia coli and
Caco-2 cells.

Laubitz D(1), Jankowska A, Sikora A, Wolinski J, Zabielski R, Grzesiuk E.

Author information: 
(1)The Kielanowski Institute of Animal Physiology and Nutrition, Polish Academy
of Sciences, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.

The heat shock response is associated with the intracellular expression of a
number of highly conserved heat shock proteins (Hsps). According to their
molecular size, Hsps have been divided into several groups, which are strongly
conserved and show high homology between the species, e.g., Hsp70, MW 70 kDa
(Lindquist & Craig, 1998; Morimoto, 1998; Jolly & Morimoto, 2000; Zylicz et al.
2001). In all organisms the Hsp expression under stress conditions is regulated
at transcriptional level, e.g., in humans by the heat shock transcription factor 
Hsf1 (Morimoto, 1998; Wu, 1995), while in Escherichia coli by replacement of the 
sigma factor sigma(70) in RNA polymerase by the sigma factor sigma(32) (Gross,
1987). The Hsps allow cell survival under stress conditions by renaturating of
denaturated proteins, protecting of stress-labile proteins, preventing protein
aggregation (chaperone functions), and by degradation of damaged proteins
(protease activities) (Lindquist & Craig, 1988; Morimoto, 1998; Jolly & Morimoto,
2000). They have also many housekeeping functions under non-stressful conditions 
during the cell cycle, growth, development, and differentiation (Morimoto, 1998).
Among a number of plausible inducing factors already studied, extremely low
artificial electromagnetic fields have been shown to induce stress response in
various cells, such as expression of sigma(32) mRNA (Cairo et al. 1998) and
induction of DnaJ and DnaK proteins in Eschericha coli (Chow & Tung, 2000);
expression of hsp-16 gene in Caenorhabditis elegans (Miyakawa et al., 2001);
induction of heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 and Hsp70, Hsp90 and Hsp27 in
human cells (Lin et al. 1997; Lin et al. 1998; Goodman & Blank, 1998; Pipkin et
al. 1999). Nevertheless, the role of endogenous electromagnetic fields, i.e.,
generated by electrically active cells within a body remains controversial. Heat 
shock proteins (Hsps) protect cells against various environmental and endogenous 
stressors. Cytoprotection caused by Hsps involves tolerance induced by one agent 
against other, more severe agents. We have found that exposure of prokaryotic
(Escherichia coli) and eukaryotic (Caco-2) cells to an electrical field (EF)
connected with a myoelectrical migrating complex (MMC) generated by the small
intestine smooth muscle induces the heat shock response. Using Western blot
analysis, we have detected an elevated level of sigma factor 32 in E. coli cells 
exposed to MMC-related EF, and confocal microscopy indicated an increased level
of the inducible form of Hsp70 protein in EF-stimulated Caco-2 cells.
Additionally, we have found that this induced level of Hsp70 protected the Caco-2
cells against apoptosis caused by camptothecin. Our observations suggest that the
myoelectrical activity of the gut may induce heat shock mechanisms in the cells
of gut epithelium as well as in gastrointestinal micro-organisms.

PMID: 16728456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jun 12;580(14):3433-8. Epub 2006 May 12.

Rsp5 regulates expression of stress proteins via post-translational modification 
of Hsf1 and Msn4 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Haitani Y(1), Shimoi H, Takagi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Fukui Prefectural University, Eiheiji-cho, Fukui,
Japan.

Rsp5 is an essential E3 ubiquitin ligase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and is known
to ubiquitinate plasma membrane permeases followed by endocytosis and vacuolar
degradation. We previously isolated the rsp5 mutant that is hypersensitive to
various stresses, suggesting that Rsp5 is involved in degradation of
stress-induced abnormal proteins. Here, we analyzed the ability to refold the
proteins by stress proteins in the rsp5 mutant. The transcription of stress
protein genes in the rsp5 mutant was significantly lower than that in the
wild-type strain when exposed to temperature up-shift, ethanol or sorbitol.
Interestingly, the amounts of transcription factors Hsf1 and Msn4 were remarkably
defective in the rsp5 mutant. These results suggest that expression of stress
proteins are mediated by Rsp5 and that Rsp5 primarily regulates
post-translational modification of Hsf1 and Msn4.

PMID: 16713599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 Apr;31(2):174-7.

[Immortalization of embryonic fibroblasts in heat shock transcription factor 1
knockout mouse].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu MD(1), Zhang HL, Gong HY, Chen GW, Wang KK, Shun-mei E, Xiao XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish immortalized embryonic fibroblast lines in heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) HSF1-/- and HSF1+/+ mice and to provide
experimental models to study the function of HSF1.
METHODS: A mammalian expression vector (pSV3neo) containing the SV40 large T
antigen was used to transfect the HSF1-/- and HSF1+/+ mouse embryonic fibroblast 
using Lipofectamine 2000. Colonies were screened by G418 and expanded to
immortalized cell lines. PCR was used to detect the integration of the large T
antigen with genome in the mouse embryonic fibroblast. Expression of SV40 large T
antigen gene in expanded cells was identified by RT-PCR. HSP70 expression was
examined by Western blot in the embryonic fibroblast lines.
RESULTS: The stable growth and serial propagation were observed in the HSF1-/-
and HSF1+/+ cell lines for six months. The mRNA of SV40 T antigen gene expressed 
in the two cell lines. HSP70 expression could not be induced in the heat-treated 
HSF1-/- mouse embryo fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: The immortalized cells of HSF1+/+ and HSF1-/- mouse embryo
fibroblasts are successfully established.

PMID: 16706109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 Apr;31(2):167-73.

[Screen of inflammatory genes regulated by heat shock factor 1 and corroboration 
with SOCS3 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu FX(1), Zhang HL, Chen GW, Wang QP, Shi YZ, Liu Y, Liang QJ, Xiao XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the inflammatory mediators genes regulated by HSF1, and
explore the mechanism of downstream genes regulated by HSF1.
METHODS: HSF-/- and HSF1+/+ mice were injected with 15 mg/kg LPS
intraperitoneally (ip), respectively, and were treated as previous after HSR. The
total RNA of lung tissues were extracted and filtrated by SuperArray gene
Microarry. The promoter of candidate genes were analyzed by transcription element
search software to search for heat shock element (HSE). Select the suppressor of 
cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) with HSE. Macrophage cells were stimulated with 400 
ng/mL LPS, and were treated as previous after HSR, then the total RNA was
extracted respectively. RT-PCR and northern blot assay were performed to detect
the expression levels of SOCS3 mRNA.
RESULTS: Fifteen genes were repressed by HSF1, including 9 genes with complete
HSE. Eleven genes were accelerated by HSF1 possibly, including 8 genes with
complete HSE. The promoter of SOCS3 gene contained one complete HSE. LPS
stimulation obviously increased the levels of SOCS3 mRNA in macrophages of
RAW264.7 mice, which was inhibited by HSR and over-expression of HSF1.
CONCLUSION: HSR or HSF1 inhibits LPS induced expression of SOCS3 mRNA; HSF1 might
inhibit LPS-induced expression of SOCS3 mRNA by binding to HSE in the promoter of
SOCS3 gene.

PMID: 16706108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 Apr;31(2):162-6.

[HSF1 inhibits heat stress-induced apoptosis in Raw264.7 macrophages].

[Article in Chinese]

Shun-mei E(1), Xiao WM, Wang KK, Wang QP, Liu MD, Liu K, Xiao XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophsiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) on heat
stress-induced apoptosis in Raw264.7 macrophages.
METHODS: Raw264.7 cells transfected with pcDNA3.1 and pcDNA3.1-HSF1 were exposed 
to heat stress (42.5 degrees C +/- 0.5 degrees C) for 1 h and recovered at 37
degrees C for 6, 9, 12, and 24 h respectively. Flow cytometry (FCM), Hoechst
33258 staining and DNA ladder assays were performed to assess the apoptosis.
RESULTS: After heat stress, FCM showed that apoptotic cells were increased
significantly and reached the peak at 9 h in Raw 264.7 cells transfected with
pcDNA3.1, and were characterized with classical morphologic changes including
apoptotic body and nuclear condensation. Agarose gel electrophoresis showed that 
"DNA ladder" could be observed clearly at 6, 9, and 12 h after the heat stress.
But the overexpression of HSF1 could reduce the number of apoptotic cells and
inhibit DNA fragmentation.
CONCLUSION: HSF1 can inhibit heat stress-induced apoptosis in Raw264.7
macrophages.

PMID: 16706107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2006 May;38(5):356-62.

Effects of heat stress on yeast heat shock factor-promoter binding in vivo.

Li N(1), Zhang LM, Zhang KQ, Deng JS, Prändl R, Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum fur Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen-Allgemeine Genetik,
Eberhard-Karls-Universitat Tubingen, 72076 Tubingen, Germany. zhanglm@ynu.edu.cn.

Heat shock factor-DNA interaction is critical for understanding the regulatory
mechanisms of stress-induced gene expression in eukaryotes. In this study, we
analyzed the in vivo binding of yeast heat shock factor (HSF) to the promoters of
target genes ScSSA1, ScSSA4, HSP30 and HSP104, using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Previous work suggested that yeast HSF is constitutively
bound to DNA at all temperatures. Expression of HSF target genes is regulated at 
the post-transcriptional level. However, our results indicated that HSF does not 
bind to the promoters of ScSSA4 and HSP30 at normal temperature (23 degrees C).
Binding to these promoters is rapidly induced by heat stress at 39 degrees C. HSF
binds to ScSSA1 and HSP104 promoters under non-stress conditions, but at a low
level. Heat stress rapidly leads to a notable increase in the binding of HSF to
these two genes. The kinetics of the level of HSF-promoter binding correlate well
with the expression of target genes, suggesting that the expression of HSF target
genes is at least partially the result of HSF-promoter binding stability and
subsequent transcription stimulation.

PMID: 16680377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Feb;190(2):321-9. Epub 2006 May 5.

HSF1 and constitutively active HSF1 improve vascular endothelial function (heat
shock proteins improve vascular endothelial function).

Uchiyama T(1), Atsuta H, Utsugi T, Oguri M, Hasegawa A, Nakamura T, Nakai A,
Nakata M, Maruyama I, Tomura H, Okajima F, Tomono S, Kawazu S, Nagai R,
Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biological Science, Gunma University Course of
Medical Science Graduate School of Medicine, 3-39-15, Showa-Machi Maebashi,
Gunma, Japan. uchiyat@med.gunma-u.ac.jp

We have been examining the role of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in the pleiotropic 
effects of statins. In parallel studies, we found that statin induces the nuclear
translocation of HSF1 and that a decoy oligonucleotide encoding the heat shock
element inhibits the statin-induced expression of heat shock protein 70,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and thrombomodulin. Also, in vascular
endothelial cells, increases in the expression of human HSF1 corresponded with
elevated steady-state levels of eNOS and thrombomodulin and reduced levels of
endothelin-1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1. We also found that heat shock
proteins induced eNOS and thrombomodulin expression and reduced PAI-1 and ET-1
expression. In particular, a combination of HSP70 and HSP90 strongly induced eNOS
expression and reduced PAI-1 expression. In the current studies, we generated a
constitutively active form of HSF1 and found that it is more effective than the
wild-type HSF at inducing thrombomodulin and eNOS expression and decreasing
endothelin-1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 expression. These results show
that the wild-type and constitutively active forms of HSF1 induce anticoagulation
and relaxation factors in vascular endothelial cells and could therefore be used 
to treat cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 16678833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Oct 15;99(3):797-806.

Effects of sequential exposure to lipopolysaccharide and heat stress on dental
pulp cells.

Kitamura C(1), Nishihara T, Ueno Y, Chen KK, Morotomi T, Yano J, Nagayoshi M,
Terashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulp Biology, Operative Dentistry, and Endodontics, Department of 
Cariology and Periodontology, Science of Oral Functions, Kyushu Dental College,
2-6-1 Manazuru, Kokurakita, Kitakyushu 803-8580, Japan. chi-aki-k@kyu-dent.ac.jp

In the present study, we examined the effects of sequential exposure to bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and heat stress on dental pulp cells. LPS induced the
proliferation of pulp cells through the activation of p38 MAPK. HSP27 was
expressed in cells with or without LPS during the entire period of heat stress,
while transiently phosphorylated by short-term heat stress. In LPS-treated cells,
short-term heat stress also induced the phosphorylation of HSF1. The immediate
phosphorylation of HSF1 and HSP27 in LPS-treated cells by short-term heat stress 
occurred dependent on the activation of p38 MAPK. However, with long-term heat
stress, the activation of HSF1 and induction of HSP27 occurred independent of p38
MAPK. Further, full activation of Akt in LPS-treated cells was immediately
induced by short-term heat stress and lasted during the entire period of heat
stress. IkappaB alpha was induced and phosphorylated throughout sequential
exposure to LPS and heat stress. These results suggest that LPS has the unique
effects on the cytoprotection and the cell death of pulp cells during heat stress
through the modification and the activation of heat stress responsive molecules, 
HSF1 and HSP27, and cell survival molecules, Akt and NF-kappaB/IkappaB alpha.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16676349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jun 1;15(11):1876-83. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of hsp90-dependent trafficking reduces
aggregation and promotes degradation of the expanded glutamine androgen receptor 
without stress protein induction.

Thomas M(1), Harrell JM, Morishima Y, Peng HM, Pratt WB, Lieberman AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301
Catherine, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The molecular chaperone hsp90 has emerged as an important therapeutic target in
cancer and neurodegenerative diseases, including the polyglutamine expansion
disorders, because of its ability to regulate the activity, turnover and
trafficking of many proteins. For neurodegenerative disorders associated with
protein aggregation, the rationale has been that inhibition of hsp90 by
geldanamycin and related compounds activates heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) to induce
the production of the chaperones hsp70 and hsp40 that promote disaggregation and 
protein degradation. However, we show here that geldanamycin blocks the
development of aggregates of the expanded glutamine androgen receptor (AR112Q) of
Kennedy disease in Hsf1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts where these chaperones
are not induced. Geldanamycin is additionally known to inhibit hsp90-dependent
protein trafficking and to promote proteasomal degradation of client proteins.
Overexpression of the hsp90 cochaperone p23 also promotes AR112Q degradation, and
inhibits both AR trafficking and AR112Q aggregation without altering levels of
hsp70 or hsp40. The hsp90-dependent trafficking mechanism has been defined, and
it is shown that key immunophilin (IMM) components of the trafficking machinery
are present in polyglutamine aggregates in cell and mouse models of Kennedy
disease. Our results indicate that inhibition of the hsp90-dependent trafficking 
mechanism prevents aggregation of the expanded glutamine androgen receptor,
thereby opening a variety of novel therapeutic approaches to these
neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 16644868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Cell. 2006 Apr 21;22(2):153-4.

Beating the heat: A translation factor and an RNA mobilize the heat shock
transcription factor HSF1.

Kugel JF(1), Goodrich JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 215 UCB, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA.

Cells respond to stress via orchestrated modifications in gene expression; in a
recent publication in Nature, Shamovsky et al. (2006) report that an RNA and a
translation factor regulate the activity of a transcriptional activator essential
to the mammalian heat shock response.

PMID: 16630884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 23;281(25):17220-7. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Heat shock protein 25 or inducible heat shock protein 70 activates heat shock
factor 1: dephosphorylation on serine 307 through inhibition of ERK1/2
phosphorylation.

Seo HR(1), Chung DY, Lee YJ, Lee DH, Kim JI, Bae S, Chung HY, Lee SJ, Jeoung D,
Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiation Effect and Laboratory of Radiation Experimental
Therapeutics, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, Seoul
139-706.

The expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) is known to be increased via
activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), and excess expression of HSPs exerts
feedback inhibition of HSF1. However, the molecular mechanism to modulate such
relationships between HSPs and HSF1 is not clear. In the present study, we show
that stable transfection of either Hsp25 or inducible Hsp70 (Hsp70i) increased
expression of endogenous HSPs such as HSP25 and HSP70i through HSF1 activation.
However, these phenomena were abolished when the dominant negative Hsf1 mutant
was transfected to HSP25 or HSP70i overexpressed cells. Moreover, the increased
HSF1 activity by either HSP25 or HSP70i was found to result from
dephosphorylation of HSF1 on serine 307 that increased the stability of HSF1.
Either HSP25 or HSP70i inhibited ERK1/2 phosphorylation because of increased MKP1
phosphorylation by direct interaction of these HSPs with MKP1. Treatment of HOS
and NCI-H358 cells, which showed high expressions of endogenous HSF1, with small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) of either HSP27 (siHSP27)or HSP70i (siHSP70i) inhibited
both HSP27 and HSP70i proteins; this was because of increased ERK1/2
phosphorylation and serine phosphorylation of HSF1. The results, therefore,
suggested that when the HSF1 protein level was high in cancer cells, excess
expression of HSP27 or HSP70i strongly facilitates the expression of HSP proteins
through HSF1 activation, resulting in severe radio- or chemoresistance.

PMID: 16624816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2006;(172):139-52.

Heat shock response: lessons from mouse knockouts.

Christians ES(1), Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR5547, Toulouse, France.
Elisabeth.Christians@cict.fr

Organisms are endowed with integrated regulatory networks that transduce and
amplify incoming signals into effective responses, ultimately imparting cell
death and/or survival pathways. As a conserved cytoprotective mechanism from
bacteria to humans, the heat shock response has been established as a paradigm
for inducible gene expression, stimulating the interests of biologists and
clinicians alike to tackle fundamental questions related to the molecular
switches, lineage-specific requirements, unique and/or redundant roles, and even 
efforts to harness the response therapeutically. Gene targeting studies in mice
confirm HSF1 as a master regulator required for cell growth, embryonic
development, and reproduction. For example, sterility of Hsf1-null female but not
null male mice established strict requirements for maternal HSF1 expression in
the oocyte. Yet Hsf2 knockouts by three independent laboratories have not fully
clarified the role of mammalian HSF2 for normal development, fertility, and
postnatal neuronal function. In contrast, Hsf4 knockouts have provided a
consistent demonstration for HSF4's critical role during lens formation. In the
future, molecular analysis of HSF knockout mice will bring new insights to HSF
interactions, foster better understanding of gene regulation at the genome level,
lead to a better integration of the HSF pathway in life beyond heat shock, the
classical laboratory challenge.

PMID: 16610358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2006;(172):43-68.

Feedback regulation of the heat shock response.

Voellmy R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miller 
School of Medicine, FL 33136, USA. rvoellmy@med.miami.edu

The heat shock response is triggered primarily by nonnative proteins accumulating
in a stressed cell and results in increased expression of heat shock proteins
(Hsps), i.e., of chaperones capable of participating in the refolding or
elimination of nonnative proteins. Best known is the transcriptional part of this
response that is mediated predominantly by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1
activity is regulated at different levels by Hsps and co-chaperones and is
modulated further by a number of mechanisms involving other stress-regulated
aspects of cell metabolism.

PMID: 16610354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Genes Dev. 2006 Apr 1;20(7):836-47.

Role of heat-shock factor 2 in cerebral cortex formation and as a regulator of
p35 expression.

Chang Y(1), Ostling P, Akerfelt M, Trouillet D, Rallu M, Gitton Y, El Fatimy R,
Fardeau V, Le Crom S, Morange M, Sistonen L, Mezger V.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie Moléculaire du Stress, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
(CNRS) UMR8541, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

Heat-shock factors (HSFs) are associated with multiple developmental processes,
but their mechanisms of action in these processes remain largely enigmatic.
Hsf2-null mice display gametogenesis defects and brain abnormalities
characterized by enlarged ventricles. Here, we show that Hsf2-/- cerebral cortex 
displays mispositioning of neurons of superficial layers. HSF2 deficiency
resulted in a reduced number of radial glia fibers, the architectural guides for 
migrating neurons, and of Cajal-Retzius cells, which secrete the positioning
signal Reelin. Therefore, we focused on the radial migration signaling pathways. 
The levels of Reelin and Dab1 tyrosine phosphorylation were reduced, suggesting
that the Reelin cascade is affected in Hsf2-/- cortices. The expression of p35,
an activator of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), essential for radial migration,
was dependent on the amount of HSF2 in gain- and loss-of-function systems. p39,
another Cdk5 activator, displayed reduced mRNA levels in Hsf2-/- cortices, which,
together with the lowered p35 levels, decreased Cdk5 activity. We demonstrate in 
vivo binding of HSF2 to the p35 promoter and thereby identify p35 as the first
target gene for HSF2 in cortical development. In conclusion, HSF2 affects
cellular populations that assist in radial migration and directly regulates the
expression of p35, a crucial actor of radial neuronal migration.

PMCID: PMC1472286
PMID: 16600913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Exp Gerontol. 2006 May;41(5):497-500. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

HSF expression in skeletal muscle during myogenesis: implications for failed
regeneration in old mice.

McArdle A(1), Broome CS, Kayani AC, Tully MD, Close GL, Vasilaki A, Jackson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GA, UK.
mdcr02@liv.ac.uk

The ability of muscles of old mice to recover force generation following
substantial damage is severely impaired, particularly during the late phase of
regeneration. This inability to recover successfully may be associated with the
attenuated ability of muscles of old mice to produce heat shock proteins (HSPs)
in response to stress since muscles of old mice overexpressing HSP70 recover
successfully following damage. The capacity of mature mammalian skeletal muscle
to regenerate following damage is due to the presence of undifferentiated
mononuclear myogenic precursor cells (satellite cells) at the periphery of mature
skeletal muscle fibres. HSP expression is under the primary transcriptional
control of heat shock factors 1 and 2 (HSF1 and HSF2). The aim of this study was 
to examine the expression of heat shock factors 1 and 2 by western blotting in
mouse-derived C2C12 myoblasts as an experimental model system for investigating
skeletal muscle regeneration. Data demonstrated that the HSF2 content of myotubes
was significantly increased during the early stages of regeneration. In contrast,
the HSF1 content of myotubes remained relatively low until late during
regeneration. Thus, abnormal activation of HSF1 may play a role in the defective 
regeneration seen in muscles of old mice.

PMID: 16580804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Radiat Res. 2006 Apr;165(4):410-23.

Hsf1-mediated stress response can transiently enhance cellular radioresistance.

Kabakov AE(1), Malyutina YV, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Radiology Research Center, Obninsk 249036, Russia.
aekabakov@hotmail.com

To elucidate how the heat-shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1)-mediated stress
response affects cellular radioresistance, mouse embryo fibroblasts with
Hsf1-gene knockout (Hsf1(-/-) cells) or with normal wild-type Hsf1 expression
(Hsf1 wild-type cells) were preconditioned by heating (43 degrees C, 30 min)
without or with quercetin (an inhibitor of Hsf1) and then exposed to gamma
radiation (4 or 6 Gy). Some cell samples were infected with virus-based vectors
to overexpress the constitutively active (mutant) form of Hsf1 or individual
heat-shock proteins (Hsps). The heat preconditioning transiently up-regulated the
Hsp levels in Hsf1 wild-type cells and significantly improved their
postirradiation survival; these effects could be abolished by quercetin or
simulated (without preheating) by the Hsf1 overexpression. In contrast, no
enhanced radioresistance was found in heat-preconditioned Hsf1(-/-) cells that
were unable to trigger Hsf1-mediated Hsp induction after heating. However, when
the constitutively active Hsf1 was overexpressed in Hsf1(-/-) cells, the latter
accumulated stress-inducible Hsps and became more radioresistant like
heat-preconditioned Hsf1 wild-type cells. The overexpression of Hsp70 or/ and
Hsp27 also enhanced radioresistance of both cell cultures. Thus the
preirradiation stress response resulting in the intracellular Hsp accumulation
can improve survival of severely irradiated mammalian cells.

PMID: 16579653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Exp Hematol. 2006 Apr;34(4):414-23.

Induction of HSP70 is dispensable for anti-inflammatory action of heat shock or
NSAIDs in mast cells.

Mortaz E(1), Redegeld FA, Bloksma N, Dunsmore K, Denenberg A, Wong HR, Nijkamp
FP, Engels F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pathophysiology, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: It is well known that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
such as acetylsalicylic acid, ibuprofen, and indomethacin, induce
anti-inflammatory effects through inhibition of cyclooxygenase enzyme activity.
However, it has also been established that a variety of their anti-inflammatory
effects are independent of cyclooxygenase. In the search for alternative modes of
action, it was found that NSAIDs share some cellular effects with heat shock
treatment. This prompted us to investigate whether NSAIDs modulate production of 
proinflammatory cytokines by mast cells through the heat shock response.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In mouse mast cells, derived from a culture of bone marrow
cells of male BALB/cBy and null HSF-1(-/-) mice, responsiveness to heat shock and
NSAIDs was monitored by measuring tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) production and signaling pathways.
RESULTS: In bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC), we found that heat shock and a
number of NSAIDs induced heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), which was closely
paralleled with inhibition of IL-6 and TNF-alpha production. Surprisingly, in
BMMC from HSF-1(-/-)mice, heat shock and selected NSAIDs were still able to
suppress cytokine production in the absence of HSP70 induction.
CONCLUSION: In this article, we provide evidence that inhibition of release of
proinflammatory cytokines by NSAIDs and heat shock may be attributed to
inhibition of the inhibitory nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) kinase activity,
extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2, and p38 pathways, resulting in
decreased transcriptional activity of the NF-kappaB pathway.

PMID: 16569588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Microbiol. 2006 Apr;60(1):240-51.

A stress regulatory network for co-ordinated activation of proteasome expression 
mediated by yeast heat shock transcription factor.

Hahn JS(1), Neef DW, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-744, Korea.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) mediates the transcriptional response of
eukaryotic cells to heat, infection and inflammation, pharmacological agents, and
other stresses. Although genes encoding heat shock proteins (HSPs) are the best
characterized targets of HSF, recent genome-wide localization of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae HSF revealed novel HSF targets involved in a wide range of cellular
functions. One such target, the RPN4 gene, encodes a transcription factor that
directly activates expression of a number of genes encoding proteasome subunits. 
Here we demonstrate that HSF co-ordinates a feed-forward gene regulatory circuit 
for RPN4 activation. We show that HSF activates expression of PDR3, encoding a
multidrug resistance (MDR) transcription factor that also directly activates RPN4
gene expression. We demonstrate that the HSF binding site (HSE) in the RPN4
promoter is primarily responsible for heat- or methyl methanesulphonate induction
of RPN4, with a minor contribution of Pdr3 binding sites (PDREs), while a Yap1
binding site (YRE) is responsible for RPN4 induction in response to oxidative
stress. Furthermore, heat-induced expression of Rpn4 protein leads to expression 
of Rpn4 targets at later stages of heat stress, providing a temporal controlling 
mechanism for proteasome synthesis upon stress conditions that could result in
irreversibly damaged proteins. In addition, the overlapping transcriptional
regulatory networks involving HSF, Yap1 and Pdr3 suggest a close linkage between 
stress responses and pleiotropic drug resistance.

PMID: 16556235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Nature. 2006 Mar 23;440(7083):556-60.

RNA-mediated response to heat shock in mammalian cells.

Shamovsky I(1), Ivannikov M, Kandel ES, Gershon D, Nudler E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016, USA.

The heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) has an important role in the
heat-shock response in vertebrates by inducing the expression of heat-shock
proteins (HSPs) and other cytoprotective proteins. HSF1 is present in unstressed 
cells in an inactive monomeric form and becomes activated by heat and other
stress stimuli. HSF1 activation involves trimerization and acquisition of a
site-specific DNA-binding activity, which is negatively regulated by interaction 
with certain HSPs. Here we show that HSF1 activation by heat shock is an active
process that is mediated by a ribonucleoprotein complex containing translation
elongation factor eEF1A and a previously unknown non-coding RNA that we term HSR1
(heat shock RNA-1). HSR1 is constitutively expressed in human and rodent cells
and its homologues are functionally interchangeable. Both HSR1 and eEF1A are
required for HSF1 activation in vitro; antisense oligonucleotides or short
interfering (si)RNA against HSR1 impair the heat-shock response in vivo,
rendering cells thermosensitive. The central role of HSR1 during heat shock
implies that targeting this RNA could serve as a new therapeutic model for
cancer, inflammation and other conditions associated with HSF1 deregulation.

PMID: 16554823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Nature. 2006 Mar 23;440(7083):551-5.

CHIP-mediated stress recovery by sequential ubiquitination of substrates and
Hsp70.

Qian SB(1), McDonough H, Boellmann F, Cyr DM, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Exposure of cells to various stresses often leads to the induction of a group of 
proteins called heat shock proteins (HSPs, molecular chaperones). Hsp70 is one of
the most highly inducible molecular chaperones, but its expression must be
maintained at low levels under physiological conditions to permit constitutive
cellular activities to proceed. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the
transcriptional regulator of HSP gene expression, but it remains poorly
understood how newly synthesized HSPs return to basal levels when HSF1 activity
is attenuated. CHIP (carboxy terminus of Hsp70-binding protein), a dual-function 
co-chaperone/ubiquitin ligase, targets a broad range of chaperone substrates for 
proteasomal degradation. Here we show that CHIP not only enhances Hsp70 induction
during acute stress but also mediates its turnover during the stress recovery
process. Central to this dual-phase regulation is its substrate dependence: CHIP 
preferentially ubiquitinates chaperone-bound substrates, whereas degradation of
Hsp70 by CHIP-dependent targeting to the ubiquitin-proteasome system occurs when 
misfolded substrates have been depleted. The sequential catalysis of the
CHIP-associated chaperone adaptor and its bound substrate provides an elegant
mechanism for maintaining homeostasis by tuning chaperone levels appropriately to
reflect the status of protein folding within the cytoplasm.

PMCID: PMC4112096
PMID: 16554822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug 15;98(6):1528-42.

Heat shock transcription factor (Hsf)-4b recruits Brg1 during the G1 phase of the
cell cycle and regulates the expression of heat shock proteins.

Tu N(1), Hu Y, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Chaperone Biology/Radiobiology Program, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Human brahma-related gene 1(Brg1) is a subunit of the switching/sucrose
non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) chromatin-remodeling complex and regulates transcription
during cell growth and differentiation and has been found to be mutated in many
types of human cancers. Mammalian heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1), which binds
conserved sequences on the promoter of the hsp70 gene when cells are exposed to
various stress stimuli, utilizes Brg1-SWI/SNF complexes and stimulates
transcription in vitro at the level of initiation and elongation. In contrast to 
the stress-inducibility of Hsf1, in vitro transcribed/translated Hsf4b binds to
the heat shock element (HSE) constitutively and loses its ability to bind HSEs
following stress. The regulation of Hsf4b transcriptional activity in vivo
remains unclear. Here, we present evidence that Hsf4b recruits Brg1 complexes to 
the promoters of heat shock proteins (HSPs) under physiological growth
conditions. Furthermore, in an asynchronous cell population, the association of
Hsf4b with Brg1 complexes is regulated in response to activation/inactivation of 
the extracellular signal regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling pathway.
Since Brg1 is also the target of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and
other protein kinases and it is hyperphosphorylated and inactivated during the
G2/M phase of the cell cycle, we tested whether the association of Hsf4b with
Brg1 complexes is altered during the cell cycle. The results indicate that
association of Hsf4b with Brg1 complexes is undetectable during G2/M; however, an
Hsf4b interaction with Brg1 complexes is evident at 1-3 h after progression of
cells into G1, where chromatin structure is presumed to be more accessible to
transcriptional regulatory proteins. At this time, Hsf4b exhibits increased
DNA-binding activity and is detectable on promoters of multiple Hsps. To
determine the unique role of Hsf4b in stimulating the expression of Hsps during
the cell cycle, experiments were conducted with mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs)
deficient in individual Hsfs. The results indicate that in the absence of Hsf1
and Hsf2, Hsf4b expression in cells leads to increased ability of Hsf4b to bind
HSE during G1, leading to enhanced synthesis of inducible Hsp70.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16552721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochem J. 2006 Apr 1;395(1):e5-6.

Clustering of heat-shock factors.

Björk JK(1), Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Abo Akademi University, Turku Centre for Biotechnology,
Abo Akademi University and University of Turku, FI-20521 Turku, Finland.

Comment on
    Biochem J. 2006 Apr 1;395(1):223-31.

Clusterin is a ubiquitous glycoprotein found in most physiological fluids and
tissues. Although not fully understood, the function of clusterin seems to be
related to its ability to bind a wide variety of molecules. Since clusterin has
been found associated with extracellular protein aggregates, a role as a
molecular chaperone has been proposed. In this issue of the Biochemical Journal, 
Le Dréan and colleagues demonstrate an up-regulation of clusterin in neuronal
cells exposed to proteotoxic stress that results in unfolded protein accumulation
and proteasome impairment, both commonly associated with neurodegenerative
diseases. Interestingly, expression of clusterin was found to be regulated by two
members of the HSF (heat-shock factor) family, HSF1 and HSF2, which possibly form
a trimeric complex on the clusterin promoter. The study proposes clusterin as a
player in a cellular defence mechanism against harmful protein accumulation, and 
highlights the importance of elucidating further the exact role of clusterin and 
the intriguing interaction between HSF1 and HSF2.

PMCID: PMC1409681
PMID: 16541486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006 Sep;291(3):R566-72.

Reciprocal activation of HSF1 and HSF3 in brain and blood tissues: is redundancy 
developmentally related?

Shabtay A(1), Arad Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006 Nov;291(5):R1565.

Transcriptional induction of heat-shock genes in response to temperature
elevation and other stresses is mediated by heat-shock transcription factors
(HSFs). Avian cells express two redundant heat-shock responsive factors, HSF1 and
HSF3, which differ in their activation kinetics and threshold induction
temperature. Unlike the ubiquitous activation of HSF1, the DNA-binding activity
of HSF3 is restricted to undifferentiated avian cells and embryonic tissues.
Herein, we report a reciprocal activation of HSF1 and HSF3 in vivo. Whereas HSF1 
mediates transcriptional activity only in the brain upon severe heat shock, HSF3 
is exclusively activated in blood cells upon light, moderate, and severe heat
shock, promoting induction of heat-shock genes. Although not activated, HSF1 is
expressed in blood cell nuclei in a granular appearance, suggesting regulation of
genes other than heat-shock genes. Intraspecific comparison of heat-sensitive and
heat-resistant fowl strains indicates that the unique activation pattern of HSF3 
in blood tissue is a general phenomenon, not related to thermal history. Taken
together, HSF1 and HSF3 mediate transcriptional activity of adult tissues and
differentiated cells in a nonredundant manner. Instead, an exclusive,
tissue-specific activation is observed, implying that redundancy may be
developmentally related. The physiological and developmental implications are
discussed.

PMID: 16497816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Chem Biol. 2006 Feb;13(2):213-23.

AEG3482 is an antiapoptotic compound that inhibits Jun kinase activity and cell
death through induced expression of heat shock protein 70.

Salehi AH(1), Morris SJ, Ho WC, Dickson KM, Doucet G, Milutinovic S, Durkin J,
Gillard JW, Barker PA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Chem Biol. 2006 Feb;13(2):115-6.

We describe a group of small-molecule inhibitors of Jun kinase (JNK)-dependent
apoptosis. AEG3482, the parental compound, was identified in a screening effort
designed to detect compounds that reduce apoptosis of neonatal sympathetic
neurons after NGF withdrawal. We show that AEG3482 blocks apoptosis induced by
the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) or its cytosolic interactor, NRAGE, and
demonstrate that AEG3482 blocks proapoptotic JNK activity. We show that AEG3482
induces production of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), an endogenous inhibitor of
JNK, and establish that HSP70 accumulation is required for the AEG3482-induced
JNK blockade. We show that AEG3482 binds HSP90 and induces HSF1-dependent HSP70
mRNA expression and find that AEG3482 facilitates HSP70 production while
retaining HSP90 chaperone activity. These studies establish that AEG3482 inhibits
JNK activation and apoptosis by a mechanism involving induced expression of HSP
proteins.

PMID: 16492569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 7;281(14):9616-22. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Triptolide, an inhibitor of the human heat shock response that enhances
stress-induced cell death.

Westerheide SD(1), Kawahara TL, Orton K, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Rice
Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 28;281(30):21575.

Molecular chaperones, inducible by heat shock and a variety of other stresses,
have critical roles in protein homeostasis, balancing cell stress with
adaptation, survival, and cell death mechanisms. In transformed cells and tumors,
chaperones are frequently overexpressed, with constitutive activation of the heat
shock transcription factor HSF1 implicated in tumor formation. Here, we describe 
the activity of triptolide, a diterpene triepoxide from the plant Triptergium
wilfordii, as an inhibitor of the human heat shock response. Triptolide treatment
of human tissue culture cells prevented the inducible expression of heat shock
genes, shown by suppression of an HSP70 promoter-reporter construct and by
suppression of endogenous HSP70 gene expression. Upon examining the steps in the 
HSF1 activation pathway, we found that triptolide abrogates the transactivation
function of HSF1 without interfering in the early events of trimer formation,
hyperphosphorylation, and DNA binding. The ability of triptolide to inhibit the
heat shock response renders these cells sensitive to stress-induced cell death,
which may be of great relevance to cancer treatments.

PMID: 16469748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2006 Apr;143(4):435-46. Epub 2006 Feb 
8.

Turning up the heat: the effects of thermal acclimation on the kinetics of hsp70 
gene expression in the eurythermal goby, Gillichthys mirabilis.

Lund SG(1), Ruberté MR, Hofmann GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9610, USA.
susan.lund@uregina.ca

Most organisms respond to temperature fluctuations by altering the expression of 
an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins known as heat shock proteins
(Hsps). Studies have shown Hsp expression and the activation of HSF1, one of the 
primary regulators of Hsp transcription, are highly malleable, varying with the
recent thermal history of the organism; however, the mechanisms that confer
plasticity to the regulation of this ubiquitous response are not well-understood.
This study furthers our knowledge in this area by characterizing the activation
kinetics of HSF1 and the corresponding transcription of hsp70 in the liver of the
eurythermal goby, Gillichthys mirabilis, following a month-long acclimation at
13, 21 or 28 degrees C. Our data revealed HSF1 DNA-binding kinetics varied as a
function of acclimation temperature and magnitude/duration of exposure, with
gobies acclimated at 21 degrees C exhibiting the most robust response. Hsp70 mRNA
followed a similar pattern with induction first occurring in the 13 and 21
degrees C fish, and then most robustly in the 28 degrees C group at 36 degrees C.
The hsp70 mRNA induction pattern was corroborated by levels of HSF1 DNA-binding
activity in each group and may have been lowest in the 28 degrees C group due to 
the 2-fold greater levels of hsp70 protein prior to thermal exposure. This study 
illustrates the integral role of HSF1 as a key regulator of Hsp induction and
helps explain the plasticity of this response in ectothermic organisms.

PMID: 16466955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Mar 24;341(4):1072-7. Epub 2006 Jan 25.

Cross talk of heat shock and heavy metal regulatory pathways.

Uenishi R(1), Gong P, Suzuki K, Koizumi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Effects Research, National Institute of Industrial
Health, 6-21-1 Nagao, Tama-ku, Kawasaki 214-8585, Japan.

Heavy metals induce transcription of human genes including those coding for
metallothionein and heat shock protein 70 (HSP70). It has been suggested that
these processes are mediated by metal-activated transcription factors, MTF-1 and 
HSF1, respectively, and are independent of each other. We raised an antibody
against human MTF-1 which efficiently supershifts the protein-DNA complex formed 
by MTF-1 and its cognate binding sequence, MRE. We discovered that this antibody 
could also supershift complexes formed by HSF1 and its recognition sequence HSE, 
which suggested the involvement of MTF-1 in these complexes. This supershift was 
observed for HSF1/HSE complexes induced by Zn, Cd, Ag, and heat shock.
Furthermore, overexpression of MTF-1 in HeLa cells markedly reduced metal-induced
transcription from the hsp70-1 gene promoter which depends on HSF1. These data
indicate that MTF-1 represses HSF1-mediated transcription probably through a
direct protein-protein interaction, suggesting a cross talk of two lines of
stress-responsive regulatory pathways.

PMID: 16460681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Genetics. 2006 May;173(1):35-47. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

De novo appearance and "strain" formation of yeast prion [PSI+] are regulated by 
the heat-shock transcription factor.

Park KW(1), Hahn JS, Fan Q, Thiele DJ, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Institute of Neuroscience, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Yeast prions are non-Mendelian genetic elements that are conferred by altered and
self-propagating protein conformations. Such a protein conformation-based
transmission is similar to that of PrP(Sc), the infectious protein responsible
for prion diseases. Despite recent progress in understanding the molecular nature
and epigenetic transmission of prions, the underlying mechanisms governing prion 
conformational switch and determining prion "strains" are not understood. We
report here that the evolutionarily conserved heat-shock transcription factor
(HSF) strongly influences yeast prion formation and strain determination. An hsf1
mutant lacking the amino-terminal activation domain inhibits the yeast prion
[PSI+] formation whereas a mutant lacking the carboxyl-terminal activation domain
promotes [PSI+] formation. Moreover, specific [PSI+] strains are preferentially
formed in these mutants, demonstrating the importance of genetic makeup in
determining de novo appearance of prion strains. Although these hsf1 mutants
preferentially support the formation of certain [PSI+] strains, they are capable 
of receiving and faithfully propagating nonpreferable strains, suggesting that
prion initiation and propagation are distinct processes requiring different
cellular components. Our findings establish the importance of HSF in prion
initiation and strain determination and imply a similar regulatory role of
mammalian HSFs in the complex etiology of prion disease.

PMCID: PMC1461444
PMID: 16452152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Cell Physiol. 2006 May;207(2):562-9.

Dynamic regulation and involvement of the heat shock transcriptional response in 
arsenic carcinogenesis.

Khalil S(1), Luciano J, Chen W, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Rutgers College, Rutgers State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New
Jersey 08854, USA.

The objective of this study is to better define induction of the heat shock
response by arsenite, and to evaluation if induction of heat shock proteins
(HSPs) contributes to the carcinogenic activity of arsenite. We show here that
arsenite is a ubiquitous inducer of the heat shock response in mammalian cells:
that it activated heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) DNA-binding activity, 
enhanced hsp 70 promoter, and induced hsp70mRNA and synthesis of HSP chaperones. 
Using a high throughput hsp70 promoter-luciferase reporter assay, we observed a
hormetic dose response where low concentrations of arsenite stimulated and high
concentrations inhibited. Further, the response was time-dependent such that with
longer times of incubation, the dose response shifted to the left. The effect of 
arsenite in inducing the hsp 70-luciferase reporter absolutely required a
functional HSF1 as it was not observed in HSF1 minus cells but re-instated by
expression of HSF1. Consistent with the suggestion that arsenic targets vicinal
cysteine-SH, we showed that dithiothreitol blocked the effect of arsenite. Assays
of cell viability and caspase showed that arsenite caused a dose-dependent
increase in cell death by activation of caspase 3/7 and pre-induction of HSPs
blunted these effects. Using anchorage independent cell growth as a late stage
tumor promotion assay, we showed that low concentrations of arsenite had a growth
promoting effect, which was enhanced by moderate heat shock. Our study provides
evidence that induction of the heat shock response is a sensitive biomarker of
arsenic exposure and that induction of HSPs likely contributes to the tumor
promotion effect of arsenic.

PMID: 16447264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):C1625-32. Epub 2006 Jan 25.

Glutamine's protection against cellular injury is dependent on heat shock
factor-1.

Morrison AL(1), Dinges M, Singleton KD, Odoms K, Wong HR, Wischmeyer PE.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Dept. of Anesthesiology, 4200 E. 9th
Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Glutamine (GLN) has been shown to protect cells, tissues, and whole organisms
from stress and injury. Enhanced expression of heat shock protein (HSP) has been 
hypothesized to be responsible for this protection. To date, there are no clear
mechanistic data confirming this relationship. This study tested the hypothesis
that GLN-mediated activation of the HSP pathway via heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1)
is responsible for cellular protection. Wild-type HSF-1 (HSF-1(+/+)) and knockout
(HSF-1(-/-)) mouse fibroblasts were used in all experiments. Cells were treated
with GLN concentrations ranging from 0 to 16 mM and exposed to heat stress injury
in a concurrent treatment model. Cell viability was assayed with phenazine
methosulfate plus tetrazolium salt, HSP-70, HSP-25, and nuclear HSF-1 expression 
via Western blot analysis, and HSF-1/heat shock element (HSE) binding via EMSA.
GLN significantly attenuated heat-stress induced cell death in HSF-1(+/+) cells
in a dose-dependent manner; however, the survival benefit of GLN was lost in
HSF-1(-/-) cells. GLN led to a dose-dependent increase in HSP-70 and HSP-25
expression after heat stress. No inducible HSP expression was observed in
HSF-1(-/-) cells. GLN increased unphosphorylated HSF-1 in the nucleus before heat
stress. This was accompanied by a GLN-mediated increase in HSF-1/HSE binding and 
nuclear content of phosphorylated HSF-1 after heat stress. This is the first
demonstration that GLN-mediated cellular protection after heat-stress injury is
related to HSF-1 expression and cellular capacity to activate an HSP response.
Furthermore, the mechanism of GLN-mediated protection against injury appears to
involve an increase in nuclear HSF-1 content before stress and increased HSF-1
promoter binding and phosphorylation.

PMID: 16436470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(3):955-64.

Inhibition of DNA binding by differential sumoylation of heat shock factors.

Anckar J(1), Hietakangas V, Denessiouk K, Thiele DJ, Johnson MS, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, P.O. Box 123, FI-20521 Turku, Finland.

Covalent modification of proteins by the small ubiquitin-related modifier SUMO
regulates diverse biological functions. Sumoylation usually requires a consensus 
tetrapeptide, through which the binding of the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 to
the target protein is directed. However, additional specificity determinants are 
in many cases required. To gain insights into SUMO substrate selection, we have
utilized the differential sumoylation of highly similar loop structures within
the DNA-binding domains of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and HSF2.
Site-specific mutagenesis in combination with molecular modeling revealed that
the sumoylation specificity is determined by several amino acids near the
consensus site, which are likely to present the SUMO consensus motif to Ubc9.
Importantly, we also demonstrate that sumoylation of the HSF2 loop impedes HSF2
DNA-binding activity, without affecting its oligomerization. Hence, SUMO
modification of the HSF2 loop contributes to HSF-specific regulation of DNA
binding and broadens the concept of sumoylation in the negative regulation of
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1347039
PMID: 16428449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Appl Genet. 2006;47(1):59-61.

A new SNP in the promoter region of the porcine MYF5 gene has no effect on its
transcript level in m. longissimus dorsi.

Urbanski P(1), Flisikowski K, Starzynski RR, Kuryl J, Kamyczek M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, Postepu 1, 05-552 Wolka Kosowska, Poland. saba57@poczta.onet.pl

Myogenic factor 5 (myf-5) is the product of the MYF5 gene, belonging to the MyoD 
family. This transcription factor participates in the control of myogenesis. We
identified 3 new mutations in the promoter region of the gene: A65C, C580T and
C613T. The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of the A65C
transversion on gene expression. The analysis was conducted on 15 Polish Large
White gilts. The relative content of MYF5 mRNA in m. longissimus dorsi did not
differ significantly across MYF5 genotypes (AA, AC, CC). This result suggests
that the A65C transversion may not play an important role in the expression of
the MYF5 gene in analysed adult muscle but it abolishes a putative binding site
for two transcription factors (CDP and HSF1) and creates such a site for Sp1.

PMID: 16424610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Radiat Res. 2006 Jan;165(1):95-104.

Increased levels of inducible HSP70 in cells exposed to electromagnetic fields.

Alfieri RR(1), Bonelli MA, Pedrazzi G, Desenzani S, Ghillani M, Fumarola C,
Ghibelli L, Borghetti AF, Petronini PG.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Patologia Molecolare ed Immunologia, Dipartimento di Medicina
Sperimentale, Università degli Studi di Parma, Parma 43100, Italy.
roberta.alfieri@unipr.it

Because reports in the literature on the effects of electromagnetic fields (EMFs)
on expression of the 70-kDa heat-shock protein (HSP70) are somewhat
contradictory, we studied the influence of low-frequency EMFs on the accumulation
of inducible HSP70 in several cell models. Some of the cell types tested showed
increased levels of HSP70 protein when exposed for 24 h to 50 Hz, 680 microT
EMFs. In endothelial cells, EMFs alone induced only a poor and transient
activation of the heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1); however, neither the 
level of HSP70 mRNA nor the synthesis of HSP70 appeared to be altered
significantly. Accordingly, transfection experiments involving HSP70 promoter
showed that gene transcription was not affected. We also noted a marked reduction
in proteasome activities in cell extracts exposed to EMFs. Interestingly, the
heat-shock-induced levels of HSP70 mRNA and protein were increased by a
concomitant weak stressor like EMFs. Taken together, our results indicate that in
EMF-exposed endothelial cells, HSP70 gene transcription and translation are
unaffected; however, EMFs alone promoted accumulation of the inducible HSP70
protein, probably by increasing its stability, and it enhanced accumulation and
translation of the heat-induced HSP70 mRNA when applied in concert with heat
shock.

PMID: 16392967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Biosci. 2005 Dec;30(5):657-67.

Expression profiles of hot pepper (Capsicum annum) genes under cold stress
conditions.

Hwang EW(1), Kim KA, Park SC, Jeong MJ, Byun MO, Kwon HB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Biological Sciences, Sunmoon University, Asan 336-708,
Korea.

In an attempt to determine a cold defense mechanism in plants, we have attempted 
to characterize changes occurring in the expression of cold-regulated transcript 
levels in the hot pepper (Capsicum annum), using cDNA microarray analysis,
combined with Northern blot analysis. After analysing a 3.1 K hot pepper cDNA
microarray, we isolated a total of 317 cold inducible genes. We selected 42 genes
which were up-regulated and three genes which were down-regulated due to cold
treatment, for further analysis. Among the 45 genes which appeared to be
up-regulated by cold, 19 genes appeared to be simultaneously regulated by salt
stress. Among the up-regulated cold-stress genes, we identified a variety of
transcription factors, including: a family of 4 ethylene-responsive element
binding protein (EREBP, designated CaEREBP-C1 to C4) genes, a bZIP protein
(CaBZ1), RVA1, Ring domain protein, HSF1, and the WRKY (CaWRKY1) protein. As
mentioned earlier, several genes appeared to be induced not only by cold stress, 
but also simultaneously by salt stress. These genes included: CaEREBP-C3, CaBZ1, 
putative trans-activator factor, NtPRp27, malate dehydrogenase, putative
auxin-repressed protein, protein phosphatase (CaTPP1), SAR8.2 protein precursor, 
late-embryogenesis abundant protein 5 (LEA5), DNAJ protein homologue,
xyloglucanendo-1,4-beta-D-gucanase precursor, PR10, and the putative non-specific
lipid transfer protein StnsLTP.

PMID: 16388140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(2):580-91.

Heat shock-independent induction of multidrug resistance by heat shock factor 1.

Tchénio T(1), Havard M, Martinez LA, Dautry F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire et Intégrations des Fonctions Cellulaires,
CNRS-UPR1983, 7 rue Guy Moquet, BP8, 94801 Villejuif Cedex, France.
tchenio@infobiogen.fr

The screening of two different retroviral cDNA expression libraries to select
genes that confer constitutive doxorubicin resistance has in both cases resulted 
in the isolation of the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) transcription factor. We show 
that HSF1 induces a multidrug resistance phenotype that occurs in the absence of 
heat shock or cellular stress and is mediated at least in part through the
constitutive activation of the multidrug resistance gene 1 (MDR-1). This drug
resistance phenotype does not correlate with an increased expression of heat
shock-responsive genes (heat shock protein genes, or HSPs). In addition, HSF1
mutants lacking HSP gene activation are also capable of conferring multidrug
resistance, and only hypophosphorylated HSF1 complexes accumulate in transduced
cells. Our results indicate that HSF1 can activate MDR-1 expression in a
stress-independent manner that differs from the canonical heat shock-activated
mechanism involved in HSP induction. We further provide evidence that the
induction of MDR-1 expression occurs at a posttranscriptional level, revealing a 
novel undocumented role for hypophosphorylated HSF1 in posttranscriptional gene
regulation.

PMCID: PMC1346900
PMID: 16382149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Brain Res. 2006 Jan 12;1068(1):34-48. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Stress-induced heat shock protein 27 expression and its role in dorsal root
ganglion neuronal survival.

Dodge ME(1), Wang J, Guy C, Rankin S, Rahimtula M, Mearow KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University
of Newfoundland, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada A1B 3V6.

Heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27), a molecular chaperone ubiquitously expressed in
many cell types, has been shown to play a role in protecting neurons from
cellular stresses. Unlike adult DRG neurons in vitro, neonatal DRG neurons
require NGF for survival; withdrawal of NGF results in apoptosis of a majority of
neonatal neurons. We hypothesized that Hsp27 contributes to the
neurotrophin-independent survival of adult DRG neurons. Constitutive Hsp27
expression is higher in adult DRG neurons compared to neonates, although both
upregulate Hsp27 expression after heat shock (HS). We found that increasing
endogenous Hsp27 by HS in neonatal neurons was able to inhibit NGF
withdrawal-induced apoptosis. Heat shock of adult and neonatal neurons also
resulted in Akt activation, which could be a mechanism for the increased
survival. Hsp27 siRNA treatment of adult neurons effected a decreased expression 
of Hsp27, which correlated with increased apoptosis in these neurons.
Downregulation of Hsp27 via siRNA also blocked the HS-induced rescue of neonatal 
neurons after NGF withdrawal. These results indicate that physiologically induced
upregulation of Hsp27 is sufficient to provide some degree of neuronal
protection. Further, this induction appears to be regulated by the
transcriptional activation of HSF1 as shown by HSF1 nuclear translocation and by 
EMSA analyses of HSF1 binding to nuclear protein.

PMID: 16376863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 3;103(1):45-50. Epub 2005 Dec 21.

PDSM, a motif for phosphorylation-dependent SUMO modification.

Hietakangas V(1), Anckar J, Blomster HA, Fujimoto M, Palvimo JJ, Nakai A,
Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, FI-20521, Turku, Finland.

SUMO (small ubiquitin-like modifier) modification regulates many cellular
processes, including transcription. Although sumoylation often occurs on specific
lysines within the consensus tetrapeptide PsiKxE, other modifications, such as
phosphorylation, may regulate the sumoylation of a substrate. We have discovered 
PDSM (phosphorylation-dependent sumoylation motif), composed of a SUMO consensus 
site and an adjacent proline-directed phosphorylation site (PsiKxExxSP). The
highly conserved motif regulates phosphorylation-dependent sumoylation of
multiple substrates, such as heat-shock factors (HSFs), GATA-1, and myocyte
enhancer factor 2. In fact, the majority of the PDSM-containing proteins are
transcriptional regulators. Within the HSF family, PDSM is conserved between two 
functionally distinct members, HSF1 and HSF4b, whose transactivation capacities
are repressed through the phosphorylation-dependent sumoylation. As the first
recurrent sumoylation determinant beyond the consensus tetrapeptide, the PDSM
provides a valuable tool in predicting new SUMO substrates.

PMCID: PMC1324973
PMID: 16371476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 17;281(7):3936-42. Epub 2005 Dec 17.

Mutated yeast heat shock transcription factor activates transcription
independently of hyperphosphorylation.

Hashikawa N(1), Mizukami Y, Imazu H, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa
University, Ishikawa, Japan.

The homotrimeric heat shock transcription factor (HSF) binds to the heat shock
element of target genes and regulates transcription in response to various
stresses. The Hsf1 protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is extensively
phosphorylated upon heat shock; a modification that is under positive regulation 
by its C-terminal regulatory domain (CTM). Hyperphosphorylation has been
implicated in gene-specific transcriptional activation. Here, we surveyed genes
whose heat shock response is reduced by a CTM mutation. The CTM is indispensable 
for transcription via heat shock elements bound by a single Hsf1 trimer but is
dispensable for transcription via heat shock elements bound by Hsf1 trimers in a 
cooperative manner. Intragenic mutations located within or near the wing region
of the winged helix-turn-helix DNA-binding domain suppress the
temperature-sensitive growth phenotype associated with the CTM mutation and
enable Hsf1 to activate transcription independently of hyperphosphorylation.
Deletion of the wing partially restores the transcriptional defects of the
unphosphorylated Hsf1. These results demonstrate a functional link between
hyperphosphorylation and the wing region and suggest that this modification is
involved in a conformational change of a single Hsf1 trimer to an active form.

PMID: 16361698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Biochem J. 2006 Apr 1;395(1):223-31.

Up-regulation of the clusterin gene after proteotoxic stress: implication of
HSF1-HSF2 heterocomplexes.

Loison F(1), Debure L, Nizard P, le Goff P, Michel D, le Dréan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Information et Programmation Cellulaire, UMR CNRS 6026, Interactions
Cellulaires et Moléculaires, IFR 140 - Génétique Fonctionnelle Agronomie et
Santé, Université de Rennes 1, France.

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2006 Apr 1;395(1):e5-6.

Clusterin is a secreted protein chaperone up-regulated in several pathologies,
including cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. The present study shows that
accumulation of aberrant proteins, caused by the proteasome inhibitor MG132 or
the incorporation of the amino acid analogue AZC (L-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid),
increased both clusterin protein and mRNA levels in the human glial cell line
U-251 MG. Consistently, MG132 treatment was capable of stimulating a 1.3 kb
clusterin gene promoter. Promoter deletion and mutation studies revealed a
critical MG132-responsive region between -218 and -106 bp, which contains a
particular heat-shock element, named CLE for 'clusterin element'. Gel
mobility-shift assays demonstrated that MG132 and AZC treatments induced the
formation of a protein complex that bound to CLE. As shown by supershift and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation experiments, CLE is bound by HSF1 (heat-shock
factor 1) and HSF2 upon proteasome inhibition. Furthermore,
co-immunoprecipitation assays indicated that these two transcription factors
interact. Gel-filtration analyses revealed that the HSF1-HSF2 heterocomplexes
bound to CLE after proteasome inhibition have the same apparent mass as HSF1
homotrimers after heat shock, suggesting that HSF1 and HSF2 could
heterotrimerize. Therefore these studies indicate that the clusterin is a good
candidate to be part of a cellular defence mechanism against neurodegenerative
diseases associated with misfolded protein accumulation or decrease in proteasome
activity.

PMCID: PMC1409688
PMID: 16336210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Planta. 2006 Jun;224(1):42-52. Epub 2005 Dec 6.

The maize heat shock factor-binding protein paralogs EMP2 and HSBP2 interact
non-redundantly with specific heat shock factors.

Fu S(1), Rogowsky P, Nover L, Scanlon MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Department, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

The heat shock response (HSR) is a conserved mechanism by which transcripts of
heat shock protein (hsp) genes accumulate following mobilization of heat shock
transcription factors (HSFs) in response to thermal stress. Studies in animals
identified the heat shock factor-binding protein1 (HSBP1) that interacts with
heat shock transcription factor1 (HSF1) during heat shock attenuation;
overexpression analyses revealed that the coiled-coil protein HSBP1 functions as 
a negative regulator of the HSR. Zea mays contains two HSBP paralogs, EMP2 and
HSBP2, which exhibit differential accumulation during the HSR and plant
development. Embryo-lethal recessive emp2 mutations revealed that EMP2 is
required for the down-regulation of hsp transcription during embryogenesis,
whereas accumulation of HSBP2 is induced in seedlings following heat shock.
Notwithstanding, no interaction has yet been demonstrated between a plant HSBP
and a plant HSF. In this report 22 maize HSF isoforms are identified comprising
three structural classes: HSF-A, HSF-B and HSF-C. Phylogenetic analysis of
Arabidopsis, maize and rice HSFs reveals that at least nine ancestral HSF
isoforms were present prior to the separation of monocot and eudicots, followed
by differential amplification of HSF members in these lineages. Yeast two-hybrid 
analyses show that EMP2 and HSBP2 interact non-redundantly with specific HSF-A
isoforms. Site-specific mutagenesis of HSBP2 reveals that interactions between
hydrophobic residues within the coiled coil are required for HSF::HSBP2 binding; 
domain swapping demonstrate that the isoform specificity of HSF::HSBP interaction
is conferred by residues outside of the coiled coil. These data suggest that the 
non-redundant functions of the maize HSBPs may be explained, at least in part, by
the specificity of HSBP::HSF interactions during plant development.

PMID: 16331466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4931-7. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Maintenance of olfactory neurogenesis requires HSF1, a major heat shock
transcription factor in mice.

Takaki E(1), Fujimoto M, Sugahara K, Nakahari T, Yonemura S, Tanaka Y, Hayashida 
N, Inouye S, Takemoto T, Yamashita H, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) play roles not only in heat shock
response but also in development of the reproductive organs, brain, and lens.
Here, we analyzed sensory organs and found abnormalities of the olfactory
epithelium in adult HSF1-null mice, which is developmentally related to the lens.
The olfactory epithelium was normal until postnatal 3 weeks but was not
maintained later than 4 weeks in HSF1-null mice. The olfactory epithelium was
atrophied with increased cell death of olfactory sensory neurons. Analysis of the
epithelium revealed that induction of HSP expression and reduction of LIF
expression are lacking in adult HSF1-null mice. We found that DNA binding
activity of HSF1 is induced in the olfactory epithelium later than 4 weeks and
that HSF1 binds directly to Lif gene and inhibits its expression. HSF4 has
opposing effects on LIF expression and olfactory neurogenesis. These data
indicate that HSF1 is required for the precise expression of Hsp and cytokine
genes that is obligatory for maintenance of olfactory neurogenesis in adult mice 
and suggest that stress-related processes are involved in its maintenance.

PMID: 16306048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 27;23(21):4297-306. Epub 2004 Oct 14.

HSF4 is required for normal cell growth and differentiation during mouse lens
development.

Fujimoto M(1), Izu H, Seki K, Fukuda K, Nishida T, Yamada S, Kato K, Yonemura S, 
Inouye S, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) family consists of three members in
mammals and regulates expression of heat shock genes via a heat shock element.
HSF1 and HSF2 are required for some developmental processes, but it is unclear
how they regulate these processes. To elucidate the mechanisms of developmental
regulation by HSFs, we generated mice in which the HSF4 gene is mutated.
HSF4-null mice had cataract with abnormal lens fiber cells containing
inclusion-like structures, probably due to decreased expression of
gamma-crystallin, which maintains protein stability. Furthermore, we found
increased proliferation and premature differentiation of the mutant lens
epithelial cells, which is associated with increased expression of growth
factors, FGF-1, FGF-4, and FGF-7. Unexpectedly, HSF1 competed with HSF4 for the
expression of FGFs not only in the lens but also in other tissues. These findings
reveal the lens-specific role of HSF4, which activates gamma-crystallin genes,
and also indicate that HSF1 and HSF4 are involved in regulating expression of
growth factor genes, which are essential for cell growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC524399
PMID: 15483628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2004 Sep;33(5):390-4.

[Induction of HSF1 expression and sporadic colorectal cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang YM(1), Dong Q, Cen H, Tang XP, Zheng S.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310009, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the activation of the signal transduction pathways related 
with the carcinogenesis of sporadic colon cancers.
METHODS: A gene microarray monitoring activation of 8 signal transduction
pathways (PathwayFinder GEArray) was used to screen the differentially expressed 
genes between colorectal cancer and normal colon tissue. The differentially
expressed genes were further analyzed by RT-PCR, using RNA extracted from cancer 
tissue and matched normal colon mucosa of 35 patients with colorectal cancer.
RESULTS: The expression of hsf1, hsf27 and inos was increased in colon cancer
compared with normal colon mucosa using PathwayFinder GEArray. The RT-PCR results
showed that the expression of hsf1 was detected in 86% of patients(30/35)and the 
expression of inos detected in 63% patients(22/35).
CONCLUSION: Hsf1 induces heat shock stress signaling pathway, which might play a 
role in the carcinogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer.

PMID: 15476319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. World J Gastroenterol. 2004 Nov 1;10(21):3122-6.

Induction of HSF1 expression is associated with sporadic colorectal cancer.

Cen H(1), Zheng S, Fang YM, Tang XP, Dong Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Zhejiang
University, Hanzhou 310009, Zhejiang Province, China.

AIM: To explore the activation of signal transduction pathways related with the
carcinogenesis of sporadic colon cancers.
METHODS: A gene array monitoring the activation of 8 signal transduction pathways
(PathwayFinder GEArray) was used to screen the differentially expressed genes
between colorectal cancer and normal colon tissues. The differentially expressed 
genes were further analyzed by RT-PCR, using RNA derived from colorectal cancer
and normal colon tissue of 35 patients.
RESULTS: The expression of HSF1, HSF27, HSP90 and iNOS was increased in colon
cancer tissues compared to normal colon tissue using PathwayFinder GEArray. The
RT-PCR results showed that the expression of HSF1 was increased in 86% (30/35)
patients and the expression of iNOS was increased in 63% (22/35) patients.
CONCLUSION: The induction of HSF1 gene expression is associated with sporadic
colon cancer. HSF1 induces heat shock stress signaling pathway, which might play 
a role in the carcinogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4611254
PMID: 15457556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Free Radic Res. 2004 Jul;38(7):675-82.

alpha-lipoic acid inhibits endotoxin-stimulated expression of iNOS and nitric
oxide independent of the heat shock response in RAW 264.7 cells.

Demarco VG(1), Scumpia PO, Bosanquet JP, Skimming JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

The heat shock response protects against sepsis-induced mortality, organ injury, 
cardiovascular dysfunction, and apoptosis. Several inducers of the heat shock
response, such as hyperthermia, sodium arsenite, and pyrollidine dithiocarbonate,
inhibit NF-kappaB activation and nitric oxide formation. The antioxidant lipoic
acid (LA) has recently been found to inhibit NF-kappaB activation and nitric
oxide formation. We therefore tested the hypothesis that LA induces a heat shock 
response. To test this hypothesis, we determined whether exposure to LA affects
expression of both heat shock protein 70 (HSP-70) and nuclear heat shock factor-1
(HSF-1) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulated macrophages. LA and hyperthermia
attenuated LPS-induced increases in nuclear NF-kappaB, iNOS protein, and media
nitrite concentrations. LPS and hyperthermia increased HSP-70 concentrations
8-fold and 20-fold, respectively. No effect of LA treatment alone on HSP-70
protein expression was detected. Likewise, no effect of LA on HSF-1 protein
expression was detected. These data suggest that LA inhibits LPS-induced
activation of iNOS in macrophages independent of the heat shock response.

PMID: 15453632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Physiol Biochem Zool. 2004 Jul-Aug;77(4):570-81.

Magnitude and duration of thermal stress determine kinetics of hsp gene
regulation in the goby Gillichthys mirabilis.

Buckley BA(1), Hofmann GE.

Author information: 
(1)Hopkins Marine Station of Stanford University, Pacific Grove, CA 93950, USA.
brad.buckley@stanford.edu

The stress-induced transcription of heat shock genes is controlled by heat shock 
transcription factor 1 (HSF1), which becomes activated in response to heat and
other protein denaturants. In previous research on the eurythermal goby
Gillichthys mirabilis, thermal activation of HSF1 was shown to vary as a function
of acclimation temperature, suggesting the mechanistic importance of HSF1
activation to the plasticity of heat shock protein (Hsp) induction temperature.
We examined the effect of season on the thermal activation of HSF1 in G.
mirabilis, as well as the relative kinetics of HSF1 activation and Hsp70 mRNA
production at ecologically relevant temperatures. There was no predictable
seasonality in the thermal activation of HSF1, perhaps due to the existence of
stressors, in addition to heat, acting in the field. Concentrations of Hsp70, a
negative regulator of HSF1, as well as those of HSF1, varied with collection
date. The rapidity of HSF1 activation and of Hsp70 mRNA synthesis increased with 
laboratory exposure temperature. Furthermore, Hsp70 mRNA production was more
sustained at 35 degrees C than at 30 degrees C. Therefore, both the magnitude and
the duration of a heat shock are important in determining the intensity of heat
shock gene induction.

PMID: 15449228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2004 Oct;37(4):847-55.

Regulation of myocardial heat shock protein 70 gene expression following
exercise.

Melling CW(1), Thorp DB, Noble EG.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Western Ontario, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of
Kinesiology, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7.

Post-exercise induction of myocardial heat shock protein (Hsp70) gene expression 
involves the activation of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF1). While the 
exact mechanisms governing the regulation of HSF1 are unclear, activation is
believed to occur subsequent to hyperphosphorylation of specific serine residues.
As two important serine kinases, protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C
(PKC), have been implicated in many phosphorylative events in myocardial cells,
we examined the role of these kinases in the activation of Hsp70 gene expression 
following exercise. In this report, we show that prior administration of a PKA
inhibitor, N-[2-(p-bromocinnamylamino)ethyl]-5-isoquinolinesulfonamide ?2HCl
(H-89; 0.36 mg/kg), significantly suppressed the elevation in Hsp70 mRNA (P <
0.05) and protein synthesis (P < 0.05) in male Sprague-Dawley rats following a
single bout of exercise. In contrast, this post-exercise elevation in Hsp70 mRNA 
and protein synthesis was not suppressed following the administration of a PKC
inhibitor chelerythrine chloride (CHEL; 5 mg/kg) (P < 0.05). Of note, inhibition 
of PKA did not alter the nuclear localization and binding affinity of HSF1 to the
promotor region of the Hsp70 gene. These data indicate that PKA, and not PKC,
plays a necessary role in the early exercise-induced regulation of Hsp70 gene
expression, downstream of DNA-binding acquisition. However, the current study
does not support previous observations regarding major changes in HSF1
phosphorylation and suggests that other PKA-related mechanisms mediate the
activation of Hsp70 gene expression following exercise.

PMID: 15380675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Exp Biol. 2004 Oct;207(Pt 21):3649-56.

Regulation of heat shock genes in isolated hepatocytes from an Antarctic fish,
Trematomus bernacchii.

Buckley BA(1), Place SP, Hofmann GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Marine Biology, University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9610, USA.

The Antarctic fishes, isolated over evolutionary history in the sub-zero waters
of the Southern Ocean, are an ideal group for studying the processes of cold
adaptation. One species of Antarctic notothenioid fish, Trematomus bernacchii,
has lost the ability to induce heat shock proteins (Hsps) in response to exposure
to acute thermal stress or to the toxic heavy metal cadmium, an important part of
the cellular defense response to such stressors. To elucidate the mechanism
responsible for the lack of Hsp induction, we examined several stages of the hsp 
gene expression pathway, including transcription factor activity, Hsp70 mRNA
production and protein synthesis patterns, in hepatocytes from T. bernacchii.
Hsp70 mRNA was detected, as was heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) with DNA-binding
activity. However, exposure to elevated temperature and to chemical inducers of
the heat shock response failed to increase Hsp70 mRNA levels, HSF1 activity or
the concentration of any size class of Hsps. These results suggest that Hsps,
inducible in nearly every other species, are expressed constitutively in the
cold-adapted T. bernacchii.

PMID: 15371473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 19;279(47):49460-9. Epub 2004 Sep 10.

Interactions between extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1,
14-3-3epsilon, and heat shock factor 1 during stress.

Wang X(1), Grammatikakis N, Siganou A, Stevenson MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of Molecular and Cellular Radiation 
Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Cytoprotection during the heat shock response is a complex phenomenon involving
multiple inducible mechanisms. We have examined the interaction of two key
molecular components in the response, heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1)
and extracellular signal regulated protein kinase (ERK). Whereas both HSF1 and
ERK are required to protect cells against apoptosis, ERK activation is
paradoxically antagonistic to trans-activation of hsp promoters by HSF1 and HSP
accumulation during heat shock. We have found that the two pathways interact
directly and that heat shock causes the physical association of ERK1 with HSF1,
an interaction that promotes the kinase activity of ERK in heat-shocked cells.
ERK activation results in the recruitment of the phosphoserine binding protein
14-3-3epsilon in a manner dependent on previous HSF1 phosphorylation by ERK. The 
effects of 14-3-3epsilon binding on HSF1 were complex, however, depending on
extracellular conditions, in that HSF1-14-3-3 binding at 37 degrees C led to the 
cytoplasmic sequestration and repression of HSF1, whereas heat shock overrode
these effects and caused quantitative nuclear localization of HSF1. Although the 
effects of 14-3-3epsilon binding to HSF1 were overridden acutely by stress,
during recovery from heat shock, 14-3-3epsilon association again led to enhanced 
cytoplasmic localization of HSF1, implicating a role for ERK/14-3-3epsilon in
HSF1 deactivation in recovering cells. Association of HSF1 with ERK and
14-3-3epsilon during heat shock may thus modulate the amplitude of the response
and lead to efficient termination of HSP expression on resumption of growth
conditions.

PMID: 15364926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 27;321(3):736-45.

HSF1 blockade-induced tumor thermotolerance abolishment is mediated by
JNK-dependent caspase-3 activation.

Wang JH(1), Yao MZ, Zhang ZL, Zhang YH, Wang YG, Liu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, PR China.
jinhuiwang66@hotmail.com

We previously blocked the heat shock transcription factor 1 function with a
dominant-negative mutant (mHSF1) in breast cancer cell line Bcap37, and found
that mHSF1 sensitizes Bcap37 cells to hyperthermia by promoting the apoptotic
process. Here we studied the mechanism of this abolishing process and how
thermotolerance develops in Bcap37 cells. The results indicated that mHSF1
abolished acquired or intrinsic thermotolerance in Bcap37 cells by enhancing JNK 
and caspase-3 pathways, two stress-induced apoptotic pathways, after
hyperthermia, and interference with either one of them attenuated
hyperthermia-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, epistasis assay of these two
pathways suggested that JNK was upstream of the caspase-3 pathway. Conversely,
other hyperthermia-induced kinases implicated in cell survival and death, Akt,
ERK or p38, did not influence the effect of mHSF1, indicating that these kinases 
were not implicated in this abolishing process. In addition, we found that the
development of acquired thermotolerance of Bcap37 cells was associated with the
suppression of JNK activation after mild preheat treatment and was not reduced by
Akt, ERK or p38 inhibition. In contrast, the intrinsic thermotolerance of Bcap37 
cells was due to the intrinsic high levels of Akt and ERK activities since Akt or
ERK inhibition resulted in increased thermosensitivity of Bcap37 cells. Our
results suggest that mHSF1 plays a valuable role in the thermotolerance
abolishment of Bcap37 cells, which likely contributes to tumor therapy in
combination with hyperthermia.

PMID: 15358168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Cell Sci. 2004 Sep 1;117(Pt 19):4551-8.

A key role for stress-induced satellite III transcripts in the relocalization of 
splicing factors into nuclear stress granules.

Metz A(1), Soret J, Vourc'h C, Tazi J, Jolly C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U309, Institut Albert Bonniot, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La Tronche
CEDEX, France.

Exposure of cells to stressful conditions results in the rapid synthesis of a
subset of specialized proteins termed heat shock proteins (HSPs) which function
in protecting the cell against damage. The stress-induced activation of hsp genes
is controlled by the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). At the cellular
level, one of the most striking effects of stress is the rapid and reversible
redistribution of HSF1 into a few nuclear structures termed nuclear stress
granules which form primarily on the 9q12 locus in humans. Within these
structures, HSF1 binds to satellite III repeated elements and drives the RNA
polymerase II-dependent transcription of these sequences into stable RNAs which
remain associated with the 9q12 locus for a certain time after synthesis. Other
proteins, in particular splicing factors, were also shown to relocalize to the
granules upon stress. Here, we investigated the role of stress-induced satellite 
III transcripts in the relocalization of splicing factors to the granules. We
show that the recruitment of the two serine/arginine-rich (SR) proteins SF2/ASF
and SRp30c requires the presence of stress-induced satellite III transcripts. In 
agreement with these findings, we identified the second RNA-recognition motif
(RRM2) of hSF2/ASF as the motif required for the targeting to the granules, and
we showed by immunoprecipitation that the endogenous hSF2/ASF protein is present 
in a complex with satellite III transcripts in stressed cells in vivo.
Interestingly, satellite III transcripts also immunoprecipitate together with
small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) in vivo whereas the intronless hsp70
transcripts do not, supporting the proposal that these transcripts are subject to
splicing. Altogether, these data highlight the central role for satellite III
transcripts in the targeting and/or retention of splicing factors into the
granules upon stress.

PMID: 15331664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cell. 2004 Aug 27;15(4):585-94.

Distinct stimulus-specific histone modifications at hsp70 chromatin targeted by
the transcription factor heat shock factor-1.

Thomson S(1), Hollis A, Hazzalin CA, Mahadevan LC.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Signalling Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QU, United Kingdom.

A question of major current interest is whether histone modification at a given
gene correlates simply with transcriptional status or if distinctive
modifications appear depending on how that gene is activated. The
stress-inducible gene Hsp70 is activated by heat shock or by sodium arsenite.
Heat shock produces acetylation of histone H4 at Hsp70 chromatin, whereas
arsenite produces both H4 acetylation and H3 phosphorylation at the gene. Histone
H3 remains markedly hypoacetylated at Hsp70 under these conditions. Arsenite, but
not heat shock, requires signaling via p38 MAP kinase for Hsp70 induction and
histone H3 phosphorylation. However, independently of p38 MAP kinase, both
stresses strongly activate the transcription factor Hsf1. Using Hsf1-/- cells, we
show that this factor is responsible for targeting histone H4 acetylation to
Hsp70 chromatin. We establish here that histone modifications at inducible genes 
are not simply a reflection of transcriptional activity, but are strictly
dependent on the stimulus used for induction.

PMID: 15327774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):44497-503. Epub 2004 Aug 12.

Developmentally dictated expression of heat shock factors: exclusive expression
of HSF4 in the postnatal lens and its specific interaction with alphaB-crystallin
heat shock promoter.

Somasundaram T(1), Bhat SP.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095-7000, USA.

The molecular cascade of stress response in higher eukaryotes commences in the
cytoplasm with the trimerization of the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), followed by
its transport to the nucleus, where it binds to the heat shock element leading to
the activation of transcription from the down-stream gene(s). This
well-established paradigm has been mostly studied in cultured cells. The
developmental and tissue-specific control of the heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs) and their interactions with heat shock promoters remain unexplored. We
report here that in the rat lens, among the three mammalian HSFs, expression of
HSF1 and HSF2 is largely fetal, whereas the expression of HSF4 is predominantly
postnatal. Similar pattern of expression of HSF1 and HSF4 is seen in fetal and
adult human lenses. This stage-specific inverse relationship between the
expression of HSF1/2 and HSF4 suggests tissue-specific management of stress
depending on the presence or absence of specific HSF(s). In addition to real-time
PCR and immunoblotting, gel mobility shift assays, coupled with specific
antibodies and HSE probes, derived from three different heat shock promoters,
establish that there is no HSF1 or HSF2 binding activity in the postnatal lens
nuclear extracts. Using this unique, developmentally modulated in vivo system, we
demonstrate 1) specific patterns of HSF4 binding to heat shock elements derived
from alphaB-crystallin, Hsp70, and Hsp82 promoters and 2) that it is HSF4 and not
HSF1 or HSF2 that interacts with the canonical heat shock element of the
alphaB-crystallin gene.

PMID: 15308659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. FEBS Lett. 2004 Jul 30;571(1-3):187-91.

Feeding induces expression of heat shock proteins that reduce oxidative stress.

Katsuki K(1), Fujimoto M, Zhang XY, Izu H, Takaki E, Tanizawa Y, Inouye S, Nakai 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 775-8505, Japan.

Heat shock proteins (Hsps) are induced in response to various kinds of
environmental and physiological stresses. However, it is unclear whether Hsps
play roles in protecting cells in the digestive organs against xenobiotic
chemicals. Here, we found that feeding induces expression of a set of Hsps
specifically in the mouse liver and intestine by activating heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1). In the liver, HSF1 is required to suppress toxic
effects of electrophiles, which are xenobiotic chemicals causing oxidative
stress. We found that overexpression of Hsp27, which elevates cellular
glutathione level, promotes survival of culture cells exposed to electrophiles.
These results suggest a novel mechanism of cell protection against xenobiotic
chemicals in the food.

PMID: 15280040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2004 Mar;9(1):21-8.

Transcriptional regulation and binding of heat shock factor 1 and heat shock
factor 2 to 32 human heat shock genes during thermal stress and differentiation.

Trinklein ND(1), Chen WC, Kingston RE, Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5120, USA.

Transcription of mammalian heat shock genes can be regulated by heat shock
factors (HSF) 1 and 2. Although it has been shown previously that these factors
respond to distinct stimuli, a broad analysis of the induction and function of
these factors in living cells has not been performed. In our study, we assayed
binding of human HSF1 and HSF2 at the promoters of 32 genes identified through
LocusLink as heat shock genes in response to elevated temperature and
hemin-induced differentiation in human K562 erythroleukemic cells using the
chromatin immunoprecipitation technique. We also measured the induced expression 
of these genes under these 2 conditions. We found that 17 of the 32 genes were
transcriptionally induced during heat shock, and HSF1 binding was detected at 15 
of the 17 promoters. Nearly all the genes induced by heat shock were also induced
to a lesser degree during hemin treatment. However, some genes were induced
significantly more during hemin treatment than during heat shock. A new finding
is that HSF1 and HSF2 bind to the same targets, but HSF1 binding is activated
more by heat than by hemin treatment, and HSF2 binding is only activated by hemin
treatment and not by heat. This technology also identified previously unknown
HSF1 binding sites near genes that were previously shown to be heat inducible
that may contribute to gene-specific regulation.

PMCID: PMC1065302
PMID: 15270074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):R1054-63. Epub 2004 Jul
8.

Differential gene expression associated with euryhalinity in sea bream (Sparus
sarba).

Deane EE(1), Woo NY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Certain fish have the remarkable capability of euryhalinity, being able to
withstand large variations in salinity for indefinite periods. Using the highly
euryhaline species, silver sea bream (Sparus sarba), as an experimental model,
some of the molecular processes involved during ion regulation (Na+-K+-ATPase),
cytoprotection [heat shock protein (hsp) 70], and growth (somatotropic axis) were
studied. To perform these studies, seven key genes involved in these processes
were cloned, and the tissue-specific expression profiles in fish adapted to
salinities of 6 parts per thousand (ppt; hypoosmotic), 12 ppt (isoosmotic), 33
ppt (seawater), and 50 ppt (hypersaline) were studied. In gills, the
transcriptional and translational expression profiles of Na+-K+-ATPase alpha- and
beta-subunit genes were lowest in isoosmotic-adapted fish, whereas in kidneys the
expression of the beta-subunit increased in seawater- and hypersaline-adapted
groups. The hsp70 multigene family, comprising genes coding for heat shock
cognate (hsc70), inducible heat shock protein (hsp70), and a heat shock
transcription factor (hsf1), was found to be highly upregulated in gills of
seawater- and hypersaline-adapted fish. In liver, hsc70 expression was lowest in 
isoosmotic groups, and in kidneys the hsp70 multigene family remained unchanged
over the salinity range tested. The regulation of the somatotropic axis was
studied by measuring pituitary growth hormone expression and liver IGF-I
expression in salinity-adapted fish. The expression amounts of both genes
involved in the somatotropic axis were highest in fish maintained at an
isoosmotic salinity. The results of this study provide new information on key
molecular processes involved in euryhalinity of fish.

Copyright 2004 American Physiological Society

PMID: 15242828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mol Immunol. 2004 Jul;41(8):785-92.

Heat shock-induced dendritic cell maturation is coupled by transient aggregation 
of ubiquitinated proteins independently of heat shock factor 1 or inducible heat 
shock protein 70.

DeFillipo AM(1), Dai J, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunotherapy of Cancer and Infectious Diseases, University of
Connecticut School of Medicine, 263 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-1601,
USA.

The transition of dendritic cells (DCs) from immature to mature states is
critical for the optimal priming of the adaptive immune response. This highly
regulated process is accompanied by structural and functional alterations of DCs,
including rapid and dramatic redistributions of MHC class I and class II
molecules to cell surfaces, nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB,and transient
appearance of dendritic cell aggresome-like induced structures (DALIS) in the
cytosol. We have previously found that DCs can be matured by a non-inflammatory
stress stimulation, i.e., heat shock. In this study, we examined if
thermomanipulation could induce DALIS formation. We found that heat shock of DCs,
but not of other cell types, led to the appearance of aggresome-like structures
that were structurally indistinguishable from DALIS induced by lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). Furthermore, the induction of DALIS in DCs by heat, but not by LPS,
correlated with the increased ability of DCs to cross-present exogenous antigens 
to MHC I. Since the canonical biochemical response to heat shock is the induction
of heat shock proteins (HSP) by heat shock factors (Hsf), we studied the
contribution of both HSP and Hsf in heat shock-mediated DALIS formation using
gene knockout mice. We demonstrated that neither inducible HSP70 nor the major
mammalian heat shock transcription factor Hsf1 was involved in the formation of
DALIS. Our results highlighted the important roles of heat shock in modulating
the function of DCs, and they further suggested that heat-mediated immune
regulation can be uncoupled from heat shock response.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15234558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cancer Res. 2004 Jul 1;64(13):4453-63.

The RET receptor is linked to stress response pathways.

Myers SM(1), Mulligan LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Queen's Cancer Research Institute,
Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

RET is a transmembrane receptor required for the development of neuroendocrine
and urogenital cell types. Activation of RET has roles in cell growth, migration,
or differentiation, yet little is known about the gene expression patterns
through which these processes are mediated. We have generated cell lines stably
expressing either the RET9 or RET51 protein isoforms and have used these to
investigate RET-mediated gene expression patterns by cDNA microarray analyses. As
seen for many oncogenes, we identified altered expression of genes associated
generally with cell-cell or cell-substrate interactions and up-regulation of
tumor-specific transcripts. We also saw increased expression of transcripts
normally associated with neural crest or other RET-expressing cell types,
suggesting these genes may lie downstream of RET activation in development. The
most striking pattern of expression was up-regulation of stress response genes.
We showed that RET expression significantly up-regulated the genes for heat shock
protein (HSP) 70 family members, HSPA1A, HSPA1B, and HSPA1L. Other members of
several HSP families and HSP70-interacting molecules that were associated with
stress response protein complexes involved in protein maturation were also
specifically up-regulated by RET, whereas those associated with the roles of
HSP70 in protein degradation were down-regulated or unaffected. The major
mechanism of stress response induction is activation of the heat shock
transcription factor HSF1. We showed that RET expression leads to increased HSF1 
activation, which correlates with increased expression of stress response genes. 
Together, our data suggest that RET may be directly responsible for expression of
stress response proteins and the initiation of stress response.

PMID: 15231654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):38701-9. Epub 2004 Jun 29.

Impaired IgG production in mice deficient for heat shock transcription factor 1.

Inouye S(1), Izu H, Takaki E, Suzuki H, Shirai M, Yokota Y, Ichikawa H, Fujimoto 
M, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Yamaguchi 
University School of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a major transactivator of heat shock proteins in
response to heat shock, and it is also involved in oogenesis, spermatogenesis,
and placental development. However, we do not know the molecular mechanisms
controlling developmental processes. In this study, we found that HSF1-null mice 
exhibited a significant decrease in the T cell-dependent B cell response. When
mice were immunized intraperitoneally with sheep red blood cells, the sheep red
blood cell-specific IgG production, especially IgG2a production, in HSF1-null
mice was about 50% lower than that in wild-type mice at 6 days after the
immunization, whereas IgM production was normal. The number of
bromodeoxyuridine-incorporated spleen cells in immunized HSF1-null mice was
one-third that in immunized wild-type mice, indicating reduced proliferation of
the spleen cells. We analyzed levels of cytokines and chemokines in spleen cells 
and in peritoneal macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide and
interferon-gamma and found that expression levels of interleukin-6 and CCL5 were 
significantly lower in HSF1-null cells than those in wild-type cells.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that the IL-6 gene is a direct target gene of HSF1. 
These results revealed a novel molecular link between HSF1 and a gene related to 
immune response and inflammation.

PMID: 15226319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2005 Jan;93(4):496-501. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

Exercise-induced oxidative stress and muscle stress protein responses in
trotters.

Kinnunen S(1), Hyyppä S, Lappalainen J, Oksala N, Venojärvi M, Nakao C, Hänninen 
O, Sen CK, Atalay M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Kuopio, P.O. Box 1627, 70211 Kuopio,
Finland.

Acute exercise induces oxidative stress and heat shock protein (HSP) expression. 
Information on the protection of stress proteins against oxidant insult and
muscle damage during moderate exercise is scanty. We aimed to show how a single
bout of moderate exercise affects the markers of oxidative stress and heat shock 
factor-1 (HSF1; the transcriptional regulator of HSP synthesis), and HSP70, HSP90
and glucose-regulated protein (GRP75) expression in horses. Eight clinically
normal and regularly trained standardbred trotters were treadmill-exercised for
45 min at moderate intensity. Blood samples were collected prior to and
immediately after exercise and at 4 and 24 h of recovery. Muscle biopsy samples
from the middle gluteal muscle were taken before exercise and after 4 h of
recovery. Acute exercise did not activate HSF1 or induce expression of HSP70,
HSP90 or GRP75 in skeletal muscle. One bout of acute exercise increased protein
oxidation, which was measured by protein carbonyls in plasma and muscle, but it
did not effect 4-hydroxynonenal protein adducts, which are markers of lipid
peroxidation. Furthermore, mild muscle damage was observed 4 h after exercise.
Our results showed that horses are susceptible to oxidative stress. One bout of
exercise at moderate intensity and duration did not induce HSP responses despite 
the increased protein oxidation and tissue inflammation in equine muscle.

PMID: 15221402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):L953-61. Epub 2004 Jun 25.

Evidence for a role of heat shock factor 1 in inhibition of NF-kappaB pathway
during heat shock response-mediated lung protection.

Wirth D(1), Bureau F, Melotte D, Christians E, Gustin P.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pharmacology, Pharmacotherapy, and Toxicology, Department of
Functional Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liege,
Belgium.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF)-1 is recognized as a central component of
the heat shock response, which protects against various harmful conditions.
However, the mechanisms underlying the protection and the role of HSF-1 in these 
mechanisms have not yet been clearly elucidated. Using HSF-1 knockout mice
(Hsf1(-/-)), we examined whether heat shock response-mediated lung protection
involved an inhibition of the proinflammatory pathway via an interaction between 
HSF-1 and NF-kappaB, in response to cadmium insult. The HSF-1-dependent
protective effect against intranasal instillation of cadmium (10 and 100
microg/mouse) was demonstrated by the higher protein content (1.2- and 1.4-fold),
macrophage (1.6- and 1.9-fold), and neutrophil (2.6- and 1.8-fold) number in
bronchoalveolar fluids, higher lung wet-to-dry weight ratio, and more severe lung
damage evaluated by histopathology in Hsf1(-/-) compared with wild-type animals. 
These responses were associated with higher granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF; 1.7-fold) but not TNF-alpha concentrations in 
bronchoalveolar fluids of Hsf1(-/-) mice compared with those of wild-type
animals, indicating that HSF-1 behaved as a repressor of specific cytokine
production in our model. To further investigate the mechanism of GM-CSF
repression, we analyzed the NF-kappaB activity and IkappaB stability. The DNA
binding NF-kappaB activity, in particular p50 homodimer activity, was higher in
Hsf1(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice after cadmium exposure. These results
provide a first line of evidence that mechanisms of lung protection depending on 
HSF-1 involve specific cytokine repression via inhibition of NF-kappaB activation
in vivo.

PMID: 15220113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Neuroscience. 2004;126(3):657-63.

Enlarged ventricles, astrogliosis and neurodegeneration in heat shock factor 1
null mouse brain.

Santos SD(1), Saraiva MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Unit, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Rua do 
Campo Alegre 8823, Porto, Portugal.

Heat shock transcription factors mediate the regulation of the organism
physiological maintenance and adaptation. We investigated the morphology and
cellular expression of selected genes in brains of transgenic mice lacking the
heat shock transcription factor 1, HSF1, the main transactivator under stress
conditions. All HSF1 null mice displayed major brain morphological alterations:
the lateral ventricles were markedly enlarged and the white matter reduced, as in
ventriculomegaly. Heterozygous mice for the HSF1 gene also had these
abnormalities albeit to a lower extent in comparison to the wild type, indicating
a gene dosage effect. Cell loss, vacuolisation, amorphous eosinophilic cytoplasm 
and pyknotic nucleus were evident in the white matter, especially in
periventricular regions. These areas also exhibited astrogliosis and
neurodegeneration. The expression of heat shock protein hsp 27 was up-regulated
whereas alpha B-crystallin was down-regulated in different areas of HSF1 null
mouse brain in comparison to control mice. These data implicate HSF1 in
maintaining the postnatal mammalian brain under non-stress conditions.

PMID: 15183515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32651-9. Epub 2004 May 19.

Expression of a dominant negative heat shock factor-1 construct inhibits
aneuploidy in prostate carcinoma cells.

Wang Y(1), Theriault JR, He H, Gong J, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Recent studies have implicated heat shock proteins (HSP) and heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in tumor progression. We have examined the role of 
HSF1 in the malignant phenotype of PC-3 prostate carcinoma cells. We have
developed a dominant negative construct of HSF1 that antagonizes transcription
from HSP promoters and results in the depletion of intracellular HSP 70. Our
studies indicate that expression of DN-HSF1 dramatically alters the DNA content
of PC-3 cells (derived from p53 null prostatic carcinoma) and inhibits aneuploidy
in these cells. This effect is due to prolonged expression of DN-HSF1, and
transient expression of the dominant negative factor from an inducible promoter
failed to cause the effect. Inhibition of aneuploidy in p53 null PC-3 cells by
DN-HSF1 expression was recapitulated by expression within the cells of wild type 
p53. Furthermore, cells expressing DN-HSF1 showed a profound inhibition in the
development of aneuploidy when exposed to chemical agents that disrupt the
mitotic spindle and prevent progression through metaphase. Inhibition of
aneuploidy in PC-3 cells expressing DN-HSF1 was associated with delayed breakdown
of cyclin B1 compared with controls, consistent with a role for wild type HSF1 in
the regulation of cyclin B1 degradation, a key step in the control of mitosis.
Our experiments therefore demonstrate that HSF1 plays a functional role in cancer
cells under nonstress conditions and influences cell cycle behavior and
progression through mitosis and promotes the development of the aneuploid state.

PMID: 15152009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2004 Sep;287(3):H1081-8. Epub 2004 Apr 29.

Radicicol activates heat shock protein expression and cardioprotection in
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes.

Griffin TM(1), Valdez TV, Mestril R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and the Cardiovascular Institute, Loyola University
Medical Center, Maywood, Illinios 60153, USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) constitute an endogenous cellular defense mechanism
against environmental stresses. In the past few years, studies have shown that
overexpression of HSPs can protect cardiac myocytes against ischemia-reperfusion 
injury. In an attempt to increase the HSPs in cardiac tissue, we used the
compound radicicol that activates HSP expression by binding to the HSP 90 kDa
(HSP90). HSP90 is the main component of the cytosolic molecular chaperone
complex, which has been implicated in the regulation of the heat shock factor 1
(HSF1). HSF1 is responsible for the transcriptional activation of the heat shock 
genes. In the present study, we show that radicicol induces HSP expression in
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, and this increase in HSPs confers cardioprotection
to these cardiomyocytes. We also show that radicicol induction of the HSP and
cardioprotection is dependent on the inhibition of HSP90 in cardiomyocytes. These
results indicate that modulation of the active HSP90 protein level plays an
important role in cardioprotection. Therefore, compounds, such as radicicol and
its possible derivatives that inhibit the function of HSP90 in the cell may
represent potentially useful cardioprotective agents.

PMID: 15117720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(9):3648-59.

Phosphorylation of the yeast heat shock transcription factor is implicated in
gene-specific activation dependent on the architecture of the heat shock element.

Hashikawa N(1), Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) binds to the heat shock element (HSE) and
regulates transcription, where the divergence of HSE architecture provides gene- 
and stress-specific responses. The phosphorylation state of HSF, regulated by
stress, is involved in the activation and inactivation of the transcription
activation function. A domain designated as CTM (C-terminal modulator) of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae HSF is required for the activation of genes containing
atypical HSE but not typical HSE. Here, we demonstrate that CTM function is
conserved among yeast HSFs and is necessary not only for HSE-specific activation 
but also for the hyperphosphorylation of HSF upon heat shock. Moreover, both
transcription and phosphorylation defects due to CTM mutations were restored
concomitantly by a set of intragenic suppressor mutations. Therefore, the
hyperphosphorylation of HSF is correlated with the activation of genes with
atypical HSE but is not involved in that of genes with typical HSE. The function 
of CTM was circumvented in an HSF derivative lacking CE2, a yeast-specific
repression domain. Taken together, we suggest that CTM alleviates repression by
CE2, which allows HSF to be heat-inducibly phosphorylated and presume that
phosphorylation is a prerequisite for the activator function of HSF when it binds
to an atypical HSE.

PMCID: PMC387759
PMID: 15082761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 7;317(3):865-72.

Regulation of HSF1-responsive gene expression by N-terminal truncated form of
p73alpha.

Tanaka Y(1), Kameoka M, Itaya A, Ota K, Yoshihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nara Medical University, Shijo-Cho 840, Kashihara,
Nara 634-8521, Japan. ytanaka@naramed-u.ac.jp

DNp73 is a transactivation domain (TAD)-truncated form of p73. The ability of
DNp73alpha to regulate gene expression was examined using reporter assays with
luciferase gene constructs. Among various promoter-regulated reporter genes
tested, heat shock factor (HSF)-responsive gene expression was selectively
activated by DNp73alpha, but not by other p73-isoforms with TAD and DNp73beta.
Deletion of TAD endowed p73alpha with the ability to activate HSF-responsive gene
expression, but deletion of N-terminal proline-rich domain (PRD) rendered both
DNp73alpha and the TAD-deleted p73alpha inactive. Considering the inability of
DNp73beta, which is the C-terminus-truncated form of DNp73alpha, to function,
these results indicate that both the PRD and C-terminus are necessary for
DNp73alpha to be able to activate the HSF-dependent gene expression. In addition 
to the reporter gene expression, both DNp73alpha and TAD-deleted p73alpha
activated the expression of an endogenous gene, hsp70, corresponding with an
increase in the active form of HSF1. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that TAD-truncated p73alpha can activate HSF-dependent gene expression via
induction of active HSF1.

PMID: 15081420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2004 Apr;36(4):577-84.

Estrogen and regulation of heat shock protein expression in female
cardiomyocytes: cross-talk with NF kappa B signaling.

Hamilton KL(1), Gupta S, Knowlton AA.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Estrogen is associated with increased heat shock protein (HSP)72 and protection
during hypoxia-reoxygenation in cardiomyocytes from adult male rats, as
previously reported. We have also reported that female rats have more cardiac
HSP72 than males. We hypothesized that, despite higher endogenous estrogen levels
and higher baseline HSP72, 17 beta-estradiol treatment would still result in
increased HSP72 and protection during hypoxia-reoxygenation in cardiomyocytes
from females.METHODS/RESULTS: Cardiac cells isolated from adult female rats were 
treated for 12 hr with 17 beta-estradiol (0.1, 10, or 50 microM), tamoxifen, (10 
or 25 microM; estrogen receptor agonist/antagonist), geldanamycin (2, 5, or 10
microg/ml; inactivates HSP90, preventing interaction with HSF1), or vehicle.
Western blot analyses revealed that treatment with 17 beta-estradiol (10 or 50
microM), tamoxifen (25 microM), and geldanamycin (all doses) resulted in
significant increases in HSP72. Electromobility shift assays revealed activation 
of HSF1 by 2 to 3 hr, and NF kappa B activation by 15 min. HSP72 induction via
HSF1 activation was confirmed using transcription factor decoys containing the
heat shock element, which prevented the estrogen-related HSP72 induction.
Estrogen pretreatment resulted in decreased LDH release during 24 hr hypoxia.
This protective effect persisted despite decoy-mediated blockade of nuclear HSF1 
binding. However, transfection with an NF?B decoy not only prevented an
estrogen-associated increase in HSP72, but also abolished the estrogen-related
protection during hypoxia.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite higher endogenous estrogen, 17 beta-estradiol and the
selective estrogen receptor modulator, tamoxifen, upregulate HSP72 in
cardiomyocytes from adult females, and provide cytoprotection during hypoxia,
independent of HSP induction. NF kappa B activation is necessary for the increase
in HSP72, suggesting that estrogen treatment activates NF kappa B, with
subsequent HSF1 activation. NF kappa B activation is critical for
estrogen-associated HSP induction, and protection during hypoxia in female
cardiocytes. Treatment with 17 beta-estradiol and tamoxifen may provide a novel
means of protecting both male and female cardiac myocytes against hypoxia-induced
damage. Further studies are needed to define the cross-talk between HSF1 and NF
kappa B signaling pathways.

PMID: 15081317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Apr 1;196(1):37-46.

Exposure of Tg.AC transgenic mice to benzene suppresses hematopoietic progenitor 
cells and alters gene expression in critical signaling pathways.

Nwosu VC(1), Kissling GE, Trempus CS, Honeycutt H, French JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina Central University, Durham, NC 27707,
USA. vcnwosu@wpo.nccu.edu

The effects of acute benzene (BZ) exposure on hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPCs) derived from bone marrow cells were studied using homozygous male v-Ha-ras
Tg.AC mice at 8-10 weeks of age. The mice were given 0.02% BZ in their drinking
water for 28 days with the dose rate estimated to be 34 mg benzene/kg BW/day.
Analysis of cultured HPCs indicated that BZ suppressed the proliferation of the
multilineage colony forming unit-granulocyte, erythrocyte, macrophage,
megakaryocyte (CFU-GEMM); colony forming unit-granulocyte, macrophage (CFU-GM);
and blast forming unit erythrocyte/colony forming unit erythrocyte (BFUE/CFUE). A
gene expression profile was generated using nylon arrays spotted with 23 cDNAs
involved in selected signal pathways involved in cell distress, inflammation, DNA
damage, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis. Of the 23 marker genes, 6 (bax, c-fos, 
E124, hsf1, ikBa, and p57) were significantly (Mann-Whitney U tests, P < 0.05)
overexpressed in BZ-exposed mice. Two genes (c-myc and IL-2) approached
significance (at P = 0.053). The pattern of gene expression was consistent with
BZ toxicity and the suppression of HPCs.

PMID: 15050406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2004 Feb;22(1):60-3.

[Expressions of JWA protein and heat stress protein 70 induced by cell
differentiation inducers combined with heat stress in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Mao WG(1), Li AP, Ye J, Huang S, Li AQ, Zhou JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Toxicology, the Jiangsu Key Laboratories of Human
Functional Genomics and Applied Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study how the combined effects of various differentiation inducers 
and heat stress on the expression of JWA protein in K562 cell, the relationship
between JWA and Hsp70 expression, and the signal regulation mechanism possibly
involved.
METHODS: The experimental model was established in K562 cells. Various
directional differentiation inducers (TPA, Ara-C, hemin, adriamycin, ATRA and
As(2)O(3)) were used alone or combined with heat shock treatment (42 degrees C, 2
h). Western blot was used for detecting expressions of JWA, Hsp70, heat stress
factor 1 (HSF1) and HSF2.
RESULTS: (1) The expressions of both JWA protein and Hsp70 were significantly
up-regulated after K562 cells treated by TPA (100, 200 ng/ml) or adriamycin (4 x 
10(-8) mol/L) 48 h, and followed by heat shock (42 degrees C, 2 h). However, the 
opposite effects were observed when the cells treated by hemin (3 x 10(-5) mol/L,
48 h), Ara-C (80 ng/ml, 48 h) and As(2)O(3) (1 x 10(-6) mol/L, 48 h) followed by 
2 h heat shock. No obvious changes were found when the cells treated by ATRA (1 x
10(-6) mol/L, 48 h) alone or followed by heat shock. (2) Both the heat shock
transcriptional factors HSF1 and HSF2 did not show any significant changes when
K562 cells were treated with various differentiation inducers and followed by
heat stress.
CONCLUSION: JWA not only takes part in the regulation of K562 cellular
differentiation, but also of heat stress, it might be the co-target gene of
several differentiation inducers and heat stress. The expression of Hsp70 seems
not mediated by both HSF1 and HSF2 in K562 cells undergoing directional
differentiation or heat stress treatment. JWA is likely to be a new signal
molecule similar to Hsp70 signal pathways. The results show that JWA takes part
in the mechanism of K562 cell response to heat stress.

PMID: 15033023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Apr 1;294(2):480-93.

Intracellular trafficking of heat shock factor 2.

Le Goff P(1), Le Dréan Y, Le Péron C, Le Jossic-Corcos C, Ainouche A, Michel D.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 6026 Information et Programmation Cellulaire, Université de Rennes1, 
35042 Rennes Cedex, France. pascale.le-goff@univ-rennes1.fr

HSF2 is an enigmatic member of the heat shock factor family, identified in the
homeotherm classes of birds and mammals. We report the characterization of HSF2
from an evolutionary ancient vertebrate, the fish rainbow trout (rtHSF2). rtHSF2 
appears closely related to its mammalian counterparts at structural and
functional levels. The conservation of the distinctive features of HSF2 from fish
to human suggests that it should ensure important biological functions, not
redundant with those of HSF1. Proteasome inhibition, reported as a potent
stimulator of HSF2, leads to the stabilization and to a striking nuclear
trafficking of rtHSF2-GFP fusion protein. Upon treatment with the proteasome
inhibitor MG132, rtHSF2-GFP accumulates into PML nuclear bodies (NBs)
independently of its sumoylation and, if expressed at moderate level, moves to
nucleoli. The translocation of rtHSF2-GFP from NBs to nucleoli is greatly favored
by overexpression of the heat shock protein Hsp70. The mammalian counterpart
mouse HSF2 (mHSF2) also exhibited changes in intracellular distribution upon
MG132 treatment. mHSF2 partitioned between a juxtanuclear area that we
characterized as an aggresome and the nucleoli. These relocalizations are likely 
to reflect common structural changes of mouse and trout HSF2 upon activation.

PMID: 15023536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 23;101(12):4100-5. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

DAXX interacts with heat shock factor 1 during stress activation and enhances its
transcriptional activity.

Boellmann F(1), Guettouche T, Guo Y, Fenna M, Mnayer L, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, FL 33101, USA.

DAXX, a modulator of apoptosis and a repressor of basal transcription, was
identified in a two-hybrid screen as a protein capable of interacting with a
trimeric form of human heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). In human cells, DAXX
interacted with HSF1 essentially only during stress, i.e., when factor
trimerization occurred. Several lines of experimentation suggested that DAXX is
an important mediator of HSF1 activation: (i) overexpression of DAXX enhanced
basal transactivation competence of HSF1 in the absence of a stress; (ii) a DAXX 
fragment exerted dominant-negative effects on HSF1 activation by different types 
of stress; (iii) induction of heat shock or stress protein (HSP)70 by heat stress
was defective in a cell line lacking functional DAXX; and (iv) RNA interference
depletion of DAXX also substantially reduced heat induction of HSF1 activity and 
HSP70 expression. HSF1 transactivation competence is repressed by an
HSP90-containing multichaperone complex that interacts with trimeric factor.
Overexpressed HSF1, known to be largely trimeric, only marginally increased HSF1 
activity on its own but potentiated the activating effect of DAXX overexpression.
Expression of a nonnative protein capable of competing for multichaperone complex
also synergistically enhanced activation of HSF1 by DAXX. These observations
suggest a model in which DAXX released from its nuclear stores during stress
opposes repression of HSF1 transactivation competence by multichaperone complex
through its interaction with trimerized HSF1. Our identification of DAXX as a
mediator of HSF1 activation raises the question whether DAXX produces some of its
pleiotropic effects through modulation of HSP levels.

PMCID: PMC384701
PMID: 15016915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genesis. 2004 Feb;38(2):66-80.

Essential requirement for both hsf1 and hsf2 transcriptional activity in
spermatogenesis and male fertility.

Wang G(1), Ying Z, Jin X, Tu N, Zhang Y, Phillips M, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia.

Heat shock factors (Hsfs) are major transactivators of heat shock proteins but
are also involved in regulation of other genes active in embryonic development.
High expression levels of Hsfs in mouse testis during development suggest a role 
for these factors in spermatogenesis, a cyclic process of spermatogonia
cell-differentiation into mature spermatozoa. In contrast to hsf1(-/-) mice,
which exhibit normal spermatogenesis, targeted disruption of hsf2 results in
reduced testicular size but only a small impairment in male fertility. We show
here that disruption of both hsf1 and hsf2 results in a more severe phenotype
associated with male sterility due to severe defects in spermatogenesis. Earliest
defects observed are the reduced number of germ cells in juvenile mice and germ
cells that enter the meiotic prophase fail to progress beyond the pachytene
stage. This was associated with a reduction or absence of transcription of genes 
critically involved in spermatogenesis. The findings suggest that additive or
synergistic transcriptional activity of both hsf1 and hsf2 is required for normal
mammalian spermatogenesis and male fertility.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14994269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. FEBS Lett. 2004 Feb 13;559(1-3):165-70.

Coactivator ASC-2 mediates heat shock factor 1-mediated transactivation dependent
on heat shock.

Hong S(1), Kim SH, Heo MA, Choi YH, Park MJ, Yoo MA, Kim HD, Kang HS, Cheong J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735,
South Korea.

Upon exposure to elevated temperatures, mammalian cells increase the expression
of the heat shock proteins (HSP) through activation of the heat shock factor 1
(HSF1). Since most transcription factors require coactivators for efficient
transcriptional activity, we tried to identify the coactivator(s) that interacts 
with and modulates the activities of HSF1. In vitro glutathione S-transferase
(GST) pull-down assay revealed that HSF1 strongly interacts with activating
signal cointegrator (ASC)-2 and weakly with cyclic adenosine monophosphate
responsive element binding protein (CBP). We also show that cotransfection of
ASC-2, but not CBP, potentiates HSF1-mediated transactivation based on its
cognate element (heat shock element, HSE) linked to luciferase reporter. The
molecular interaction of HSF1 and ASC-2 was stimulated by heat shock in cells and
the overexpression of HSF1-interacting domain of ASC-2 inhibited the specific
induced protein association and HSF1-mediated transactivation. Taking these
results together, we suggest that ASC-2 in a novel coactivator for HSF1 and heat 
shock stress may contribute the strong active transcription complex through
sequential recruitment of HSF1 and ASC-2.

PMID: 14960326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jun;70(6):1606-13. Epub 2004 Feb 6.

Early transcriptional activation of the hsp70.1 gene by osmotic stress in
one-cell embryos of the mouse.

Fiorenza MT(1), Bevilacqua A, Canterini S, Torcia S, Pontecorvi M, Mangia F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti and Department of Psychology,
Section of Neuroscience, UniversityLa Sapienza of Rome, 00185 Rome, Italy.

In fertilized mouse eggs, de novo transcription of embryonic genes is first
observed during the S phase of the one-cell stage. This transcription, however,
is mostly limited to the male pronucleus and possibly uncoupled from translation,
making the functional meaning obscure. We found that one-cell mouse embryos
respond to the osmotic shock of in vitro isolation with migration of HSF1, the
canonical stress activator of mammalian heat shock genes, to pronuclei and by
transient transcription of the hsp70.1, but not hsp70.3 and hsp90, heat shock
genes. Isolated growing dictyate oocytes also display a nuclear HSF1
localization, but, in contrast with embryos, they transcribe both hsp70.1 and
hsp70.3 genes only after heat shock. Intranuclear injection of double-stranded
oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing HSE, GAGA box or GC box consensus sequences,
and antibodies raised to transcription factors HSF1, HSF2, Drosophila
melanogaster GAGA factor, or Sp1 demonstrated that hsp70.1 transcription depends 
on HSF1 in both oocytes and embryos and that Sp1 is dispensable in oocytes and
inhibitory in the embryos. Hsp70.1 thus represents the first endogenous gene so
far identified to be physiologically activated and tightly regulated after
fertilization in mammals.

PMID: 14766729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Feb;271(4):703-12.

Cloning and characterization of two distinct isoforms of rainbow trout heat shock
factor 1. Evidence for heterotrimer formation.

Ojima N(1), Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, Physiology and Molecular Biology Division, National
Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Fisheries Research Agency, Yokohama,
Japan. ojima@affrc.go.jp

To elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying the heat shock response in
cold-water fish species, genes encoding heat shock transcription factors (HSFs)
were cloned from RTG-2 cells of the rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss.
Consequently, two distinct HSF1 genes, named HSF1a and HSF1b, were identified.
The predicted amino acid sequence of HSF1a shows 86.4% identity to that of HSF1b.
The two proteins contained the general structural motifs of HSF1, i.e. a
DNA-binding domain, hydrophobic heptad repeats and nuclear localization signals. 
Southern blot analysis showed that each HSF1 is encoded by a distinct gene. The
two HSF1 mRNAs were coexpressed in unstressed rainbow trout RTG-2 cells and in
various tissues. In an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, each in vitro
translated HSF1 bound to the heat shock element. Chemical cross-linking and
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that HSF1a and HSF1b form heterotrimers as
well as homotrimers. Taken together, these results demonstrate that in rainbow
trout cells there are two distinct HSF1 isoforms that can form heterotrimers,
suggesting that a unique molecular mechanism underlies the stress response in
tetraploid and/or cold-water fish species.

PMID: 14764086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Int J Radiat Biol. 2004 Jan;80(1):29-38.

Human and rodent cell lines showing no differences in the induction but differing
in the repair kinetics of radiation-induced DNA base damage.

Purschke M(1), Kasten-Pisula U, Brammer I, Dikomey E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics and Radiobiology, University-Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistr. 52, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany.

PURPOSE: To compare the induction and repair of radiation-induced base damage in 
human and rodent cell lines.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Experiments were performed with two human (normal
fibroblasts HSF1 and tumour HeLa cells) and two rodent (mouse L929 and hamster
CHO-K1) cell lines. Base damage was determined with the alkaline comet assay
combined with the repair enzyme formamidopyrimidine-glycosylase (Fpg). Proteins
were detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: The induction of Fpg-sensitive sites was measured in human and rodent
cell lines for doses up to 8 or 5 Gy, respectively. Comets were analysed in terms
of tail moments, which were transformed into Gy-equivalents. The amount of
Fpg-sensitive sites increased linearly with doses up to 4 Gy, whereby the ratio
of single-strand breaks (ssb) to Fpg-sensitive sites was nearly identical for
human and rodent cells with ssb:Fpg-sensitive sites=1:0.41+/-0.07 and
1:0.45+/-0.05, respectively. For doses exceeding 4 Gy, the amount of
Fpg-sensitive sites did not increase further, indicating a dose limit up to which
the comet assay can be used to detect Fpg-sensitive sites. Repair of
Fpg-sensitive sites was studied for an X-ray dose of 4 Gy. For all four cell
lines, the repair was measured to be completed 24 h after irradiation, but with
pronounced differences in the kinetics. In both rodent cell lines, 50% of
Fpg-sensitive sites were removed after t((1/2))=25+/-10 min in contrast to
t((1/2))=80+/-20 min in the two human cell lines. The two species also differed
in the level of polymerase ss with, on average, a three- to fivefold higher level
in rodent cells compared with human cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Repair of radiation-induced Fpg-sensitive sites was much faster in
rodent than in human cells, which might result from the higher level of
polymerase ss found in rodent cells.

PMID: 14761848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2003 Aug;21(4):253-6.

[Effect of differentiation inducer and heat stress on the expression of JWA
protein and Hsp70 of K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Mao WG(1), Li AP, Ye J, Huang S, Li AQ, Zhou JW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, The Key Laboratory for
Toxicology of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing 210029, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of JWA protein and heat shock protein (Hsp70),
and to explore these relationship and the possible mechanism of JWA gene involved
in induced differentiation and heat stress (42 degrees C) of K562 cells.
METHODS: The models of differentiation and heat stress of K562 cells were
established. Western blot was used for detecting expressed proteins of JWA gene, 
Hsp70, heat shock factor (HSF1 and HSF2).
RESULTS: (1) Under the condition of differentiations induced by TPA (100 ng/ml), 
hemin (3 x 10(-5) mol/L), Ara-C (80 ng/ml), adriamycin (4 x 10(-8) mol/L), ATRA
(1 x 10(-6) mol/L) and As(2)O(3) (1 x 10(-6) mol/L) for 48 h respectively, the
expression of JWA protein and Hsp70 were more significantly increased than
control; the level of HSF2 protein was increased by inductions of hemin, Ara-C
and adriamycin, respectively. (2) After heat exposure to 42 degrees C for 10, 20,
30, 45, 60, 90 min, and heat exposure to 39 degrees C, 42 degrees C, 45 degrees
C, the trend of changing in expression of Hsp70 was similar to that of JWA
protein, and HSF1 was expressed in earlier stage.
CONCLUSION: The expression of JWA protein and Hsp70 were upregulated in induced
differentiation and in heat stress, and the change of expression of JWA protein
were similar to that of Hsp70, but the intracellular transduction signal pathways
involved may be various. JWA might not be specifically related with both HSF1 and
HSF2.

PMID: 14761432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Cell Mol Med. 2003 Oct-Dec;7(4):425-35.

Phenotypic characterization of mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking heat shock
factor 2.

Paslaru L(1), Morange M, Mezger V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Fundeni Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.

In murine cells, the heat shock response is regulated by a transcription factor, 
HSF1, which triggers the transcription of heat shock genes. HSF2 has been shown
to be involved in meiosis and mouse brain development. We characterized the
effects of the absence of HSF2 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The
temperature threshold of the heat shock response appeared lowered in Hsf2(-/-)
MEFS as monitored by the synthesis of heat shock protein HSP70. In contrast to
unstressed wild type MEFS, HSP70 and HSF1 are localized in the nucleus of
unstressed Hsf2(-/-) MEFS, a characteristic of stressed cells. HSF1 is not
activated for DNA-binding at unstressed temperature in Hsf2(-/-) MEFS. Therefore,
the absence of HSF2 induces some but not all of the characteristics of the stress
response. In addition, Hsf2(-/-) MEFS exhibited proliferation defects, altered
morphology, remodeling of the fibronectin network.

PMID: 14754511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Feb;20(1):30-3.

[Effects of hsf1 genotype on the constitutive expression of alphaB-crystallin in 
mice myocardium].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu L(1), Zhang HH, Ding GX, Cheng YL, Yan LJ, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

AIM: Try to clarify the effects of HSF1 gene on the constitutively expressed
alphaBC.
METHODS: To investigate the levels of constitutively expressed alphaB-Crystallin 
(alphaBC) in hsf1 knockout (hsf1 -/-) and hsf1 wild type (hsf1 +/+) mice
myocardium by Western blot and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The alphaBC levels in hsf1 -/- and hsf1 +/+ were 68.42% +/- 4.16%, 100% 
+/- 7.58%, respectively (P < 0.05, cytosolic fraction), and 20.53% +/- 1.01%,
37.55% +/- 1.91%, respectively (P < 0.05, pellet fraction). The alphaBC signals
decreased significantly in hsf1 -/- myocardium compared with hsf1 +/+ myocardium 
stained with fluorescence immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSION: hsf1 is the important, but not the only factor, which mediates the
constitutively expressed alphaBC.

PMID: 21162300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Cells. 2003 Dec;8(12):951-61.

Carboxy-terminal region of the yeast heat shock factor contains two domains that 
make transcription independent of the TFIIH protein kinase.

Sakurai H(1), Hashikawa N, Imazu H, Fukasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Kanazawa University, 5-11-80
Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. sakurai@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Phosphorylation of the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest
subunit of RNA polymerase II is implicated in transition from initiation to
elongation in the transcription cycle. In yeast cells, Kin28, a subunit of the
general transcription factor TFIIH, is responsible for the CTD phosphorylation.
Although Kin28 is indispensable for transcription of many genes, its requirement 
is bypassed in certain genes such as SSA4 or CUP1, whose transcription is
activated by the heat shock factor Hsf1.
RESULTS: We show that C-terminal region of Hsf1, which consists of an activation 
domain AR2 and a regulatory domain CTM, mediates the Kin28-independent
transcription. The AR2 domain, when fused to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4 and
recruited to the GAL7 gene via the Gal4-binding sequence, is sufficient for
activating GAL7 in the absence of Kin28. We have further found that AR2 has an
ability to recruit TATA box-binding protein-associated factors (TAFs) to the
promoter. Consistently, transcription from promoters occupied naturally or
artificially with TAFs is sustained in the absence of Kin28 function.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that CTM modulates activation function of AR2 in 
the Hsf1 molecule. We also suggest that recruitment of TAFs to a promoter is
involved in the Kin28-independent transcription.

PMID: 14750950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Cell Biol. 2004 Jan 5;164(1):15-7.

Nuclear stress granules: the awakening of a sleeping beauty?

Sandqvist A(1), Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, BioCity, P.O. Box 123, FIN-20521 Turku,
Finland.

Comment on
    J Cell Biol. 2004 Jan 5;164(1):25-33.

Nuclear stress granules are subnuclear compartments that form in response to heat
shock and other stress stimuli. Although many components of nuclear stress
granules have been identified, including HSF1 and pre-mRNA processing factors,
their function remains a mystery. A paper in this issue describes the
stress-induced transcriptional activation of one of the nuclear stress granule
target sites, a heterochromatic region that has been considered silent (Jolly et 
al., 2004). These intriguing findings will certainly give the research of these
structures a new twist.

PMCID: PMC2171964
PMID: 14709538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 12;279(11):10551-5. Epub 2004 Jan 5.

HSF1 modulation of Hsp70 mRNA polyadenylation via interaction with symplekin.

Xing H(1), Mayhew CN, Cullen KE, Park-Sarge OK, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Induction of heat shock protein (HSP) gene expression by stress is initiated by
binding of HSF1 to HSP gene promoters to increase their transcription. The
cytoprotective functions of these HSPs are essential for cell survival, and thus 
it is critical that inducible HSP gene expression be executed rapidly and
efficiently. Here we report an interaction between heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and
symplekin, a protein known to form a complex with the polyadenylation factors
CstF and CPSF. HSF1-symplekin complexes are detected only after stress treatment,
and these two proteins co-localize in punctate nuclear structures in stressed
cells. HSF1 also complexes in a stress-induced manner with the 3' processing
factor CstF-64. Interfering with HSF1-symplekin interaction by overexpressing a
non-DNA-binding mutant HSF1 protein significantly decreases Hsp70 mRNA
polyadenylation in stressed cells, supporting the functional role for HSF1 in
promoting 3' processing of this transcript. Importantly, this was also found to
result in a significant loss of Hsp70 protein induction and increased cell death 
in response to stress exposure. These results indicate that the HSF1-symplekin
interaction functions as a mechanism for recruiting polyadenylation factors to
HSP genes to enhance the efficiency/kinetics of production of mature Hsp mRNA
transcripts to achieve the critical cellular need for rapid HSP expression after 
stress. Thus, HSF1 regulates HSP gene expression at not one but two different
steps of the expression pathway, functioning both as a transcription factor and a
polyadenylation stimulatory factor.

PMID: 14707147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. DNA Repair (Amst). 2004 Feb 3;3(2):113-20.

Induction and repair of radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks in human
fibroblasts are not affected by terminal differentiation.

Brammer I(1), Herskind C, Haase O, Rodemann HP, Dikomey E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics and Radiobiology, University Hospital of
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

It was studied for human skin fibroblasts, whether the induction or repair of DNA
double-strand breaks (dsb) depend on the differentiation status. These studies
were performed (a) with a fibroblast strain (HSF1) kept in progenitor state
(mitotic fibroblasts, MF) or triggered to premature terminal differentiation
(postmitotic fibrocytes, PMF) by exposure to mitomycin C or (b) with 20
fibroblast strains differing intrinsically in their differentiation status. The
differentiation status was quantified by determining the fraction of postmitotic 
fibrocytes by light microscopy. DNA dsb were measured by constant-field gel
electrophoresis, and the fraction of apoptotic cells by comet assay. MF and PMF
cultures of HSF1 cells were irradiated with X-ray doses up to 160 Gy, and dsb
were measured either immediately after irradiation or after a repair incubation
of 4 or 24 h. There were a difference neither in the number of initial nor
residual dsb. PMF cultures, however, showed a slightly higher number of dsb
already present in non-irradiated cells, which was measured to result from a
small fraction of 5% apoptotic cells. The 20 analysed fibroblast strains showed a
substantial variation in the fraction of postmitotic fibrocytes (9-51%) as well
as in the number of dsb remaining at 24 h after irradiation (1.9-4.9%), but there
was no correlation between these two parameters. These data demonstrate that for 
fibroblasts the terminal differentiation has an effect neither on the induction
nor the repair of radiation-induced dsb. This result indicates that the variation
in dsb-repair capacity previously observed for fibroblast strains and which was
considered to be the main cause for the variation in the cellular
radiosensitivity, cannot be ascribed to differences in the differentiation
status.

PMID: 14706344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Radiat Biol. 2003 Sep;79(9):709-20.

Fibronectin and laminin increase resistance to ionizing radiation and the
cytotoxic drug Ukrain in human tumour and normal cells in vitro.

Cordes N(1), Blaese MA, Plasswilm L, Rodemann HP, Van Beuningen D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiobiology, German Armed Forces Medical Academy,
Neuherbergstrasse 11, D-80937 Munich, Germany. nils_cordes@web.de

PURPOSE: Cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions are thought to mediate drug
and radiation resistance. Dependence of cell survival, beta1-integrin expression 
and cell cycling on the ECM proteins and beta1-integrin ligands fibronectin (FN) 
and laminin (LA) were examined in malignant and normal cells exposed to the
cytotoxic drug Ukrain plus/minus irradiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human A549 lung cancer and MDAMB231 (MDA231) breast cancer
cells and normal fibroblasts (HSF1) grown on FN, LA, bovine serum albumin (BSA)
or polystyrene were treated with Ukrain (1 microg ml(-1), 24 h) plus/minus
irradiation (2-8 Gy) and the effects studied using colony formation assays, flow 
cytometry (beta1-integrin, DNA analysis) and adhesion assays.
RESULTS: FN and LA reduced the cytotoxic effect of single Ukrain treatment
compared with polystyrene and BSA. FN and LA also abolished Ukrain-dependent
radiosensitization in A549 cells and decreased the radiosensitivity of MDA231 and
HSF1 cells. Single Ukrain exposure on polystyrene significantly reduced
beta1-integrin expression and promoted G2-phase accumulation of A549 cells. In
contrast, Ukrain-treated MDA231 and HSF1 cells showed elevated beta1-integrin
expression and no Ukrain-specific cell cycle effect. Under Ukrain-radiation
exposure, irradiation, FN or LA abolished Ukrain-mediated reduction of
beta1-integrin expression and G2-phase accumulation in A549 cells, whereas in
MDA231 cells and fibroblasts beta1-integrin expression and cell cycle
distribution were stabilized. Cell adhesion to FN or LA was significantly
impaired (A549) or improved (MDA231, HSF1) upon Ukrain treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The data corroborate the findings of other groups that cell
adhesion-mediated resistance to either single or combined drug and radiation
exposure is tightly correlated to specific ECM proteins. By demonstrating a
strong modulatory impact of FN and LA on the radiosensitivity-modifying activity 
of the drug Ukrain, the set findings are also highly important for the assessment
of drug and radiation effects within in vitro cytotoxicity studies. The data give
the first mechanistic insights into specific FN- and LA-modulated cellular
resistance mechanisms as well as into the important role for beta1-integrins
using the unique cytotoxic and radiosensitivity-modifying drug Ukrain.

PMID: 14703944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Biol. 2004 Jan 5;164(1):25-33. Epub 2003 Dec 29.

Stress-induced transcription of satellite III repeats.

Jolly C(1), Metz A, Govin J, Vigneron M, Turner BM, Khochbin S, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U309, Institut A. Bonniot, 38706 La Tronche cedex, France.
caroline.jolly@ujf-grenoble.fr

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2004 Jan 5;164(1):15-7.

Exposure of mammalian cells to stress induces the activation of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and the subsequent transcription of heat shock
genes. Activation of the heat shock response also correlates with a rapid
relocalization of HSF1 within a few nuclear structures termed nuclear stress
granules. These stress-induced structures, which form primarily on the 9q12
region in humans through direct binding of HSF1 to satellite III repeats, do not 
colocalize with transcription sites of known hsp genes. In this paper, we show
that nuclear stress granules correspond to RNA polymerase II transcription
factories where satellite III repeats are transcribed into large and stable RNAs 
that remain associated with the 9q12 region, even throughout mitosis. This work
not only reveals the existence of a new major heat-induced transcript in human
cells that may play a role in chromatin structure, but also provides evidence for
a transcriptional activity within a locus considered so far as heterochromatic
and silent.

PMCID: PMC2171959
PMID: 14699086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):509-20. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Enhancement of glucocorticoid receptor-mediated gene expression by constitutively
active heat shock factor 1.

Jones TJ(1), Li D, Wolf IM, Wadekar SA, Periyasamy S, Sánchez ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 3035 Arlington Avenue, Medical College of Ohio,
Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

To further define the role of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in the stress
potentiation of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activity, we placed a constitutively
active mutant of human HSF1 (hHSF1-E189) under the control of a doxycycline
(DOX)-inducible vector. In mouse L929 cells, DOX-induced expression of hHSF1-E189
correlated with in vivo occupancy of the human heat shock protein 70 (hHsp70)
promoter (chromatin-immunoprecipitation assay) and with increased activity under 
nonstress conditions at the hHsp70 promoter controlling expression of
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) (p2500-CAT). Comparison of hHSF1-E189
against stress-activated, endogenous HSF1 for DNA-binding, p2500-CAT, and Hsp70
protein expression activities showed the mutant factor to have lower, but clearly
detectable, activities as compared with wild-type factor. Thus, the hHSF1-E189
mutant is capable of replicating these key functions of endogenous HSF1, albeit
at reduced levels. To assess the involvement of hHSF1-E189 in GR activity,
DOX-induced expression of hHSF1-E189 was performed in L929 cells expressing the
minimal pGRE(2)E1B-CAT reporter. hHSF1-E189 protein expression in these cells was
maximal at 24 h of DOX and remained constant up to 72 h. hHSF1-E189 expressed
under these conditions was found both in the cytosolic and nuclear compartments, 
in a state capable of binding DNA. More importantly, GR activity at the
pGRE(2)E1B-CAT promoter was found to increase after DOX-induced expression of
hHSF1-E189. The potentiation of GR by hHSF1-E189 occurred at saturating
concentrations of hormone and was dependent on at least 48 h of hHSF1-E189
up-regulation, suggesting that time was needed for an HSF1-induced factor to
accumulate to a threshold level. Initial efforts to characterize how hHSF1-E189
controls GR signaling showed that it does not occur through alterations of GR
protein levels or changes in GR hormone binding capacity. In summary, our
observations provide the first molecular evidence for the existence of
HSF1-regulated genes that serve to elevate the response of steroid receptors
under stress conditions.

PMID: 14673135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):500-8. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Agonist-activated glucocorticoid receptor inhibits binding of heat shock factor 1
to the heat shock protein 70 promoter in vivo.

Wadekar SA(1), Li D, Sánchez ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, 3035 Arlington Avenue, Medical College of Ohio,
Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

We have previously shown that activation of glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
signaling in stressed cells will cause inhibition of the heat shock response as
mediated by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). In that work, a full-length
human heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) promoter was used to measure HSF1
transactivity, and the data suggested inhibition of HSF1 through the
transactivation or transrepressive properties of GR. Here, we show that the
inhibitory effect of glucocorticoid agonist (dexamethasone) upon Hsp70 promoter
activity is rapid, occurring within 1 h of hormone addition. Moreover, addition
of hormone during the first hour of recovery from stress was sufficient to
inhibit HSF1. Thus, dexamethasone is able to rapidly reverse HSF1 transactivity, 
suggesting a transrepressive mode of action for GR. Yet, GR transrepression of
HSF1 by analysis of putative negative glucocorticoid response elements in the
Hsp70 promoter was not found. To further investigate the in vivo nature of this
fast-acting mechanism, we used the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay with
primers specific to the human Hsp70 promoter. Dexamethasone inhibited HSF1
binding at the Hsp70 promoter in response to heat or chemical shock (sodium
arsenite). Moreover, dexamethasone also blocked promoter binding by a
constitutively active mutant of HSF1 (hHSF1-E189) expressed under nonstress
conditions. In all cases, inhibition of HSF1 recruitment to the promoter by
dexamethasone was blocked by the GR antagonist RU486, a result that was
consistent with promoter activity based on chloramphenicol acetyl transferase
gene expression. The ability of dexamethasone to prevent HSF1 recruitment to the 
promoter was fast acting (occurring in as little as 15 min), and the hormone also
caused release of HSF1 already bound to the promoter. Although these results
suggest GR can effectively prevent HSF1 binding to Hsp promoters, fractionation
and Western blot experiments showed that stress-activated HSF1 was not released
from the nucleus in response to hormone. Thus, this effect of dexamethasone is
either specific to the Hsp70 promoter or causes shunting of HSF1 to other
high-affinity nuclear sites. These observations provide evidence of a novel
mechanism for attenuation of the heat shock response by glucocorticoids:
prevention or reversal of HSF1 recruitment to Hsp promoters through the rapid
actions of GR.

PMID: 14673132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Mar;15(3):1254-61. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

The role of heat shock transcription factor 1 in the genome-wide regulation of
the mammalian heat shock response.

Trinklein ND(1), Murray JI, Hartman SJ, Botstein D, Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-5120, USA.

Previous work has implicated heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) as the
primary transcription factor responsible for the transcriptional response to heat
stress in mammalian cells. We characterized the heat shock response of mammalian 
cells by measuring changes in transcript levels and assaying binding of HSF1 to
promoter regions for candidate heat shock genes chosen by a combination of
genome-wide computational and experimental methods. We found that many
heat-inducible genes have HSF1 binding sites (heat shock elements, HSEs) in their
promoters that are bound by HSF1. Surprisingly, for 24 heat-inducible genes, we
detected no HSEs and no HSF1 binding. Furthermore, of 182 promoters with likely
HSE sequences, we detected HSF1 binding at only 94 of these promoters. Also
unexpectedly, we found 48 genes with HSEs in their promoters that are bound by
HSF1 but that nevertheless did not show induction after heat shock in the cell
types we examined. We also studied the transcriptional response to heat shock in 
fibroblasts from mice lacking the HSF1 gene. We found 36 genes in these cells
that are induced by heat as well as they are in wild-type cells. These results
provide evidence that HSF1 does not regulate the induction of every transcript
that accumulates after heat shock, and our results suggest that an independent
posttranscriptional mechanism regulates the accumulation of a significant number 
of transcripts.

PMCID: PMC363119
PMID: 14668476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Genet Genomics. 2004 Feb;271(1):11-21. Epub 2003 Dec 4.

Two different heat shock transcription factors regulate immediate early
expression of stress genes in Arabidopsis.

Lohmann C(1), Eggers-Schumacher G, Wunderlich M, Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen (ZMBP), Allgemeine Genetik,
Universität Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Genet Genomics. 2004 Apr;271(3):376.

In order to assess the specific functional roles of different plant heat shock
transcription factors (HSFs) we have isolated T-DNA insertion mutants in the
AtHsf1 and AtHsf3 genes of Arabidopsis thaliana. Complete and selective loss of
the promoter binding activities of AtHSF1 or AtHSF3, verified by
immunoprecipitation assays, had no obvious effects on the heat shock (HS)
response in the individual mutant lines. Only hsf1(-) /hsf3(-)double mutants were
significantly impaired in HS gene expression. In these plants the inability to
form high-molecular-weight HSE-binding complexes correlates with a dramatic
change in the kinetics of mRNA accumulation from all HSF target genes tested,
including members of the Hsp100, Hsp90, Hsp70 and small Hsp families, and genes
for two heat-inducible class B-HSFs. After prolonged HS, the amounts of most heat
shock mRNAs expressed, except transcripts of Hsp18.2, reached approximately the
same levels as in wild type plants. Our data indicate that AtHSF1 and AtHSF3 are 
key regulators of the immediate stress-induced activation of HS gene
transcription, and consequently determine the kinetics of the negative feed back 
loop that is responsible for the transience of HS gene expression in wild type.

PMID: 14655047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cancer Lett. 2003 Dec 8;202(1):89-100.

Changes in the number of HSF1 positive granules in the nucleus reflects heat
shock semiquantitatively.

Nonaka T(1), Akimoto T, Mitsuhashi N, Tamaki Y, Nakano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to examine the changes in the number of
HSF1 granules in the nucleus caused by different degree of heat stress.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A human esophageal cancer cell line, TE-2, was used. HSF1 
granules were examined in an immunofluorescence study, and the changes in the
average number of HSF1 granules after heat alone or heat in combination with
KNK437, Hsp inhibitor, were evaluated. A band shift of HSF1 was also determined
by western blot.
RESULTS: HSF1 granules appeared soon after the start of heating at 43 degrees C
and reached a peak at 60 min and gradually disappeared after discontinuation of
heat. In the fractionated heat treatment, preheating (43 degrees C, 30 min)
suppressed the increase in the number of the granules during the second heating, 
but suppression of Hsp72 by KNK437 resulted in increase in the number of
granules. Continued heating at 43 degrees C with or without KNK437 maintained the
number of the granules at the peak level during heat treatment. The band shift of
HSF1 examined by western blot correlated with the changes in the number of
granules. The number of granules also reflected the degree of stress according to
different temperature.
CONCLUSION: The number of HSF1 granules in the nucleus well reflected heat
stress, and was almost consistent with phosphorylation of HSF1. The number of
HSF1 granules would be a useful tool for evaluating different degrees of heat
stress semiquantitatively.

PMID: 14643030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Circulation. 2003 Dec 16;108(24):3024-30. Epub 2003 Nov 17.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 protects cardiomyocytes from
ischemia/reperfusion injury.

Zou Y(1), Zhu W, Sakamoto M, Qin Y, Akazawa H, Toko H, Mizukami M, Takeda N,
Minamino T, Takano H, Nagai T, Nakai A, Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, Chiba University, Graduate 
School of Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.
komuro-tky@umin.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Because cardiomyocyte death causes heart failure, it is important to 
find the molecules that protect cardiomyocytes from death. The death trap is a
useful method to identify cell-protective genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we isolated the heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) as a protective molecule by the death trap method. Cell death
induced by hydrogen peroxide was prevented by overexpression of HSF1 in COS7
cells. Thermal preconditioning at 42 degrees C for 60 minutes activated HSF1,
which played a critical role in survival of cardiomyocytes from oxidative stress.
In the heart of transgenic mice overexpressing a constitutively active form of
HSF1, ischemia followed by reperfusion-induced ST-segment elevation in ECG was
recovered faster, infarct size was smaller, and cardiomyocyte death was less than
wild-type mice. Protein kinase B/Akt was more strongly activated, whereas Jun
N-terminal kinase and caspase 3 were less activated in transgenic hearts than
wild-type ones.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that HSF1 protects cardiomyocytes from death
at least in part through activation of Akt and inactivation of Jun N-terminal
kinase and caspase 3.

PMID: 14623809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 13;279(7):5169-76. Epub 2003 Nov 10.

Activation of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae heat shock transcription factor under 
glucose starvation conditions by Snf1 protein kinase.

Hahn JS(1), Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is an evolutionarily conserved protein that
mediates eukaryotic transcriptional responses to stress. Although the mammalian
stress-responsive HSF1 isoform is activated in response to a wide array of
seemingly unrelated stresses, including heat shock, pharmacological agents,
infection and inflammation, little is known about the precise mechanisms or
pathways by which this factor is activated by many stressors. The baker's yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes a single HSF protein that responds to heat
stress and glucose starvation and provides a simple model system to investigate
how a single HSF is activated by multiple stresses. Although induction of the HSF
target gene CUP1 by glucose starvation is dependent on the Snf1 kinase,
HSF-dependent heat shock induction of CUP1 is Snf1-independent. Approximately 165
in vivo targets for HSF have been identified in S. cerevisiae using chromatin
immunoprecipitation combined with DNA microarrays. Interestingly, approximately
30% of the HSF direct target genes are also induced by the diauxic shift, in
which glucose levels begin to be depleted. We demonstrate that HSF and Snf1
kinase interact in vivo and that HSF is a direct substrate for phosphorylation by
Snf1 kinase in vitro. Furthermore, glucose starvation-dependent, but not heat
shock-dependent HSF phosphorylation, and enhanced chromosomal HSF DNA binding to 
low affinity target promoters such as SSA3 and HSP30, occurred in a
Snf1-dependent manner. Consistent with a more global role for HSF and Snf1 in
activating gene expression in response to changes in glucose availability,
expression of a subset of HSF targets by glucose starvation was dependent on Snf1
and the HSF carboxyl-terminal activation domain.

PMID: 14612437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003 Oct 1;192(1):12-20.

Use of Hsf1(-/-) mice reveals an essential role for HSF1 to protect lung against 
cadmium-induced injury.

Wirth D(1), Christians E, Li X, Benjamin IJ, Gustin P.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pharmacology, Pharmacotherapy and Toxicology; Department of Functional
Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liege, Belgium.

Cadmium (Cd) is known to activate heat shock (HS) response, which is
characterized by overexpression of heat shock proteins (Hsps) under the control
of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). The potential protection provided by the HS
response, induced by increasing the body temperature of animals before Cd
exposure or by Cd itself, against pathophysiological changes occurring after Cd
intranasal instillation (1 to 100 microg/mouse) was examined. HSF1-deficient mice
were used to evaluate the role of this factor in lung protection. Cd instillation
caused dose- and time-dependent changes in the respiratory pattern measured by
plethysmography (Penh), and significant increases in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 
activity as well as macrophage and neutrophil counts in bronchoalveolar lavage
fluids. HS preconditioning induced Hsp overexpression and reduced the Penh
(-30%), LDH (-25%), and neutrophil (-55%) responses to subsequent administration 
of the highest Cd doses (50 and 100 microg) in wild-type mice. HSF1 deficiency
abolished the HS response and its protective effect. In the absence of
preconditioning, Hsf1(-/-) mice exhibited higher values of Penh (+70%) and LDH
activity (+42%) compared with wild-type animals when exposed to the lowest Cd
doses. Higher macrophage (+80%) and neutrophil counts (+115%) were recorded
whatever the dose. Western blot analyses indicated that lung protection might be 
related to the kinetics of HSF1-dependent Hsp70 expression. Altogether, our data 
demonstrate that HS response elicited both by prior HS and by Cd itself moderates
pulmonary injuries due to Cd instillation, and that HSF1 is a major mediator in
this protection.

PMID: 14554099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. EMBO J. 2003 Oct 15;22(20):5446-58.

CHIP activates HSF1 and confers protection against apoptosis and cellular stress.

Dai Q(1), Zhang C, Wu Y, McDonough H, Whaley RA, Godfrey V, Li HH, Madamanchi N, 
Xu W, Neckers L, Cyr D, Patterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, and Department of Medicine, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Induction of molecular chaperones is the characteristic protective response to
environmental stress, and is regulated by a transcriptional program that depends 
on heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), which is normally under negative regulatory
control by molecular chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp90. In metazoan species, the
chaperone system also provides protection against apoptosis. We demonstrate that 
the dual function co-chaperone/ubiquitin ligase CHIP (C-terminus of
Hsp70-interacting protein) regulates activation of the stress-chaperone response 
through induced trimerization and transcriptional activation of HSF1, and is
required for protection against stress-induced apoptosis in murine fibroblasts.
The consequences of this function are demonstrated by the phenotype of mice
lacking CHIP, which develop normally but are temperature-sensitive and develop
apoptosis in multiple organs after environmental challenge. CHIP exerts a central
and unique role in tuning the response to stress at multiple levels by regulation
of protein quality control and transcriptional activation of stress response
signaling.

PMCID: PMC213783
PMID: 14532117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Oct;136(2):275-82.

Heat- and cold-inducible regulation of HSP70 expression in zebrafish ZF4 cells.

Airaksinen S(1), Jokilehto T, Råbergh CM, Nikinmaa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Laboratory of Animal Physiology, University of Turku,
Turku FIN-20014, Finland. susanna.airaksinen@rktl.fi

Elevated temperature induces a rapid heat shock transcription factor
(HSFs)-mediated expression of heat shock (hsp) genes. The effect of cold exposure
on hsp gene expression has hardly been investigated, although ectothermic animals
experience both cold and heat stress. We have previously shown in zebrafish that 
the expression of hsf1a and a unique isoform hsf1b vary in a tissue-specific
manner upon heat stress. In the current study, using a zebrafish (Danio rerio)
embryonic cell line (ZF4), we have compared the effects of heat shock (28-->37
degrees C) vs. cold shock (28-->20 degrees C) on the expression of ahsf1a, zhsf1b
and hsp70. Concomitantly, the suitability of the ZF4 cells as a model system was 
verified. The expression pattern of HSP70 proteins following heat or cold
exposure is distinct, and the total HSP70 level is upregulated or stable,
respectively. Moreover, heat exposure specifically increases the ratio of
zhsf1a/b expression (10-fold), whereas cold exposure decreases it to one half.
These data suggest that the zhsf1a/zhsf1b ratio is regulated in a
temperature-dependent manner, and the ratio may be indicative of the
stressor-specific HSP70 expression. Furthermore, the response in ZF4 cells upon
heat shock resembles the response observed in zebrafish liver and thus, supports 
the use of this cell line in stress response studies.

PMID: 14529753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2003 Oct;3(5):349-58.

The stress response: implications for the clinical development of hsp90
inhibitors.

Whitesell L(1), Bagatell R, Falsey R.

Author information: 
(1)Steele Memorial Children's Research Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 
85724, USA. whitelj@peds.arizona.edu

In their role as molecular chaperones, heat shock proteins serve as central
integrators of protein homeostasis within cells. As part of this function, they
guide the folding, assembly, intracellular disposition and proteolytic turnover
of many key regulators of cell growth, differentiation and survival. Not
surprisingly then, heat shock proteins are over expressed in many types of
cancer, and induction of the stress response may actually be required for cells
to tolerate the genetic disarray characteristic of malignant transformation.
Regulation of heat shock protein levels via the stress response is complex, but
recent data indicate that the molecular chaperone Hsp90 plays a key role.
Specifically, Hsp90 inhibitors alter the multi-chaperone complexes associated
with Heat Shock Factor 1 (HSF1), the dominant transcription factor controlling
induction of the stress response, and stimulate HSF1-activated heat shock gene
expression. Induction of this heat shock response has now emerged as an important
consideration in the further clinical development of Hsp90 inhibitors for several
reasons. First, tumors in which the stress response is compromised appear
particularly sensitive to Hsp90 inhibition. Second, induction of the stress
response by Hsp90 inhibitors provides a sensitive pharmacodynamic endpoint with
which to monitor drug action in individual patients. Third, Hsp90 inhibitors
display important therapeutic interactions with both conventional DNA-targeted
chemotherapeutics and newer molecularly targeted agents. These interactions are, 
at least in part, due to modulation of the stress response by these drugs.
Lastly, stress response induction by Hsp90 inhibitors may have therapeutic
benefits in non-neoplastic disorders such as heart disease, stroke and
neurodegenerative diseases. These benefits are just beginning to be explored.

PMID: 14529386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cell Death Differ. 2003 Oct;10(10):1126-36.

TNFalpha mediates susceptibility to heat-induced apoptosis by protein
phosphatase-mediated inhibition of the HSF1/hsp70 stress response.

Schett G(1), Steiner CW, Xu Q, Smolen JS, Steiner G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Vienna, Austria. georg.schett@akh-wien.ac.at

TNFalpha uniquely combines proinflammatory features with a proapoptotic
potential. Activation of HSF1 followed by induction of hsp70 is part of a stress 
response, which protects cells from apoptosis. Herein, the effects of TNFalpha on
the hsp70 stress response were investigated. TNFalpha caused transient
downregulation of HSF1 activation and hsp70 synthesis, leading to increased
sensitivity to heat-induced apoptosis. Blockade of TNF-R1, but not TNF-R2, as
well as inhibition of protein phosphatases PP1/PP2a and PP2b completely blocked
this effect. In contrast, blockade of MAPK/SAPK-, NF-kappaB (NF-kappaB)-, and
PKC- pathways as well as the caspase cascade did not prevent downregulation of
HSF1/hsp70. These data demonstrate that TNFalpha transiently inhibits the hsp70
stress response via TNF-R1 and activation of protein phosphatases. The price of
inhibition of an essential cellular stress response is increased sensitivity to
apoptotic cell death.

PMID: 14502236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):18-24. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 is involved in quality-control mechanisms in
male germ cells.

Izu H(1), Inouye S, Fujimoto M, Shiraishi K, Naito K, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Japan.

Quality-control mechanisms in spermatogenesis are important to eliminate injured 
or abnormal cells, thereby protecting the organism from abnormal development in
the next generation. The processes of spermatogenesis are highly sensitive to
high temperatures; however, the mechanisms by which injured germ cells are
eliminated remain unclear. Here, we found that heat shock proteins are not
induced in male germ cells in response to thermal stress, although heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is activated. Using HSF1-null mice, we showed that 
apoptosis of pachytene spermatocytes was markedly inhibited in testes with a
single exposure to heat and in the cryptorchid testes, indicating that HSF1
promotes apoptotic cell death of pachytene spermatocytes exposed to thermal
stress. In marked contrast, HSF1 acts as a cell-survival factor of more immature 
germ cells, probably including spermatogonia, in testes exposed to high
temperatures. These results demonstrate that HSF1 has two opposite roles in male 
germ cells independent of the activation of heat shock genes.

PMID: 12954729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Hear Res. 2003 Aug;182(1-2):88-96.

Heat shock transcription factor HSF1 is required for survival of sensory hair
cells against acoustic overexposure.

Sugahara K(1), Inouye S, Izu H, Katoh Y, Katsuki K, Takemoto T, Shimogori H,
Yamashita H, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

To analyze the role of heat shock response in the cochleae, we induced major heat
shock proteins, Hsp70, Hsp90, and Hsp27 by perfusion of hot saline into the
middle ear cavity (called 'local heat shock') in guinea pigs. Hsps were induced
in almost all of the cochlear cells including the sensory hair cells in the organ
of Corti. We showed that loss of both the sensory hair cells and the auditory
function induced by acoustic overexposure was inhibited by pretreatment of the
inner ear with local heat shock. To examine the role of heat shock transcription 
factor 1(HSF), which activates heat shock genes in response to heat shock, in the
protection of sensory hair cells, we analyzed acoustic injury in HSF1-null mice. 
We found that the loss of sensory hair cells was more significant in HSF1-null
mice compared with that of wild-type mice when mice were subjected to acoustic
overexposure. These results indicate that HSF1 is required for survival of the
sensory hair cells against acoustic overexposure.

PMID: 12948605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Sep;23(17):6013-26.

Regulation of molecular chaperone gene transcription involves the serine
phosphorylation, 14-3-3 epsilon binding, and cytoplasmic sequestration of heat
shock factor 1.

Wang X(1), Grammatikakis N, Siganou A, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) regulates the transcription of molecular chaperone hsp
genes. However, the cellular control mechanisms that regulate HSF1 activity are
not well understood. In this study, we have demonstrated for the first time that 
human HSF1 binds to the essential cell signaling protein 14-3-3 epsilon. Binding 
of HSF1 to 14-3-3 epsilon occurs in cells in which extracellular signal regulated
kinase (ERK) is activated and blockade of the ERK pathway by treatment with the
specific ERK pathway inhibitor PD98059 in vivo strongly suppresses the binding.
We previously showed that ERK1 phosphorylates HSF1 on serine 307 and leads to
secondary phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) on serine 303
within the regulatory domain and that these phosphorylation events repress HSF1. 
We show here that HSF1 binding to 14-3-3 epsilon requires HSF1 phosphorylation on
serines 303 and 307. Furthermore, the serine phosphorylation-dependent binding of
HSF1 to 14-3-3 epsilon results in the transcriptional repression of HSF1 and its 
sequestration in the cytoplasm. Leptomycin B, a specific inhibitor of nuclear
export receptor CRM1, was found to reverse the cytoplasmic sequestration of HSF1 
mediated by 14-3-3 epsilon, suggesting that CRM1/14-3-3 epsilon directed nuclear 
export plays a major role in repression of HSF1 by the ERK/GSK3/14-3-3 epsilon
pathway. Our experiments indicate a novel pathway for HSF1 regulation and suggest
a mechanism for suppression of its activity during cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC180972
PMID: 12917326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Plant J. 2003 Aug;35(4):442-51.

Generation of dominant-negative effects on the heat shock response in Arabidopsis
thaliana by transgenic expression of a chimaeric HSF1 protein fusion construct.

Wunderlich M(1), Werr W, Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen, Allgemeine Genetik, Universität
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Upon heat stress, heat shock factors (HSFs) control the expression of heat shock 
protein (HSP) genes by transcriptional activation. The perplexing multiplicity of
HSF genes in Arabidopsis- 21 potential genes have been identified - renders it
difficult to identify mutant phenotypes. In this study, we have attempted to
generate a transdominant-negative mutant of HSF by transgenic expression of a
protein fusion construct, EN-HSF1, consisting of the Drosophila engrailed
repressor domain (EN) and the complete Arabidopsis AtHSF1. Transgenic lines were 
screened for impaired ability to induce high levels of low-molecular-weight heat 
shock proteins (sHSPs). Two lines, EH14-6 and EH16-3, which showed quantitative
differences in the expression of EN-HSF1, were further analysed for induction of 
thermotolerance and heat-stress-dependent mRNAs of a number of different HSF
target genes encoding different HSP and HSF. The mRNA levels of all genes tested 
were moderately downregulated in EH14-6 but strongly reduced in EH16-3 plants
compared to wild-type (Wt) and HSF1-overexpressing control plants. The inhibition
of the induction of heat shock response correlated with impaired basal and
acquired thermotolerance of the EH16-3 line. The kinetics of HSP expression
suggest that the negative effect of EN-HSF1 is stronger in the early phase of the
heat shock response, and that the reduction in mRNA levels is partially
compensated at the translational level.

PMID: 12904207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(16):5882-95.

Activation of heat shock genes is not necessary for protection by heat shock
transcription factor 1 against cell death due to a single exposure to high
temperatures.

Inouye S(1), Katsuki K, Izu H, Fujimoto M, Sugahara K, Yamada S, Shinkai Y, Oka
Y, Katoh Y, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock response, which is characterized by the induction of a set of heat
shock proteins, is essential for induced thermotolerance and is regulated by heat
shock transcription factors (HSFs). Curiously, HSF1 is essential for heat shock
response in mammals, whereas in avian HSF3, an avian-specific factor is required 
for the burst activation of heat shock genes. Amino acid sequences of chicken
HSF1 are highly conserved with human HSF1, but those of HSF3 diverge
significantly. Here, we demonstrated that chicken HSF1 lost the ability to
activate heat shock genes through the amino-terminal domain containing an
alanine-rich sequence and a DNA-binding domain. Surprisingly, chicken and human
HSF1 but not HSF3 possess a novel function that protects against a single
exposure to mild heat shock, which is not mediated through the activation of heat
shock genes. Overexpression of HSF1 mutants that could not bind to DNA did not
restore the susceptibility to cell death in HSF1-null cells, suggesting that the 
new protective role of HSF1 is mediated through regulation of unknown target
genes other than heat shock genes. These results uncover a novel role of
vertebrate HSF1, which has been masked under the roles of heat shock proteins.

PMCID: PMC166333
PMID: 12897157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biol Chem. 2003 Jun;384(6):959-63.

Heat stress-dependent DNA binding of Arabidopsis heat shock transcription factor 
HSF1 to heat shock gene promoters in Arabidopsis suspension culture cells in
vivo.

Zhang L(1), Lohmann C, Prändl R, Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen--Allgemeine Genetik,
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, D-72076 Tübingen,
Germany.

Using UV laser cross-linking and immunoprecipitation we measured the in vivo
binding of Arabidopsis heat shock transcription factor HSF1 to the promoters of
target genes, Hsp18.2 and Hsp70. The amplification of promoter sequences,
co-precipitated with HSF1-specific antibodies, indicated that HSF1 is not bound
in the absence of heat stress. Binding to promoter sequences of target genes is
rapidly induced by heat stress, continues throughout the heat treatment, and
declines during subsequent recovery at room temperature. The molecular mechanisms
underlying the differences between Hsp18.2 and Hsp70 in the kinetics of
HSF1/promoter binding and corresponding mRNA expression profiles are discussed.

PMID: 12887064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Aug 1;288(1):1-8.

Regulation of the HIV1 long terminal repeat by mutant heat shock factor.

Ignatenko NA(1), Gerner EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology/Cancer Biology Section, Arizona Cancer
Center, The University of Arizona, 1515 N. Campbell Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85724,
USA. nignatenko@azcc.arizona.edu

Heat shock is a known transcriptional activator of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV1) long terminal repeat (LTR). However, HIV1 LTR suppression can occur
under hyperthermic conditions. To investigate this phenomenon, a series of HIV1
LTR deletion luciferase constructs were generated and tested in cell culture in
combination with a mutant heat shock factor 1 (HSF1+), which is transcriptionally
active in the absence of heat stress. HSF1+ suppressed the activity of a minimal 
HIV1 LTR promoter, which contained NF-kappaB, Sp1, and tat consensus sequences.
Electromobility shift assays showed nuclear protein-DNA complex formation with a 
Sp1 consensus sequence. Immunoprecipitation of nuclear extracts with Sp1 antibody
did not affect nuclear protein-Sp1 oligonucleotide complex formation. In
contrast, no complexes were formed with the Sp1 consensus sequence when the HSF
protein was immunoprecipitated. These experiments indicate that modified heat
shock factor can suppress HIV1 promoter activity by a mechanism involving
interaction with Sp1 elements in the HIV1 promoter. The ability of HSF1+ to
suppress HIV1 promoter activity suggests that HSF1+ could serve as a tool for the
treatment of AIDS.

PMID: 12878154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Cell Sci. 2003 Sep 1;116(Pt 17):3557-70. Epub 2003 Jul 15.

Formation of nuclear stress granules involves HSF2 and coincides with the
nucleolar localization of Hsp70.

Alastalo TP(1), Hellesuo M, Sandqvist A, Hietakangas V, Kallio M, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
BioCity, PO Box 123, FIN-20521 Turku, Finland.

The heat-shock response is characterized by the activation of heat-shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1), followed by increased expression of heat-shock
proteins (Hsps). The stress-induced subnuclear compartmentalization of HSF1 into 
nuclear stress granules has been suggested to be an important control step in the
regulation of stress response and cellular homeostasis in human cells. In this
study, we demonstrate that the less-well characterized HSF2 interacts physically 
with HSF1 and is a novel stress-responsive component of the stress granules.
Based on analysis of our deletion mutants, HSF2 influences to the localization of
HSF1 in stress granules. Moreover, our results indicate that the stress granules 
are dynamic structures and suggest that they might be regulated in an
Hsp70-dependent manner. The reversible localization of Hsp70 in the nucleoli
strictly coincides with the presence of HSF1 in stress granules and is
dramatically suppressed in thermotolerant cells. We propose that the regulated
subcellular distribution of Hsp70 is an important regulatory mechanism of
HSF1-mediated heat shock response.

PMID: 12865437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Neurosci. 2003 Jul 2;23(13):5789-98.

High threshold for induction of the stress response in motor neurons is
associated with failure to activate HSF1.

Batulan Z(1), Shinder GA, Minotti S, He BP, Doroudchi MM, Nalbantoglu J, Strong
MJ, Durham HD.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute and Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4.

Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) protects cultured motor neurons from the toxic
effects of mutations in Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD-1), which is responsible 
for a familial form of the disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Here,
the endogenous heat shock response of motor neurons was investigated to determine
whether a high threshold for activating this protective mechanism contributes to 
their vulnerability to stresses associated with ALS. When heat shocked, cultured 
motor neurons failed to express Hsp70 or transactivate a green fluorescent
protein reporter gene driven by the Hsp70 promoter, although Hsp70 was induced in
glial cells. No increase in Hsp70 occurred in motor neurons after exposure to
excitotoxic glutamate or expression of mutant SOD-1 with a glycine--> alanine
substitution at residue 93 (G93A), nor was Hsp70 increased in spinal cords of
G93A SOD-1 transgenic mice or sporadic or familial ALS patients. In contrast,
strong Hsp70 induction occurred in motor neurons with expression of a
constitutively active form of heat shock transcription factor (HSF)-1 or when
proteasome activity was sufficiently inhibited to induce accumulation of an
alternative transcription factor HSF2. These results indicate that the high
threshold for induction of the stress response in motor neurons stems from an
impaired ability to activate the main heat shock-stress sensor, HSF1.

PMID: 12843283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Med Sci (Paris). 2003 Apr;19(4):459-64.

[When the mother further impacts the destiny of her offspring: maternal effect
mutations].

[Article in French]

Christians ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Laboratories,
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6000 Harry Hines Blvd,
Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA. Elisabeth.Christians@utsouthwestern.edu

Genes affected by maternal effect mutations encode maternal factors (transcripts,
proteins) which are normally stored in oocytes and used by the embryos after
fertilization. Although females bearing this type of mutation are viable and
appear to be normal, embryonic development and survival of their offspring are
compromised. Although maternal effect mutations are well known in lower
organisms, such as drosophila or zebrafish, several examples have been only quite
recently reported in mammals (Dnmt, Hsf1 and Mater). These studies provide new
insights on the aspects of embryonic development directly controlled by maternal 
factors brought by the oocytes.

PMID: 12836219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Acta Biochim Pol. 2003;50(2):535-41.

Expression of a constitutively active mutant of heat shock factor 1 under the
control of testis-specific hst70 gene promoter in transgenic mice induces
degeneration of seminiferous epithelium.

Widlak W(1), Benedyk K, Vydra N, Glowala M, Scieglinska D, Malusecka E, Nakai A, 
Krawczyk Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Center of Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Institute, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland. wwidlak@io.gliwice.pl

Heat shock activates in somatic cells a set of genes encoding heat shock proteins
which function as molecular chaperones. The basic mechanism by which these genes 
are activated is the interaction of the specific transcription factor HSF1 with a
regulatory DNA sequence called heat shock element (HSE). In higher eukaryotes
HSF1 is present in unstressed cells as inactive monomers which, in response to
cellular stress, aggregate into transcriptionally competent homotrimers. In the
present paper we showed that the expression of a transgene encoding mutated
constitutively active HSF1 placed under the control of a spermatocyte-specific
promoter derived from the hst70 gene severely affects spermatogenesis. We found
the testes of transgenic mice to be significantly smaller than those of wild-type
males and histological analysis showed massive degeneration of the seminiferous
epithelium. The lumen of tubules was devoid of spermatids and spermatozoa and
using the TUNEL method we demonstrated a high rate of spermatocyte apoptosis. The
molecular mechanism by which constitutively active HSF1 arrests spermatogenesis
is not known so far. One can assume that HSF1 can either induce or repress so far
unknown target genes involved in germ cell apoptosis.

PMID: 12833178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 10;546(2-3):315-20.

Enhanced suicide gene therapy by chimeric tumor-specific promoter based on HSF1
transcriptional regulation.

Wang J(1), Yao M, Zhang Z, Gu J, Zhang Y, Li B, Sun L, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, PR
China.

Two tandem cassettes, one containing the telomerase reverse transcriptase gene
(hTERT) promoter upstream of a constitutively activated form of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (cHSF1) and followed by the other containing the heat
shock protein 70B (hsp70B) promoter (HSE) upstream of the cytosine deaminase (CD)
gene, could greatly enhance the efficiency of CD gene therapy while retaining
tumor specificity in vitro and in vivo. This hTERT-cHSF1/HSE promoter could
restrict gene expression in tumor cells and was about 1.5-3-fold more potent than
the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter. hTERT-cHSF1/HSE-CD transfection led to tumor 
cells more sensitive to 5-fluorocytosine compared with hTERT-CD and its toxicity 
was comparable to that of CMV-CD. Besides enhancement of promoter activity, cHSF1
overexpression itself could enhance the bystander effect of CD gene therapy that 
could be reversed by anti-Fas antibody. This system also led to activation of
stress-related genes such as hsp70 in tumor cells, which in the presence of cell 
killing by the cytotoxic gene is a highly immunostimulatory event. Furthermore, a
more potent anti-tumor effect of hTERT-cHSF1/HSE-CD was observed in nude mice
inoculated with Bcap37 cells. No obvious activity of the hTERT-cHSF1/HSE promoter
was observed in normal tissues after intravenous administration. These results
indicate that the hTERT-cHSF1/HSE promoter is highly tumor-specific and strong
with potential application in targeted gene therapy, and therefore may be useful 
for construction of vectors for systemic therapy.

PMID: 12832060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 11;306(4):1037-41.

Rsp5-Bul1/2 complex is necessary for the HSE-mediated gene expression in budding 
yeast.

Kaida D(1), Toh-e A, Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Rsp5 is an essential ubiquitin ligase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and is
concerned with many functions such as endocytosis and transcription through
ubiquitination of various substrates. Bul1 or its homologue Bul2 binds to Rsp5
through the PY-motif and the bul1 bul2 double mutant is sensitive to various
stresses. We demonstrate here that heat shock element (HSE)-mediated gene
expression was defective in both rsp5-101 and bul1 bul2 mutants under high
temperature condition. The bul1 gene containing mutations in the PY motif region 
did not recover this defective gene expression of the bul1 bul2 mutant. The
protein level and phosphorylation state of the HSE-binding transcription factor, 
Hsf1, was not affected by these mutations. Thus, the Rsp5-Bul1/2 complex has a
new function for the HSE-mediated gene expression and may regulate it through
other factors than Hsf1.

PMID: 12821147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 Jul;35(7):785-94.

Role of protein kinase C in geranylgeranylacetone-induced expression of
heat-shock protein 72 and cardioprotection in the rat heart.

Yamanaka K(1), Takahashi N, Ooie T, Kaneda K, Yoshimatsu H, Saikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, School of Medicine, Oita Medical
University, 1-1 Idaigaoka, Hasama, 879-5593, Oita, Japan.

We recently demonstrated that oral administration of geranylgeranylacetone (GGA),
an antiulcer agent, induces heat-shock protein 72 (HSP72) in the rat heart and
renders cardioprotection against ischemia/reperfusion injury. However, the
signaling pathways remain to be elucidated. The present study tested the
hypothesis that oral GGA would activate protein kinase C (PKC), leading to the
phosphorylation and translocation of heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), and thus,
promote the expression of HSP72 protein. Rats were classified into four groups: a
control (CNT) group (vehicle administration), a GGA group (GGA 200 mg/kg
administration), a chelerythrine (CHE)-CNT group (pretreated with intravenous
(i.v.) injection of 5 mg/kg CHE before vehicle administration), and a CHE-GGA
group (pretreated with CHE before GGA administration). After 24 h administration,
oral GGA-induced overexpression of HSP72, increased amount of the phosphorylated 
form of HSF1 in the nucleus, produced heat-shock element-specific DNA-HSF1
complex, and caused translocation of protein kinase C (PKC)delta, all of which
were prevented by pretreatment with CHE. GGA also increased the PKC activity in a
particulate fraction, which was prevented by pretreatment with rottlerin, a
specific inhibitor of PKCdelta. Isolated-perfused heart experiments revealed that
the better functional recovery observed in the GGA group during the reperfusion
period following the 20 min of no-flow global ischemia, compared with the CNT
group, was abolished by pretreatment with CHE. These results suggest that
activation of PKC (translocation of PKCdelta), which primes the phosphorylation
of HSF1, plays an essential role in the cardiac overexpression of HSP72 by GGA
that leads to cardioprotection.

PMID: 12818569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Jul;64(1):85-93.

Anti-inflammatory activity of 15-deoxy-delta12,14-PGJ2 and 2-cyclopenten-1-one:
role of the heat shock response.

Ianaro A(1), Ialenti A, Maffia P, Di Meglio P, Di Rosa M, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, University of Naples Federico II, Via
D. Montesano 4, 80131, Naples, Italy. ianaro@unina.it

The transcription factor heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) plays a key role in the
expression of several genes, such as heat shock protein (hsp) genes, which are
cytoprotective against several pathological conditions, including inflammation.
Cyclopentenone prostaglandins (cyPG) are able to activate HSF1 and induce the
synthesis of the 70-kDa hsp (hsp70) in mammalian cells. These molecules are
characterized by the presence of a reactive alpha,beta-unsatured carbonyl group
in the cyclopentane ring (cyclopentenone) which is the key structure for
triggering HSF1 activation. In the present study, we investigated, in carrageenin
hind-paw edema, an acute model of inflammation, the effect of double-stranded
oligodeoxynucleotides with consensus HSF1 sequence as transcription factor decoys
to inhibit HSF1 binding to native DNA sites. We show that HSF1 activation and
hsp72 expression occurs in inflamed tissue and that this effect is associated
with the remission of the inflammatory reaction. Moreover, we studied the effect 
of prostaglandin 15-deoxy-delta12,14-prostaglandin (PG) J2, of its precursor,
PGD2 and, for the first time in vivo, the effect of the cyclopentenone ring
structure itself, 2-cyclopenten-1-one. Our results demonstrated that all agents
used had anti-inflammatory properties and that this effect was associated with
HSF1-induced hsp72 expression in vivo, suggesting that the use of cyclopentenone 
derivatives may represent a novel therapeutic approach to the treatment of
inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 12815164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2003 Apr;134(4):839-46.

Stressor-dependent regulation of the heat shock response in zebrafish, Danio
rerio.

Airaksinen S(1), Råbergh CM, Lahti A, Kaatrasalo A, Sistonen L, Nikinmaa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Laboratory of Animal Physiology, University of Turku,
FIN-20014 Turku, Finland. susanna.airaksinen@rktl.fi

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) regulate expression of heat shock
proteins (Hsps). We have previously shown that in zebrafish a unique isoform,
zHSF1b, disappears concomitant with heat shock-induced Hsp70 expression. To
characterize the role of zHSF1a and zHSF1b isoforms in the regulation of the
stress response in vivo, we have carried out cadmium (10-100 microM) and copper
(10-30 microM) exposures in order to specify whether the disappearance of HSF1b
is specific for heat stress. After 4-h metal exposures we analyzed the expression
of hsp70, zHSF1a, zHSF1b and metallothionein (MT) by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction in zebrafish liver, gonads and gills. Although cadmium 
is a known inducer of Hsps, it did not affect hsp70 expression significantly in
the studied tissues. Induction of hsp70 was observed upon copper exposure in
liver and gonads, but not in gills. Neither metal affected the zHSF1a/b ratio.
Both cadmium and copper exposure caused upregulation of MT, regulator of metal
homeostasis and detoxification, confirming that the tissues were subjected to
metal loads. Thus, hsp70 appears to be more weakly induced upon metal exposure
than in response to heat shock and HSF1 isoforms may participate in
stressor-specific regulation of hsp70.

PMID: 12814792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 12;278(37):35465-75. Epub 2003 Jun 16.

Elevated expression of heat shock factor (HSF) 2A stimulates HSF1-induced
transcription during stress.

He H(1), Soncin F, Grammatikakis N, Li Y, Siganou A, Gong J, Brown SA, Kingston
RE, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) belongs to a family of structurally related
transcription factors, which share the property of binding to heat shock elements
in the promoters of hsp molecular chaperone genes. However, unlike HSF1, which is
essential for hsp gene transcription, the cellular functions of HSF2 are not well
known. Here we show that human HSF2, although an ineffective activator of the
hsp70 promoter in vitro and in vivo in the absence of stress, participates in the
activation of the hsp70 promoter by heat shock. HSF2 was not, however, activated 
by heat shock in cells deficient in functional HSF1, suggesting a requirement for
HSF1 in HSF2-mediated transcriptional enhancement. In addition, HSF2 regulation
involves differential activity of two isoforms, HSF2A and HSF2B, which arise from
alternative splicing of a common hsf2 gene. Under basal conditions, both HSF2
isoforms are ineffective in activating the hsp70 transcription. However, heat
shock differentially activates HSF2A in vivo. This phenomenon appears to be
physiologically significant, as human myeloprogenitor cells differentiating along
the erythroid lineage express HSF2A de novo and undergo a large increase in
capacity to activate the hsp70 promoter. Our experiments further show that HSF1
is physically associated with HSF2 in the cell and that such binding is enhanced 
by heat shock. Our data suggest a mechanism involving the formation of
heterocomplexes between HSF1 and HSF2 with enhanced activity to activate the
hsp70 promoter when compared with HSF1 or HSF2 homotrimers.

PMID: 12813038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 22;278(34):31879-83. Epub 2003 Jun 12.

Heat and heavy metal stress synergize to mediate transcriptional hyperactivation 
by metal-responsive transcription factor MTF-1.

Saydam N(1), Steiner F, Georgiev O, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Mammalian cells react to heavy metal stress by transcribing a number of genes
that contain metal-response elements (MREs) in their promoter/enhancer region;
this activation is mediated by metal-responsive transcription factor-1 (MTF-1).
Well-known target genes of MTF-1 are those encoding metallothioneins, small,
cysteine-rich proteins with a high affinity for heavy metals. The response to
heat shock, another cell stress, is mediated by heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1), which activates a battery of heat shock genes. Little is known about the 
cross-talk between the different anti-stress systems of the cell. Here we report 
a synergistic activation of metal-responsive promoters by heavy metal load (zinc 
or cadmium) and heat shock. An obvious explanation, cooperativity between MTF-1
and HSF1, seems unlikely: transfected HSF1 boosts the activity of an Hsp70
promoter but hardly affects an MRE-containing promoter upon exposure to metal and
heat shock. A clue to the mechanism is given by our finding that heat shock leads
to intracellular accumulation of heavy metals. We propose that the known
anti-apoptotic effect of heat shock proteins allows for cell survival despite
heavy metal accumulation and, consequently, results in a hyperactivation of the
metal response pathway.

PMID: 12805380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Sheng Wu Hua Xue Yu Sheng Wu Wu Li Xue Bao (Shanghai). 2003 Jun;35(6):542-7.

[Redox-dependent changes in structure and function of hHSF1].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin Z(1), Huang F, Ma ZF, Xu K, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)The First Hospital Affiliated to Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080
China. zhenglin2@hotmail.com

To evaluate the effects of cysteine-SH-directed regents on the redox status,
structure and function of human heat shock transcription factor 1 (hHSF1),
treatment in vitro of hHSF1 with 0.3 0.5 mmol/L oxidizing reagent diamide (DM)
and treatment in vivo of HeLa cells with 1 mmol/L buthionine sulfoximine (BSO),
an inhibitor of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase, promoted the formation of a
compact, intramolecularly disulfide-crosslinked, stable monomeric form of
ox-hHSF1, and blocked the trimerization and activation of HSF1. The effects of
diamine were dose-dependent and readily could be completely reversed by adding
0.4 0.5 mmol/L reducing reagent dithiothreitol (DTT) to the samples prior to gel 
electrophoresis. Computer modeling of the alpha-helical coiled-coil domains of
the HSF1 monomer and trimer showed that the alignment of the N- and C-terminal
hydrophobic repeats of HSF1 monomer could bring C(3)(Cys(153))close to C(4) and
C(5)(Cys(373) and Cys(378), respectively), in positions permissible for disulfide
bond formation under appropriate experimental conditions. The results suggest
that redox-dependent thiol-disulfide exchange can provide a mechanism for
regulation the conformation and activity of hHSF1.

PMID: 12796815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genes Dev. 2003 Jun 1;17(11):1392-401.

Localized recruitment of a chromatin-remodeling activity by an activator in vivo 
drives transcriptional elongation.

Corey LL(1), Weirich CS, Benjamin IJ, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

To understand the role of chromatin-remodeling activities in transcription, it is
necessary to understand how they interact with transcriptional activators in vivo
to regulate the different steps of transcription. Human heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) stimulates both transcriptional initiation and elongation. We replaced
mouse HSF1 in fibroblasts with wild-type and mutant human HSF1 constructs and
characterized regulation of an endogenous mouse hsp70 gene. A mutation that
diminished transcriptional initiation led to twofold reductions in hsp70 mRNA
induction and recruitment of a SWI/SNF remodeling complex. In contrast, a
mutation that diminished transcriptional elongation abolished induction of
full-length mRNA, SWI/SNF recruitment, and chromatin remodeling, but minimally
impaired initiation from the hsp70 promoter. Another remodeling factor, SNF2h, is
constitutively present at the promoter irrespective of the genotype of HSF1.
These data suggest that localized recruitment of SWI/SNF drives a specialized
remodeling reaction necessary for the production of full-length hsp70 mRNA.

PMCID: PMC196071
PMID: 12782657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Jun;33(6):1754-62.

Heat shock factor 1-independent activation of dendritic cells by heat shock:
implication for the uncoupling of heat-mediated immunoregulation from the heat
shock response.

Zheng H(1), Benjamin IJ, Basu S, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunotherapy of Cancer and Infectious Diseases, University of
Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington 06030, USA.

The induction of heat shock proteins by heat shock is classically defined as the 
heat shock response, which is involved in cytoprotection, inflammation and immune
responses. Whereas the cytoprotective properties of heat shock have been well
characterized, the immunomodulating roles of the heat shock response on the
immune system are just emerging. In particular, it is not known whether
immunomodulating functions of heat are mediated by the heat shock response. We
addressed this question genetically, using a murine model that is unable to mount
the heat shock response because of deletion of a major transcriptional factor,
heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1). We focused on the roles of heat shock on modulating
the functions of dendritic cells (DC) because of their important roles in both
innate and adaptive immunity. We found that heat shock matures CD11c(+) DC both
in vitro and in vivo, phenotypically and functionally, in the absence of any
exogenous inflammatory stimuli. Furthermore, heat-shock-mediated DC maturation is
independent of Hsf1, as Hsf1(-/-) DC can be matured by heat shock equally well as
wild-type DC. Our novel findings demonstrate that heat shock, one of the most
primitive biological responses, can modulate the immune response without the
requirement for the transcriptional induction/repression of target genes mediated
by Hsf1.

PMID: 12778494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 8;278(32):30272-82. Epub 2003 May 21.

Mild heat and proteotoxic stress promote unique subcellular trafficking and
nucleolar accumulation of RGS6 and other RGS proteins. Role of the RGS domain in 
stress-induced trafficking of RGS proteins.

Chatterjee TK(1), Fisher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City,
Iowa 52242, USA.

RGS proteins comprise a large family of proteins named for their ability to
negatively regulate heterotrimeric G protein signaling. RGS6 is a member of the
R7 subfamily of RGS proteins possessing DEP (disheveled/Egl-10/pleckstrin)
homology and GGL (G protein gamma-subunit-like) domains in addition to the
semiconserved RGS domain. Our previous study documented unusual complexity in
splicing of the human RGS6 gene, and we demonstrated localization of various RGS6
splice forms at sites other than the plasma membrane, including the cytoplasm and
nucleus, where G proteins are not localized (Chatterjee, T. K., Liu, Z., and
Fisher, R. A. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 30261-30271). Here we provide new
evidence that mild heat stress, proteasome-mediated proteotoxic stress, and HSF1 
expression induces dramatic relocalization of RGS6 proteins from such sites to
nucleoli. This response was observed in COS-7 cells expressing various splice
forms of RGS6, was not elicited by other forms of cellular stress and was
observed in cells treated with various protein kinase inhibitors or co-expressing
a dominant-negative kinase inactive SAPK. The RGS domain of RGS6 was identified
as a primary structural module providing support for its stress-induced nucleolar
trafficking and various other RGS proteins or their isolated RGS domains
similarly undergo nucleolar migration in response to heat or proteotoxic stress
or during co-expression of HSF1. The atypical RGS domains of axin and AKAP10 also
underwent stress-induced nucleolar trafficking while structural domains outside
of the RGS domain of some RGS proteins can override nucleolar trafficking in
response to stress. Inhibition of rDNA transcription also promoted nucleolar
migration of RGS6, a response previously observed in a subset of nucleolar
proteins. The DEP domain of RGS6, but not its RGS domain, conferred structural
support for its transcription-linked nucleolar migration. RGS6 exhibited
trafficking from subnuclear dots to nucleoli in response to heat-, proteotoxic-
or transcription-linked stress. These results provide new evidence that mammalian
RGS proteins undergo unique subcellular trafficking in response to specific forms
of cellular stress and implicate the RGS family of proteins in cellular stress
signaling pathways.

PMID: 12761220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genesis. 2003 May;36(1):48-61.

Targeted disruption of the heat shock transcription factor (hsf)-2 gene results
in increased embryonic lethality, neuronal defects, and reduced spermatogenesis.

Wang G(1), Zhang J, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Heat shock transcription factors (Hsfs) are major transactivators of heat shock
protein (Hsp) genes in the response to stress stimuli, but are also thought to be
involved in embryonic development and spermatogenesis. Among the three known
mammalian Hsfs, Hsf1 is recognized as the most effective transactivator of Hsps
in response to thermal challenge, but the role of Hsf2 in regulation of genes
under normal or increased stress conditions in vivo remains elusive. To study its
physiological function in vivo, we generated mice deficient in hsf2 by gene
targeting. We report here that hsf2(-/-) mice exhibit multiple phenotypes,
including an increased prenatal lethality occurring between mid-gestation to
birth, with fetal death probably due to central nervous system defects including 
collapse of the lateral ventricles and ventricular hemorrhages. Approximately 30%
of hsf2(-/-) animals surviving to adulthood exhibited brain abnormalities
characterized by marked dilation of the third and lateral ventricles. In
addition, disruption of hsf2 resulted in reduced female fertility; however,
despite ubiquitous expression in the testes and markedly reduced testis size and 
sperm count, only a small reduction in fertility was apparent in hsf2(-/-) male
mice. Immunoblotting and gene expression microarray analysis of hsf2(-/-) embryos
did not reveal reduced Hsp expression levels, indicating that the defects
observed in hsf2(-/-) embryos may not result from disruption of Hsp expression.
These findings suggest that hsf2 has a major function in controlling expression
of genes important for embryonic development and maintenance of sperm production.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12748967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Strahlenther Onkol. 2003 May;179(5):337-44.

Cell adhesion-mediated radioresistance (CAM-RR). Extracellular matrix-dependent
improvement of cell survival in human tumor and normal cells in vitro.

Cordes N(1), Meineke V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiology, Medical Academy of German Armed Forces, Munich,
Germany. nils_cordes@web.de

BACKGROUND: Cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) contact is thought to have great
impact on cellular mechanisms resulting in increased cell survival upon exposure 
to ionizing radiation. Several human tumor cell lines and normal human
fibroblastic cell strains of different origin, all of them expressing the
wide-spread and important integrin subunit beta1, were irradiated, and clonogenic
cell survival, beta 1-integrin cell surface expression, and adhesive
functionality were investigated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Human tumor cell lines A172 (glioblastoma), PATU8902
(pancreas carcinoma), SKMES1 (lung carcinoma), A549 (lung carcinoma), and IPC298 
(melanoma) as well as normal human skin (HSF1) and lung fibroblasts (CCD32) and
human keratinocytes (HaCaT) were irradiated with 0-8 Gy. Besides colony formation
assays, beta 1-integrin cell surface expression by flow cytometry and adhesive
functionality by adhesion assays were analyzed.
RESULTS: All cell lines showed improved clonogenic survival after irradiation in 
the presence of fibronectin as compared to plastic. Irradiated cells exhibited a 
significant, dose-dependent increase in beta 1-integrin cell surface expression
following irradiation. As a parameter of the adhesive functionality of the beta
1-integrin, a radiation-dependent elevation of cell adhesion to fibronectin in
comparison with adhesion to plastic was demonstrated.
CONCLUSION: The in vitro cellular radiosensitivity is highly influenced by
fibronectin according to the phenomenon of cell adhesion-mediated
radioresistance. Additionally, our emerging data question the results of former
and current in vitro cytotoxicity studies performed in the absence of an ECM.
These findings might also be important for the understanding of malignant
transformation, anchorage-independent cell growth, optimization of
radiotherapeutic regimes and the prevention of normal tissue side effects on the 
basis of experimental radiobiological data.

PMID: 12740661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Cell Sci. 2003 Jun 15;116(Pt 12):2421-30. Epub 2003 Apr 30.

PTHrP [67-86] regulates the expression of stress proteins in breast cancer cells 
inducing modifications in urokinase-plasminogen activator and MMP-1 expression.

Luparello C(1), Sirchia R, Pupello D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo, Università, Viale delle
Scienze, 90128 Palermo, Italy. clupar@tin.it

It was previously reported that a midregion domain of parathyroid hormone-related
protein (PTHrP), that is, [67-86]-amide, is able to restrain growth and promote
matrigel penetration by the 8701-BC cell line, derived from a biopsy fragment of 
a primary ductal infiltrating carcinoma of the human breast, and that cell
invasion in vitro is drastically impaired by inactivation of
urokinase-plasminogen activator (uPa). In this study we started a more detailed
investigation of the possible effects on gene expression arising from the
interaction between PTHrP [67-86]-amide and 8701-BC breast cancer cells by a
combination of conventional-, differential display-and semi-quantitative
multiplex-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays. We present here the first
evidence that the upregulation of some stress-related genes, most noticeably heat
shock factor binding protein-1 (hsbp1) and heat shock protein 90 (hsp-90), is
involved in the acquisition of an in vitro more invasive phenotype by cells
treated with midregion PTHrP. This is conceivably accomplished by sequestering
and inactivating heat shock factor-1 (hsf1) which is able to recognize Ets
transcription-factor-binding sites present in some gene promoters, such as those 
of uPa and matrix metalloprotease-1 (MMP-1). In fact, our data show that
incubation of PTHrP [67-86]-amide-treated cells with either antisense
hsbp1-oligonucleotide or geldanamycin, an hsp90-inactivating antibiotic, results 
in downregulation of uPa and upregulation of MMP-1, and in a prominent inhibition
of cell invasion in matrigel-containing Transwell chambers. Alternatively,
incubation of untreated 8701-BC cells with quercetin, a flavonoid known to
decrease the amount of free hsf1, is found to induce upregulation of uPa and
downregulation of MMP-1, and an increase of matrigel invasion by cells, thus
providing further supporting data of the involvement of hsf unavailability on the
modulation of uPa and MMP-1 expression and on cell invasive behaviour. These
studies confirm a previous postulate that over-secretion of uPa, rather than of
other extracellular proteases, is a primary condition for the increase of
invasive activity triggered by PTHrP [67-86]-amide in vitro, and support a role
for midregion forms of PTHrP in potentially affecting pathological mammary growth
and differentiation. They also identify two new key protagonists in the complex
scenario of breast tumor cell invasiveness in vitro, that is, hsbp1 and hsp90,
which deserve further and more extensive studies as potential and attractive
molecular targets for anti-breast cancer treatments.

PMID: 12724357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell Biochem. 2003 Mar;245(1-2):191-9.

Genistein inhibits herbimycin A-induced over-expression of inducible heat shock
protein 70 kDa.

Kiang JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring, MD 20910-7500, USA. Juliann.Kiang@na.amedd.army.mil

It has been shown that expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) can interfere
with the effectiveness of therapeutic cytotoxic drugs. In this study, we
investigated the regulation of expression of HSPs in human epidermoid A-431
cells. Two known protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors were studied. Treatment of
cells with herbimycin A increased production of inducible HSP 70 kDa (HSP-70i) in
a concentration-dependent manner, whereas genistein did not. The increase induced
by herbimycin A was observed within 2 h, reached a peak at 6 h, and remained
above the basal level 3 days later. Pretreatment with genistein inhibited the
herbimycin A-induced increase in HSP-70i. Herbimycin A treatment increased levels
of HSP-70i mRNA in cells, suggesting that herbimycin A increases HSP-70i by
promoting transcription. Treatment with genistein or genistein combined with
herbimycin A did not increase HSP-70i mRNA, suggesting that the inhibitory effect
of genistein also occurs at the level of mRNA production. Herbimycin A increased 
intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i), but treatment with genistein
decreased it. Chelation of [Ca2+]i with BAPTA blocked the herbimycin A-induced
increase in HSP-70i mRNA and HSP-70i protein. Herbimycin A induced the
phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), while genistein reduced HSF1
production. The ability of genistein to inhibit the herbimycin A-induced increase
in HSP-70i is not associated with genistein's capacity to decrease basal [Ca2+]i,
but because it decreases HSFI production. The herbimycin A-induced increase in
HSP-70i protected cells from hypoxia injury.

PMID: 12708759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Pathol. 2003 May;162(5):1669-76.

Activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 in atherosclerosis.

Metzler B(1), Abia R, Ahmad M, Wernig F, Pachinger O, Hu Y, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University Hospital
of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Previous work established that increased expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs)
in the vessel wall might evoke proinflammatory and autoimmune reactions in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. The present study was designed to further
scrutinize the molecular mechanisms of HSP expression involving activation of
heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) in atherosclerotic lesions in animal
models. Severe atherosclerotic lesions developed in the aortas of rabbits 16
weeks after feeding a 0.2% cholesterol diet. When protein extracts from the
aortas were subjected to Western blot analysis, the level of HSF1 in proteins
from atherosclerotic lesions of hypercholesterolemic rabbits were significantly
higher than those of normal vessels. Gel mobility shift assays revealed the
formation of protein-heat shock element complexes containing HSF1 in protein
extracts from atherosclerotic lesion. Furthermore, triglyceride-rich lipoprotein,
oxidized-triglyceride-rich lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, and oxidized
low-density lipoprotein did not activate HSF1 in cultured smooth muscle cells,
whereas HSF1 was highly activated in cells treated with tumor necrosis
factor-alpha. Interestingly, mechanical stretching of smooth muscle cells
resulted in HSF1 translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and
hyperphosphorylation followed by increased HSP70 expression. Thus, our findings
provide the first evidence that HSF1 is activated and highly expressed in
atherosclerotic lesions and that cytokine stimulation and disturbed mechanical
stress to the vessel wall may be responsible for such activation.

PMCID: PMC1851193
PMID: 12707051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2953-68.

Phosphorylation of serine 303 is a prerequisite for the stress-inducible SUMO
modification of heat shock factor 1.

Hietakangas V(1), Ahlskog JK, Jakobsson AM, Hellesuo M, Sahlberg NM, Holmberg CI,
Mikhailov A, Palvimo JJ, Pirkkala L, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University
and Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry, University of Turku, Finland.

The heat shock response, which is accompanied by a rapid and robust upregulation 
of heat shock proteins (Hsps), is a highly conserved protection mechanism against
protein-damaging stress. Hsp induction is mainly regulated at transcriptional
level by stress-inducible heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). Upon activation, HSF1
trimerizes, binds to DNA, concentrates in the nuclear stress granules, and
undergoes a marked multisite phosphorylation, which correlates with its
transcriptional activity. In this study, we show that HSF1 is modified by SUMO-1 
and SUMO-2 in a stress-inducible manner. Sumoylation is rapidly and transiently
enhanced on lysine 298, located in the regulatory domain of HSF1, adjacent to
several critical phosphorylation sites. Sumoylation analyses of HSF1
phosphorylation site mutants reveal that specifically the
phosphorylation-deficient S303 mutant remains devoid of SUMO modification in vivo
and the mutant mimicking phosphorylation of S303 promotes HSF1 sumoylation in
vitro, indicating that S303 phosphorylation is required for K298 sumoylation.
This finding is further supported by phosphopeptide mapping and analysis with
S303/7 phosphospecific antibodies, which demonstrate that serine 303 is a target 
for strong heat-inducible phosphorylation, corresponding to the inducible HSF1
sumoylation. A transient phosphorylation-dependent colocalization of HSF1 and
SUMO-1 in nuclear stress granules provides evidence for a strictly regulated
subnuclear interplay between HSF1 and SUMO.

PMCID: PMC152542
PMID: 12665592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Apr 4;303(2):700-6.

Transcriptional activity and DNA binding of heat shock factor-1 involve
phosphorylation on threonine 142 by CK2.

Soncin F(1), Zhang X, Chu B, Wang X, Asea A, Ann Stevenson M, Sacks DB,
Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique EP 560, Institut Pasteur de
Lille, 1 Rue Calmette-BP 245, 59021, Lille Cedex, France.

Heat shock factor-1 (HSF-1) is the regulator of hsp molecular chaperone
transcription, although the intracellular mechanisms involved in HSF-1 activation
have not been fully elucidated. As HSF1 is activated by heat shock simultaneously
with the nuclear translocation of the protein kinase CK2, we have investigated
the role of CK2 in HSF1 activation. We demonstrate that HSF-1 is phosphorylated
by CK2 on both serine and threonine residues and has characterized a
phosphorylation site at threonine 142. Mutation of Thr-142 to alanine (T142A)
inhibits trans-activation of the HSP70 gene by HSF1 and in addition inhibits the 
accumulation of HSF-1 competent to bind heat shock elements in the nucleus. HSF1 
activation by heat is correlated with the thermal activation of nuclear CK2 and
overexpression of CK2 activates HSF1. Phosphorylation by CK2 on threonine 142 may
therefore be an essential step in the thermal activation of latent HSF1 by
stresses.

PMID: 12659875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biochem Soc Trans. 2003 Apr;31(2):455-6.

Skeletal muscles of aged male mice fail to adapt following contractile activity.

Vasilaki A(1), Iwanejko LM, McArdle F, Broome CS, Jackson MJ, McArdle A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GA, U.K.

Skeletal muscle adapts rapidly following exercise by the increased production of 
heat-shock proteins (HSPs). The aim of this study was to examine the ability of
muscle from adult and aged mice to produce HSPs following non-damaging exercise. 
Adult and aged B6XSJL mice were anaesthetized and their hind limbs were subjected
to isometric contractions. At different time points, muscles were analysed for
HSP production by Western and Northern blotting and by electrophoretic
mobility-shift assay. HSP protein and mRNA levels in muscles from adult mice
increased significantly following exercise. This was not evident in muscles of
aged mice. In contrast, binding of the transcription factor heat-shock factor 1
(HSF1) was not grossly altered in muscles of aged mice compared with adult mice. 
The data suggest that the inability of muscles of aged mice to produce HSPs
appears to be due to alterations during gene transcription.

PMID: 12653661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):196-200.

Insights into the regulation of heat shock transcription factor 1 SUMO-1
modification.

Hilgarth RS(1), Hong Y, Park-Sarge OK, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

The transcriptional regulatory protein HSF1 is the key mediator of induced heat
shock protein gene expression in response to elevated temperature and other
stresses. Our previous studies identified stress-induced SUMO-1 modification of
HSF1 as an important regulator of the DNA-binding activity of this factor. The
underlying molecular mechanism by which stress leads to sumoylation of HSF1 was
unknown. Prompted by previous studies indicating stress-induced phosphorylation
at serine 307 of HSF1, a site very near the sumoylation site at lysine 298, we
examined the role of this phosphorylation event in regulating SUMO-1 modification
of HSF1. Using a combination of transfection and in vitro
phosphorylation/sumoylation experiments, our results indicate that
phosphorylation at serine 307 stimulates sumoylation of HSF1. Our results also
reveal a role for a conserved leucine zipper sequence in the C-terminal region of
HSF1 in inhibiting its SUMO-1 modification. Based on these data, we postulate
that phosphorylation at serine 307 could stimulate HSF1 sumoylation by causing a 
conformation change that relieves the inhibitory effect of the C-terminal leucine
zipper.

PMID: 12646186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):24-30.

Cloning, expression, and characterization of chicken transforming growth factor
beta 4.

Pan H(1), Halper J.

Author information: 
(1)The Soft Tissue Center, Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, The University of Georgia, GA, Athens 30602-7388, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta 4 (TGF-beta 4) is unique to avian species, though
its roles in vivo have not yet been well established. In this paper we describe
the expression and partial characterization of recombinant chicken TGF-beta 4. By
using a GC-rich PCR system in a modified 5'RACE methodology we generated the
5'-end of cDNA sequence encoding the TGF-beta 4 precursor, which was in-frame
cloned into pcDNA3.1/V5-His-TOPO and transfected into the Chinese hamster ovary
cell line (CHO-K1). A cell line stably expressing TGF-beta 4 precursor protein
was established from CHO-K1 cells. Acid-activated mature TGF-beta 4 inhibited the
growth of mink lung epithelial (Mv1Lu) cell line. TGF-beta 4 also stimulated the 
expression of type I procollagen and enhanced heat shock protein 47 (Hsp47)
expression in chicken tendon fibroblasts. Hsp47 expression by TGF beta 4 is
likely regulated through activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). 
Because the presence of TGF-beta 1 has not been documented in avian cells and our
data show that TGF-beta 4 elicits biological activities in chicken tendon cells, 
which closely parallel that of TGF-beta 1, we propose that TGF-beta 4 plays roles
in avian species similar to what TGF-beta 1 plays in mammalian species.

PMID: 12646161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):15465-8. Epub 2003 Mar 12.

p53 inhibitor pifithrin alpha can suppress heat shock and glucocorticoid
signaling pathways.

Komarova EA(1), Neznanov N, Komarov PG, Chernov MV, Wang K, Gudkov AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Pifithrin alpha (PFTalpha) is a chemical compound isolated for its ability to
suppress p53-mediated transactivation. It can protect cells from p53-mediated
apoptosis induced by various stimuli and reduce sensitivity of mice to gamma
radiation. Identification of molecular targets of PFTalpha is likely to provide
new insights into mechanisms of regulation of p53 pathway and is important for
predicting potential risks associated with administration of PFTalpha-like p53
inhibitors in vivo. We found that PFTalpha, in addition to p53, can suppress heat
shock and glucocorticoid receptor signaling but has no effect on nuclear
factor-kappaB signaling. PFTalpha reduces activation of heat shock transcription 
factor (HSF1) and increases cell sensitivity to heat. Moreover, it reduces
activation of glucocorticoid receptor and rescues mouse thymocytes in vitro and
in vivo from apoptotic death after dexamethasone treatment. PFTalpha affected
both signaling pathways in a p53-independent manner. These observations suggest
that PFTalpha targets some unknown factor that is common for three major signal
transduction pathways.

PMID: 12637507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17299-306. Epub 2003 Mar 5.

HSF-1 interacts with Ral-binding protein 1 in a stress-responsive, multiprotein
complex with HSP90 in vivo.

Hu Y(1), Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) regulates the rapid and transient expression of heat
shock genes in response to stress. The transcriptional activity of HSF1 is
tightly controlled, and under physiological growth conditions, the HSF1 monomer
is in a heterocomplex with the molecular chaperone HSP90. Through unknown
mechanisms, transcriptionally repressed HSF1.HSP90 heterocomplexes dissociate
following stress, which triggers HSF1 activation and heat shock gene
transcription. Using a yeast two-hybrid screening system, we have identified
Ral-binding protein 1 (RalBP1) as an additional HSF1-interacting protein. We show
that RalBP1 and HSF1 interact in vivo, and transient cotransfection of HSF1 and
RalBP1 into hsf1(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts represses HSP70 expression.
Furthermore, transient cotransfection of HSF1 and the constitutively active form 
of RalA (RalA23V), an upstream activator of the RalBP1 signaling pathway,
increases the heat-inducible expression of HSP70, whereas the dominant negative
form (RalA28N) suppresses HSP70 expression. We further find that alpha-tubulin
and HSP90 are also present in the RalBP1.HSF1 heterocomplexes in unstressed
cells. Upon heat shock, the Ral signaling pathway is activated, and the resulting
RalGTP binds RalBP1. Concurrently, HSF1 is activated, leaves the RalBP1 x HSF1 x 
HSP90 x alpha-tubulin heterocomplexes, and translocates into the nucleus, where
it then activates transcription. In conclusion, these observations reveal that
the RalGTP signal transduction pathway is critical for activation of the
stress-responsive HSF1 and perhaps HSP90 molecular chaperone system.

PMID: 12621024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2003 Feb;77(3):233-43.

Concurrent exposure to heat shock and H7 synergizes to trigger breast cancer cell
apoptosis while sparing normal cells.

Xia W(1), Hardy L, Liu L, Zhao S, Goodman M, Voellmy R, Spector NL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

Most cancer therapies, including chemotherapy, kill tumor cells by inducing
apoptosis. Consequently, the propensity of tumor cells to evade apoptotic signals
contributes to therapeutic resistance. Here we show that breast cancer cells
exhibiting a highly resistant phenotype undergo apoptosis when exposed to
concurrent heat shock and H7, a potent serine/threonine kinase inhibitor. The
anti-tumor effects of this combination are synergistic as neither treatment alone
adversely affects breast cancer cell growth/survival. In contrast, non-malignant 
breast epithelial and hematopoietic progenitor cells are resistant to this
combination therapy, thereby excluding non-specific cytotoxicity as the cause of 
tumor cell apoptosis. Heat or other cell stresses, including chemotherapy,
preferentially enhance heat shock protein (hsp) synthesis, which serves to
protect cells from potentially lethal consequences of heat shock stimuli. Ectopic
overexpression of hsps in breast cancer cells protects against
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, increased hsps in primary breast
cancers correlates with resistance to therapy and decreased survival.
Stress-induced hsp synthesis is mediated by heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1). To simulate hsp overexpressing primary breast cancers, a number of breast
cancer cell lines were transfected with HSF1d202-316, a constitutively activated 
form of HSF1 that leads to baseline overexpression of hsps in the absence of
stress. Importantly, HSF1d202-316 transfected breast cancer cells undergo
apoptosis following concurrent heat shock and H7. In light of its tumor selective
activity against breast cancer cells that exhibit a highly resistant phenotype,
concurrent H7 and heat shock warrants further investigation as a potential cancer
therapy.

PMID: 12602923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Dev. 2003 Feb 15;17(4):516-28.

Redox regulation of mammalian heat shock factor 1 is essential for Hsp gene
activation and protection from stress.

Ahn SG(1), Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

The activation of eukaryotic heat shock protein (Hsp) gene expression occurs in
response to a wide variety of cellular stresses including heat shock, hydrogen
peroxide, uncoupled oxidative phosphorylation, infection, and inflammation.
Biochemical and genetic studies have clearly demonstrated critical roles for
mammalian heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in stress-inducible Hsp gene expression,
resistance to stress-induced programmed cell death, extra-embryonic development, 
and other biological functions. Activation of mammalian Hsp gene expression
involves the stress-inducible conversion of HSF1 from the inactive monomer to the
DNA-binding competent homotrimer. Although Hsp activation is a central conserved 
process in biology, the precise mechanisms for stress sensing and signaling to
activate HSF1, and the mechanisms by which many distinct stresses activate HSF1, 
are poorly understood. In this report we demonstrate that recombinant mammalian
HSF1 directly senses both heat and hydrogen peroxide to assemble into a
homotrimer in a reversible and redox-regulated manner. The sensing of both
stresses requires two cysteine residues within the HSF1 DNA-binding domain that
are engaged in redox-sensitive disulfide bonds. HSF1 derivatives in which either 
or both cysteines were mutated are defective in stress-inducible trimerization
and DNA binding, stress-inducible nuclear translocation and Hsp gene
trans-activation, and in the protection of mouse cells from stress-induced
apoptosis. This redox-dependent activation of HSF1 by heat and hydrogen peroxide 
establishes a common mechanism in the stress activation of Hsp gene expression by
mammalian HSF1.

PMCID: PMC195992
PMID: 12600944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Circulation. 2003 Jan 21;107(2):339-45.

Altered temporal profile of heat shock factor 1 phosphorylation and heat shock
protein 70 expression induced by heat shock in nucleus tractus solitarii of
spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Chan SH(1), Wang LL, Chang KF, Ou CC, Chan JY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, National Sun Yat-sen University, Taiwan, Republic of 
China.

BACKGROUND: We demonstrated recently that heat shock (HS)-induced heat shock
protein 70 (HSP70) expression in bilateral nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS), the
terminal site in the brain stem for primary baroreceptor afferents, confers
cardiovascular protection against heatstroke by potentiating baroreceptor reflex 
(BRR) response. This study evaluated the hypothesis that altered regulation of
HSP70 expression may be associated with the heightened susceptibility to
heatstroke during hypertension.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and normotensive
Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats anesthetized with propofol were used. Compared with WKY
rats, significant induction in HSP70 or phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), but not HSF2, in the NTS and potentiation of BRR response in SHR occurred
earlier (4 versus 8 hours), reaching peak magnitude sooner (16 versus 24 hours), 
and declined more rapidly after a brief hyperthermic HS (42+/-0.5 degrees C for
15 minutes). The protection conferred by HS against hypotension and bradycardia
during the onset of heatstroke (45 degrees C for 60 minutes), although effective,
was less effective in SHR. Microinjection bilaterally into the NTS of the
selective protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H-89 (100 pmol) or the selective PKC
inhibitor calphostin C (100 pmol) significantly attenuated all of the above
events induced in SHR by HS. However, only H-89 was effective in WKY rats.
CONCLUSIONS: An altered temporal profile of HS-induced HSP70 expression or
potentiation of BRR response by concurrent activation via both PKA and PKC
pathways of phosphorylation of HSF1 in the NTS may be associated with greater
susceptibility to heatstroke during hypertension.

PMID: 12538438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9322-6. Epub 2003 Jan 7.

Lowered temperature set point for activation of the cellular stress response in
T-lymphocytes.

Gothard LQ(1), Ruffner ME, Woodward JG, Park-Sarge OK, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky,
Chandler Medical Center, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0294, USA.

The induction of heat shock protein gene expression in response to stress is
critical for the ability of organisms to cope with and survive exposure to these 
stresses. However, most studies on HSF1-mediated induction of hsp70 gene
expression have utilized immortalized cell lines and temperatures above the
physiologically relevant range. For these reasons much less is known about the
heat shock response as it occurs in mammalian cells within tissues in the intact 
organism. To gain insight into this area we determined the temperature thresholds
for activation of HSF1 DNA binding in different mouse tissues. We have found that
HSF1 DNA binding activity and hsp70 synthesis are induced in spleen cells at
significantly lower temperatures relative to cells of other tissues, with a
temperature threshold for activation (39 degrees C) that is within the
physiological range for fever. Furthermore, we found that the lowered temperature
set point for induction of the stress response in spleen is specific to
T-lymphocytes residing within this tissue and is not exhibited by B-lymphocytes. 
This lowered threshold is also observed in T-lymphocytes isolated from lymph
nodes, suggesting that it is a general property of T-lymphocytes, and is seen in 
different mouse strains. Fever is an early event in the immune response to
infection, and thus activation of the cellular stress response in T-lymphocytes
by fever temperatures could serve as a way to give these cells enough time to
express hsps in anticipation of their function in the coming immune response. The
induced hsps likely protect these cells from the stressful conditions that can
exist during the immune response, for example increasing their protection against
stress-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 12519785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):4687-98. Epub 2002 Dec 4.

Heat shock factor 1 contains two functional domains that mediate transcriptional 
repression of the c-fos and c-fms genes.

Xie Y(1), Zhong R, Chen C, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), in addition to its pivotal role as a regulator of the
heat shock response, functions as a versatile gene repressor. We have
investigated the structural domains involved in gene repression using mutational 
analysis of the hsf1 gene. Our studies indicate that HSF1 contains two adjacent
sequences located within the N-terminal half of the protein that mediate the
repression of c-fos and c-fms. One region (NF) appears to be involved in
quenching transcriptional activation factors on target promoters and binds to the
basic zipper transcription factor NF-IL6 required for activation of c-fms and
IL-1beta. The NF domain encompasses the leucine zipper 1 and 2 sequences as well 
as the linker domain between the DNA binding and leucine zipper regions. The
function of this domain in gene repression is highly specific for HSF1, and the
homologous region from conserved family member HSF2 does not restore repressive
function in HSF2/HSF1 chimeras. In addition, HSF2 is not capable of binding to
NF-IL6. The NF domain, although necessary for repression, is not sufficient, and 
a second region (REP) occupying a portion of the regulatory domain is required
for repression. Neither domain functions independently, and both are required for
repression. Furthermore, we constructed dominant inhibitors of c-fos repression
by HSF1, which also blocked the repression of c-fms and IL-1beta, suggesting a
shared mechanism for repression of these genes by HSF1. Our studies suggest a
complex mechanism for gene repression by HSF1 involving the binding to and
quenching of activating factors on target promoters. Mapping the structural
domains involved in this process should permit further characterization of
molecular mechanisms that mediate repression.

PMID: 12468538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Trends Biochem Sci. 2002 Dec;27(12):619-27.

Multisite phosphorylation provides sophisticated regulation of transcription
factors.

Holmberg CI(1), Tran SE, Eriksson JE, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Rice Institute for
Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.

Reversible phosphorylation is a prevalent mechanism by which the activity of
eukaryotic transcription factors is regulated rapidly in response to changes in
the cellular environment. Accumulated evidence has expanded the concept of
phosphorylation to a process that provides dynamic and precise tuning of the
transactivating potential of a factor, rather than being a static on/off switch. 
In the case of transcription factors such as heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), p53 and 
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), multisite phosphorylation enables
several effects to operate within a single factor, thereby functioning as a key
to signal integration. Studies on these transcription factors illustrate recent
progress in solving the dynamic nature of transcriptional regulation by multisite
phosphorylation.

PMID: 12468231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Microsc Res Tech. 2002 Nov 15;59(4):313-6.

Characterization of gene expression profile associated with energy
restriction-induced cold tolerance of heart.

Wada Y(1), Kayo T, Koizumi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, 663-8501,
Japan. wadayasu@hyo-med.ac.jp

Hypothermia is known to be a common feature of energy restriction (ER) and
essential for a life-prolonging effect of ER. The heart is sensitive to
hypothermia, but the heart in ER mice acquires some adaptation to hypothermia.
The aim of the present study was to characterize the gene expression profile
associated with ER-induced cold resistance of heart. We analyzed the expression
of heart mRNA from ER (200 kJ/week) or control (400 kJ/week) B6 11-month-old male
mice using cDNA array membranes including 588 genes. Eighty-eight out of 588
genes were expressed in the heart. mRNAs increased by ER were glutathion
S-transferase Mu1, transcriptional factor 1 for heat shock gene (HSF1), and fetal
myosin alkali light chain genes. mRNA decreased by ER were seven genes in four
categories: (1). cell cycle or apoptosis-related proteins (cyclin G and
nucleoside diphosphate kinase B); (2). stress response proteins (oxidative
stress-induced protein); (3). DNA repair proteins (protein involved in DNA
double-strand break repair, Rad23 UV excision repair protein homologue and
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme); and (4). cell-surface antigens (lamimin receptor
1). These data suggest that the heart of ER mice adapts to hypothermia involving 
heat shock proteins and their transcriptional factors and by changing structure
and property of myofibrils. It is also suggested that ER induces protection
against oxidative stress and inhibits cell proliferation of "nonmuscle cells" in 
the heart. Gene expression analysis using cDNA array was useful for screening
genes associated with ER-induced cold adaptation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12424794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Eur Surg Res. 2002 Nov-Dec;34(6):397-404.

Reperfusion but not acute ischemia in pig small intestine induces
transcriptionally mediated heat shock response in situ.

Oksala NK(1), Kaarniranta K, Tenhunen JJ, Tiihonen R, Heino A, Sistonen L,
Paimela H, Alhava E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Although there is data on the cytoprotective role of heat shock
proteins in intestinal ischemia-reperfusion, the effects of ischemia and
reperfusion per se on the small intestinal heat shock response have been poorly
characterized.
METHODS: Four female pigs were subjected to 60-min ischemia by superior
mesenteric artery occlusion followed by 360-min reperfusion. Systemic and local
hemodynamics were monitored. Samples from the jejunal mucosa and muscularis were 
obtained for histology and for time series molecular biologic analyses of heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), hsp70 mRNA and Hsp70 protein.
RESULTS: A 30-min reperfusion of jejunum after a preceding 1-hour ischemia
results in a significantly increased DNA-binding activity of HSF1, in a 10-fold
increase of hsp70 mRNA in the mucosal and in a 7-fold increase in the muscular
layers. Translational activation and accumulation of Hsp70 protein occurs after
60 min of reperfusion in the intestine. Nevertheless, a 60-min ischemia inducing 
mucosal detachment does not induce the heat shock response at any level analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: Ischemia alone is insufficient to induce the heat shock response,
whereas subsequent reperfusion induces the response via transcriptionally
mediated induction of Hsp70 synthesis both in the mucosal and muscular layers.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12403938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):8005-14.

Heat shock transcription factor 2 is not essential for embryonic development,
fertility, or adult cognitive and psychomotor function in mice.

McMillan DR(1), Christians E, Forster M, Xiao X, Connell P, Plumier JC, Zuo X,
Richardson J, Morgan S, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine. Pediatrics. Pathology. Division of Cell and 
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas,
Dallas, Texas 75235, USA.

Members of the heat shock factor (HSF) family are evolutionarily conserved
regulators that share a highly homologous DNA-binding domain. In mammals, HSF1 is
the main factor controlling the stress-inducible expression of Hsp genes while
the functions of HSF2 and HSF4 are less clear. Based on its developmental profile
of expression, it was hypothesized that HSF2 may play an essential role in brain 
and heart development, spermatogenesis, and erythroid differentiation. To
directly assess this hypothesis and better understand the underlying mechanisms
that require HSF2, we generated Hsf2 knockout mice. Here, we report that
Hsf2(-/-) mice are viable and fertile and exhibit normal life span and behavioral
functions. We conclude that HSF2, most probably because its physiological roles
are integrated into a redundant network of gene regulation and function, is
dispensable for normal development, fertility, and postnatal psychomotor
function.

PMCID: PMC134743
PMID: 12391166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Oct 21;1592(2):135-40.

Stabilization of hsp70 mRNA on prolonged cell exposure to hypertonicity.

Alfieri RR(1), Bonelli MA, Petronini PG, Borghetti AF.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Sezione di Patologia Molecolare e
Immunologia, Universita' degli Studi di Parma, Via Volturno 39, 43100 Parma,
Italy. roberta.alfieri@unipr.it

Prolonged exposure of 3T3 cells to 0.5 osM hypertonic medium induced the
accumulation of hsp70 mRNAs. This increase in mRNA levels required active protein
synthesis. A weak and transient activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) was
noted, but it was temporally uncoupled to the accumulation of the hsp70 mRNAs.
Nuclear run-on assay and transfection experiments showed that hsp70 gene
transcription was not affected by hypertonicity. ActD chase experiments showed
that during hypertonic treatment, degradation of hsp70 mRNAs was markedly
reduced. This effect did not appear to be a general phenomenon since the increase
in mRNA level of another gene induced by hypertonicity (ATA2 transporter) was
scarcely due to RNA stabilization. These findings suggest that hypertonic
treatment increases the production of hsp70 protein in 3T3 cells via a
stabilization of its corresponding mRNA.

PMID: 12379476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Hear Res. 2002 Nov;173(1-2):109-18.

Expression and localization of heat shock factor (Hsf) 1 in the rodent cochlea.

Fairfield DA(1), Kanicki AC, Lomax MI, Altschuler RA.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology/Head Neck
Surgery, The University of Michigan, 1301 East Ann Street, Ann Arbor 48109-0506, 
USA.

Activation of heat shock factors (Hsfs) is one of the potential mechanisms for
regulating the transcription of the heat shock proteins (Hsps) and certain other 
stress-responsive genes. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), Western blot and immunocytochemistry were used to examine the
expression and localization of Hsf1, the stress-responsive member of the Hsf
family, in the rat and mouse cochlea. Cerebellum was used as a positive control. 
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR of cochlear RNA revealed that Hsf1 was more highly
expressed in a subfraction containing sensorineural epithelium and lateral wall
than in a subfraction containing modiolus, with the alpha splice form predominant
over the beta in both subfractions. Immunocytochemistry showed selective staining
in the rodent cochlea. Hsf1 immunostaining was found in the nuclei of inner and
outer hair cells in the organ of Corti, spiral ganglion cells in the modiolus,
and cells in the marginal and intermediate layers of the stria vascularis. This
is largely consistent with where Hsp70 induction is reported. Hsf1 activation
following heat shock was examined by Western blot. Hyperthermia resulted in
stress-induced Hsf1 hyperphosphorylation in cochlea as well as cerebellum. This
hyperphosphorylation as well as the correlation of its localization with Hsp70
induction supports a role for Hsf1 in the cochlear stress response.

PMID: 12372640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 1;21(19):5164-72.

Mouse heat shock transcription factor 1 deficiency alters cardiac redox
homeostasis and increases mitochondrial oxidative damage.

Yan LJ(1), Christians ES, Liu L, Xiao X, Sohal RS, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Laboratories,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA.

In this study, using heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1) knockout mice as a model, we
tested the hypothesis that HSF1-dependent regulation of heat shock proteins
(Hsps) is required to maintain redox state and attenuate oxidative damage in the 
normal heart. Here we report that, in mice, HSF1 deficiency reduces cardiac
expression of Hsp25, alphaB-crystallin and Hsp70, but not Hsp60 and Hsp90.
Consistent with the downregulation of Hsp25, for example, a significantly lower
glutathione (GSH)/glutathione disulfate (GSSG) ratio was associated with the
decreased activity, but not protein content, of glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase. Con sequently, superoxide was generated at a higher rate, and
several mitochondrial proteins, including adenine nucleotide translocase 1
(ANT1), were more oxidized by HSF1 deficiency in vivo. Oxidative damage to ANT1
protein, a structural component of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore
(MPTP), decreases its catalytic activity and increases MPTP opening,
respectively. Taken together, our results indicate for the first time that
constitutive expression of HSP chaperones requires HSF1 activity, and that such
HSF1-dependent requirements are directly and functionally linked to maintain
redox homeostasis and antioxidative defenses at normal (37 degrees C)
temperature.

PMCID: PMC129050
PMID: 12356732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44817-25. Epub 2002 Sep 17.

Misfolded proteins are competent to mediate a subset of the responses to heat
shock in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Trotter EW(1), Kao CM, Berenfeld L, Botstein D, Petsko GA, Gray JV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Biomedical and Life Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Glasgow G11 6NU, United Kingdom.

Cells may sense heat shock via the accumulation of thermally misfolded proteins. 
To explore this possibility, we determined the effect of protein misfolding on
gene expression in the absence of temperature changes. The imino acid analog
azetidine-2-carboxylic acid (AZC) is incorporated into protein competitively with
proline and causes reduced thermal stability or misfolding. We found that adding 
AZC to yeast at sublethal concentrations sufficient to arrest proliferation
selectively induced expression of heat shock factor-regulated genes to a maximum 
of 27-fold and that these inductions were dependent on heat shock factor. AZC
treatment also selectively repressed expression of the ribosomal protein genes,
another heat shock factor-dependent process, to a maximum of 20-fold. AZC
treatment thus strongly and selectively activates heat shock factor. AZC
treatment causes this activation by misfolding proteins. Induction of HSP42 by
AZC treatment required protein synthesis; treatment with ethanol, which can also 
misfold proteins, activated heat shock factor, but treatment with canavanine, an 
arginine analog less potent than AZC at misfolding proteins, did not. However,
misfolded proteins did not strongly induce the stress response element regulon.
We conclude that misfolded proteins are competent to specifically trigger
activation of heat shock factor in response to heat shock.

PMID: 12239211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Exp Biol. 2002 Oct;205(Pt 20):3231-40.

Thermal acclimation changes DNA-binding activity of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in
the goby Gillichthys mirabilis: implications for plasticity in the heat-shock
response in natural populations.

Buckley BA(1), Hofmann GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Arizona State University, Tempe 85287-1501, USA.

The intracellular build-up of thermally damaged proteins following exposure to
heat stress results in the synthesis of a family of evolutionarily conserved
proteins called heat shock proteins (Hsps) that act as molecular chaperones,
protecting the cell against the aggregation of denatured proteins. The
transcriptional regulation of heat shock genes by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) has 
been extensively studied in model systems, but little research has focused on the
role HSF1 plays in Hsp gene expression in eurythermal organisms from broadly
fluctuating thermal environments. The threshold temperature for Hsp induction in 
these organisms shifts with the recent thermal history of the individual but the 
mechanism by which this plasticity in Hsp induction temperature is achieved is
unknown. We examined the effect of thermal acclimation on the heat-activation of 
HSF1 in the eurythermal teleost Gillichthys mirabilis. After a 5-week acclimation
period (at 13, 21 or 28 degrees C) the temperature of HSF1 activation was
positively correlated with acclimation temperature. HSF1 activation peaked at 27 
degrees C in fish acclimated to 13 degrees C, at 33 degrees C in the 21 degrees C
group, and at 36 degrees C in the 28 degrees C group. Concentrations of both HSF1
and Hsp70 in the 28 degrees C group were significantly higher than in the colder 
acclimated fish. Plasticity in HSF1 activation may be important to the adjustable
nature of the heat shock response in eurythermal organisms and the environmental 
control of Hsp gene expression.

PMID: 12235201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Struct Funct. 2002 Jun;27(3):157-62.

Steryl glucoside is a lipid mediator in stress-responsive signal transduction.

Kunimoto S(1), Murofushi W, Kai H, Ishida Y, Uchiyama A, Kobayashi T, Kobayashi
S, Murofushi H, Murakami-Murofushi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Ochanomizu University, Tokyo,
Japan.

We previously reported that steryl glucoside (SG) is rapidly induced in cells
from molds to humans by exposure to environmental stress (Murakami-Murofushi et
al. (1997) J. Biol. Chem., 272, 486-489, Kunimoto et al. (2000) Cell Stress &
Chaperones, 5, 3-7), and in mold cells SG production is followed by activation of
a certain protein kinase and induction of heat shock proteins (HSP) (Maruya et
al. (1997) Cell Struct. Funct., 21, 533-538). To determine the biological
significance of SG in stress responsive signal transduction, we added SG to the
culture of human fibroblasts and examined its effect on HSP induction. We
demonstrated a rapid activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) to
bind to heat shock element (HSE) and induction of heat shock protein 70 (HSP70)
in fibroblast cells by exposure to exogenously added human major SG, cholesteryl 
glucoside (CG). In addition, enzyme activity to form CG from cholesterol and
UDP-glucose was detected in the homogenate of fibroblast cells. These results
strongly suggest that CG acts as a mediator in the early stage of stress
responsive signal transduction.

PMID: 12207046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Toxicol Sci. 2002 Sep;69(1):139-48.

Peroxisome proliferators do not activate the transcription factors AP-1, early
growth response-1, or heat shock factors 1 and 2 in rats or hamsters.

O'Brien ML(1), Cunningham ML, Spear BT, Glauert HP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40506, USA.

Peroxisome proliferators (PPs) cause hepatomegaly, peroxisome proliferation, and 
hepatocarcinogenesis in rats and mice, whereas hamsters are less responsive to
these compounds. PPs increase peroxisomal beta-oxidation and P4504A subfamily
activity, which have been hypothesized to result in oxidative stress. Work in our
laboratory indicated that differential modulation of the redox-sensitive
transcription factor NF-kappaB may contribute to the resulting difference in
species susceptibility following PP administration. Therefore, we hypothesized
that other redox-sensitive transcription factors such as AP-1, early growth
response gene 1 (Egr-1), and heat-shock factors 1 and 2 (HSF1/2) may also be
alternatively activated in differentially susceptible species. Accordingly, we
measured the activation of these transcription factors using gel mobility shift
assays, with hepatic nuclear extracts derived from rats and Syrian hamsters fed
two doses of three peroxisome proliferators (dibutyl-phthalate [DBP], gemfibrozil
and Wy-14,643) for 6, 34, or 90 days. Although changes were observed at various
time points, no consistent, dose-responsive changes were observed in the DNA
binding activities of these transcription factors following PP treatment. The
lack of increased binding of AP-1, Egr-1, and HSFs suggests that these factors
are not involved in increased cell proliferation following PP administration,
although we cannot rule out that these factors are activated at earlier time
points than those examined in this study.

PMID: 12215668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Integr Comp Biol. 2002 Aug;42(4):808-14. doi: 10.1093/icb/42.4.808.

Molecular chaperones in ectothermic marine animals: biochemical function and gene
expression.

Hofmann GE(1), Buckley BA, Place SP, Zippay ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-1501.

The intertidal zone has historically functioned as an important natural
laboratory for testing ideas about how physical factors such as temperature
influence organismal physiology and in turn influence the distribution patterns
of organisms. Key to our understanding of how the physical environment helps
structure organismal distribution is the identification of physiological
processes that have ecological relevance. We have focused on biochemical- and
molecular-level physiology that would contribute to thermal tolerance and
maintenance of a functional intracellular protein pool in the face of extreme and
fluctuating environmental temperatures. Past research has addressed processes
central to protein homeostasis (e.g., protein ubiquitination) and the molecular
ecology of molecular chaperones, a.k.a. heat shock proteins (Hsps), in
ectothermic animals. In this presentation, we focus on two new developments
regarding the biology of heat shock proteins as molecular chaperones in
intertidal organisms. First, we present data on the functional characteristics of
the transcriptional factor, HSF1 and discuss how these data relate to the
plasticity of Hsp gene expression observed in intertidal organisms in nature.
Second, we present data on the biochemical function of heat shock proteins
purified from our non-model study organisms and discuss the temperature
relationships of these molecules as they assist in protein folding in situ.

PMID: 21708779  [PubMed]


88. Cardiovasc Res. 2002 Aug 1;55(2):341-8.

Increased preload directly induces the activation of heat shock transcription
factor 1 in the left ventricular overloaded heart.

Nishizawa J(1), Nakai A, Komeda M, Ban T, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan. nishizaw@kcn.ne.jp

OBJECTIVES: The rapid induction of heat shock proteins (HSPs) by cardiac overload
has been shown using in vivo models and it is assumed that HSPs are involved in
myocardial protection against cardiac overload. However, the mechanisms for the
induction of heat shock response by cardiac overload remain unclear. We examined 
whether increased preload as mechanical stress directly induces heat shock gene
expression.
METHODS: Rat hearts were isolated and perfused with Krebs-Henseleit buffer by the
Langendorff method. Whole-cell extracts were prepared for gel mobility shift
assay using oligonucleotides containing the heat shock element. We examined the
induction of the DNA-binding activity of heat shock transcription factor (HSF),
by which the transcription of heat shock genes is mainly regulated, during
increased preload of left ventricle (LV) or perfusion with the buffer containing 
epinephrine, norepinephrine, angiotensin II, or vasopressin.
RESULTS: In preloaded hearts, with LVEDP of both 30 and 50 mmHg, the DNA-binding 
activity of HSF1 was detected at 10 min, and increased at 20 and 60 min. At any
time point, the activity with LVEDP of 50 mmHg was stronger than that with LVEDP 
of 30 mmHg. However, none of these hypertensive agents activated the DNA-binding 
activities of HSF. In afterloaded hearts, with the perfusion of norepinephrine,
the activation of HSF was not induced.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that increased preload as mechanical stress 
directly induces the activation of HSF1 in the LV-overloaded heart.

PMID: 12123773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Jul 15;64(2):247-56.

Relationship between the activation of heat shock factor and the suppression of
nuclear factor-kappaB activity in rat hepatocyte cultures treated with
cyclosporine A.

Andrés D(1), Díez-Fernández C, Castrillo A, Cascales M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica (CSIC-UCM), Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad
Complutense, Plaza de Ramón y Cajal sn, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We investigated on primary cultures of rat hepatocytes the effect of cyclosporine
A (CsA) on the activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), activator protein
1 (AP-1), and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), three transcription factors involved in
cellular response pathways. Hepatocytes were subjected to a time-course (1, 3, 6,
and 22 hr) incubation and CsA treatment in the range 1-50 microM. NF-kappaB,
AP-1, and HSF1 binding activities were established through electrophoretic
mobility shift assay. Levels of HSP70 mRNA and protein were measured by Northern 
and Western blot analysis respectively. In cells incubated for 1 and 3 hr,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments showed a dose-dependent increase
of the NF-kappaB binding activity; while following 22hr of incubation, a
suppression of the positive effect of CsA at shorter times was detected. At all
periods of incubation assayed, CsA induced the activation of AP-1 which was
detected by DNA-binding activity of this transcription factor. A dose-dependent
activation of HSF1 was observed at 22 hr of incubation. We conclude that in rat
hepatocyte cultures, CsA induces the transcriptional activation of NF-kappaB,
AP-1, and HSF1. However, the time point at which activation of each transcription
factor occurs is different. Thus, at 22 hr of incubation, the CsA-induced
activation of HSF1 is accompanied by the reduction of the positive effect of CsA 
on NF-kappaB activation at earlier time points.

PMID: 12123745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Cell Biochem. 2002;86(2):376-93.

Targeted disruption of hsf1 leads to lack of thermotolerance and defines
tissue-specific regulation for stress-inducible Hsp molecular chaperones.

Zhang Y(1), Huang L, Zhang J, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and Department of Radiology,
Medical College of Georgia, 1120, 15th St., CB2803, Augusta 30912, USA.

The rapid synthesis of heat shock proteins (Hsps) in cells subjected to
environmental challenge is controlled by heat shock transcription factor-1
(Hsf1). Regulation of Hsps by Hsf1 is highly complex and, in the whole organism, 
remains largely unexplored. In this study, we have used mouse embryo fibroblasts 
and bone marrow progenitor cells from hsf1-/- mice as well as hsp70.3-lacZ
knock-in mice bred on the hsf1deficient genetic background
(hsf1-/--hsp70.3+/--lacZ), to further elucidate the function of Hsf1 and its
participation as a transcriptional activator of Hsp70 synthesis under normal or
heat-induced stress conditions in vitro and in vivo. The results revealed that
heat-induced Hsp70 expression in mouse tissue is entirely controlled by Hsf1,
whereas its activity is not required for tissue-specific constitutive Hsp70
expression. We further demonstrate that Hsf1 is critical for maintaining cellular
integrity after heat stress and that cells from hsf1-/- mice lack the ability to 
develop thermotolerance. This deficiency is explained by the elimination of
stress-inducible Hsp70 and Hsp25 response in the absence of Hsf1 activity,
leading to a lack of Hsp-mediated inhibition of apoptotic cell death via both
caspase-dependent and caspase-independent pathways. The pivotal role of the Hsf1 
transactivator in regulating rapid synthesis of Hsps as a critical cellular
defense mechanism against environmental stress-induced damage is underlined.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Aug;283(2):C404-11.

Redox signaling of cardiac HSF1 DNA binding.

Paroo Z(1), Meredith MJ, Locke M, Haist JV, Karmazyn M, Noble EG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 3K7.

Experiments involving chemical induction of the heat shock response in simple
biological systems have generated the hypothesis that protein denaturation and
consequential binding of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) to proximal
heat shock elements (HSEs) on heat shock protein (hsp) genes are the result of
oxidation and/or depletion of intracellular thiols. The purpose of the present
investigation was to determine the role of redox signaling of HSF1 in the intact 
animal in response to physiological and pharmacological perturbations. Heat shock
and exercise induced HSF1-HSE DNA binding in the rat myocardium (P < 0.001) in
the absence of changes in reduced glutathione (GSH), the major nonprotein thiol
in the cell. Ischemia-reperfusion, which decreased GSH content (P < 0.05),
resulted in nonsignificant HSF1-HSE formation. This dissociation between
physiological induction of HSF1 and changes in GSH was not gender dependent.
Pharmacological ablation of GSH with L-buthionine-[S,R]-sulfoximine (BSO)
treatment increased myocardial HSF1-HSE DNA binding in estrogen-naive animals (P 
= 0.007). Thus, although physiological induction of HSF1-HSE DNA binding is
likely regulated by mediators of protein denaturation other than cellular redox
status, the proposed signaling pathway may predominate with pharmacological
oxidation and may represent a plausible and accessible strategy in the
development of HSP-based therapies.

PMID: 12107049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Mol Biol. 2002 May 17;318(5):1237-49.

Structural mimicry of proline kinks: tertiary packing interactions support local 
structural distortions.

Ceruso MA(1), Weinstein H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029-6574, USA.

Proline residues in the helical segments of soluble and transmembrane proteins
have received special attention from both a structural and functional
perspective. A feature of these helices is the structural distortion termed
"proline-kink", which has been associated with the presence of the proline
residue. However, a recent report on the yeast heat-shock transcription factor of
Kluyveromyces lactis (HSF_KL) suggests that these proline-associated deformations
can be achieved in the absence of proline residues, thus raising the question of 
the mechanisms responsible for the structural mimicry of proline-related
features. In this study, the specific interactions responsible for the distortion
were characterized by comparative analysis of the atomic details of the packing
interactions that surround the evolutionarily conserved proline-kink in the
alpha2 helix of HSF_KL and a set of 39 structurally related proteins that lacked 
the distortion. The mechanistic details inferred from this analysis were
confirmed with molecular dynamics simulations. The study shows that the packing
interactions between the alpha2 and alpha1 helices in HSF_KL are responsible for 
the stabilization of the conserved kink, whether a proline residue that divides
the helix into segments is present or not. The proline-kink can facilitate the
formation of tertiary packing interactions that would otherwise not be possible. 
However, it is the ability to establish differential packing interactions for the
helix segments, rather than the structural properties of the proline-kink itself,
that emerges as the key factor for the characteristic distortion.

PMID: 12083514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Neurochem. 2002 Apr;81(2):355-64.

Geldanamycin induces heat shock proteins in brain and protects against focal
cerebral ischemia.

Lu A(1), Ran R, Parmentier-Batteur S, Nee A, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0536, USA.

Geldanamycin (GA), a benzoquinone ansamycin, binds Hsp90 in vitro, releases heat 
shock factor (HSF1) and induces heat shock proteins (Hsps). Because viral and
transgenic overexpression of Hsps protects cells against ischemia in vitro, we
hypothesized that GA would protect brain from focal ischemia by inducing Hsps in 
vivo. Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to 2-hour middle cerebral
artery occlusions (MCAO) using the suture technique followed by 22-h
reperfusions. GA or vehicle was injected into the lateral cerebral ventricles
(i.c.v) 24 h before ischemia. Geldanamycin at 1 microg/kg decreased infarct
volumes by 55.7% (p < 0.01) and TUNEL-positive cells by 30% in cerebral cortex.
GA also improved behavioral outcomes (p < 0.01) and reduced brain edema (p <
0.05). Western blots showed that the 1 microg/kg GA dose induced Hsp70 and Hsp25 
protein 8.2-fold and 2.7-fold, respectively, by 48 h following administration.
Immunocytochemistry showed that GA induced Hsp70 in neurons and Hsp25 in glia and
arteries in cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus, and other brain regions. GA
reduced co-immunoprecipitation of HSF1 with Hsp90 in brain tissue homogenates,
promoted HSE-binding of HSF in brain nuclear extracts using gel shift assays, and
increased luciferase reporter gene transcription for the Hsp70 promoter in PC12
cells. The data show that geldanamycin protects brain from focal ischemia and
that this may be due, at least in part, to geldanamycin stimulation of heat shock
gene transcription.

PMID: 12064483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2002 May 30;101(1-2):136-40.

Neuronal cells show regulatory differences in the hsp70 gene response.

Kaarniranta K(1), Oksala N, Karjalainen HM, Suuronen T, Sistonen L, Helminen HJ, 
Salminen A, Lammi MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Kuopio, P.O. Box 1627, 70211 Kuopio,
Finland. kaarnira@messi.uku.fi

The synthesis of heat shock proteins (Hsps), encoded by heat shock genes, is
increased in response to various stress stimuli. Hsps function as molecular
chaperones, they dissociate cytotoxic stress-induced protein aggregates within
cells and ensure improved survival. Induction of heat shock genes is mainly
regulated at the transcriptional level. The stress responsive transcription
factor, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), is involved in the transcriptional induction 
of the heat shock genes. Our objective was to examine how hsp70 genes are
regulated in different transformed and primary neurons upon exposure to elevated 
temperature. Our findings reveal that the Hsp70 response is regulated at the
translational level in Neuro-2a neuroblastoma cells, while the IMR-32
neuroblastoma cells respond to stress by the classical HSF1-driven
transcriptional regulatory mechanism. Primary rat hippocampal neurons show a lack
of HSF1 and induction of the hsp70 gene. These observations suggest that neuronal
cells display different hsp70 gene expression patterns which range from
undetected response to transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation during 
heat stress.

PMID: 12007842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Immunol. 2002 May 15;168(10):5178-83.

Induction of heat shock protein 47 synthesis by TGF-beta and IL-1 beta via
enhancement of the heat shock element binding activity of heat shock
transcription factor 1.

Sasaki H(1), Sato T, Yamauchi N, Okamoto T, Kobayashi D, Iyama S, Kato J,
Matsunaga T, Takimoto R, Takayama T, Kogawa K, Watanabe N, Niitsu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Section 4) and Clinical Diagnosis Medicine,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, South-1, West-16, Sapporo
060-8543, Japan.

With most immunological reactions, tissue fibrosis, collagen overproduction
caused by immune cytokines, is inevitably associated. Among the various immune
cytokines, heat shock protein 47 (HSP47) is a procollagen-specific molecular
chaperon and is essential for secretion of procollagen from cells. Induction of
HSP47 by TGF-beta has been previously reported in rat skeletal myoblasts and
mouse osteoblasts, but not in human diploid fibroblasts. As for IL-1beta, its
effect on HSP47 has not been elucidated. In the present study, using human
embryonic lung fibroblast cells, we first disclosed that both TGF-beta and
IL-1beta induced HSP47 synthesis. We then revealed that the binding of the heat
shock element (HSE) by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) was enhanced by
both cytokines. We further demonstrated that trimer formation of HSF1, which is
essential for its binding to HSE, was induced by these cytokines. The enhancement
of HSP47 synthesis and their trimer formation of HSF1 were augmented by using a
combination of both cytokines. Collectively, TGF- beta and IL-1beta were found to
induce trimer formation of HSF1 which in turn bound to HSE of HSP47, resulting in
the enhancement of HSP47 expression. Thus, HSP47 could well be a good candidate
for molecular targeting in controlling tissue fibrosis, given that both principal
fibrinogenetic cytokines (TGF-beta, IL-1beta) are commonly involved in its
induction through HSF1 trimerization.

PMID: 11994473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Exp Cell Res. 2002 May 1;275(2):200-14.

Exogenous expression of heat shock protein 90kDa retards the cell cycle and
impairs the heat shock response.

Zhao C(1), Hashiguchi A, Kondoh K, Du W, Hata J, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinano-machi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.

The 90-kDa heat shock protein, HSP90, is an abundant molecular chaperone which
functions in cellular homeostasis in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It is well known
that HSP90 plays a critical and indispensable role in regulating cell growth
through modulations of various signal transduction pathways, but its roles in
cell cycle control are not so well known. We transferred human HSP90 (wild-type
or mutated types) expression vectors into NIH-3T3 cells in order to study certain
functions of HSP90 in the cell cycle and cell growth under physiological
conditions. We found that the exogenous expression of HSP90 (wild-type) induced a
decrease in cell growth via retardation of the G1/S transition. The inhibition of
cell growth was caused by reduced expressions of cyclin D3 and cyclin A mRNA and 
protein. On the other hand, no stable transfectants with the three types of
mutated HSP90 were obtained. Unexpectedly, exogenous HSP90 expression impaired
the heat shock response by inhibiting both heat shock transcription factor
1(HSF1) activation and transportation of HSF1 into the nucleus. The HSF1 function
was disrupted by the direct association between HSF1 and exogenous HSP90, which
was present as a monomer. These results reveal important roles of HSP90 in cell
cycle control and in the stress response of nontransformed cells.

PMID: 11969290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22140-6. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

A novel non-conventional heat shock element regulates expression of MDJ1 encoding
a DnaJ homolog in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Tachibana T(1), Astumi S, Shioda R, Ueno M, Uritani M, Ushimaru T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Geoscience, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University,
Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

The heat shock factor (HSF) is a pivotal transcriptional factor that regulates
the expression of genes encoding heat shock proteins (HSPs) via heat shock
elements (HSEs). nGAAnnTTCnnGAAn functions as the minimum consensus HSE (cHSE) in
vivo. Here we show that the expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae MDJ1 encoding 
a mitochondrial DnaJ homolog is regulated by HSF via a novel non-consensus HSE
(ncHSE(MDJ1)), which consists of three separated pentameric nGAAn motifs,
nTTCn-(11 bp)-nGAAn-(5 bp)-nGAAn. This is the first evidence to show that the
immediate contact of nGAAn motifs is dispensable for regulation by HSF in vivo.
ncHSE(MDJ1) confers different heat shock responses versus cHSE and, unlike cHSE, 
definitively requires a carboxyl-terminal activation domain of HSF in the
expression. ncHSE(MDJ1)-like elements are found in promoter regions of some other
DnaJ-related genes. The highly conserved HSF/HSE system suggests that similar
ncHSEs may be used for the expression of HSP genes in other eukaryotes including 
humans.

PMID: 11940587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Curr Genet. 2002 Feb;40(5):291-310. Epub 2001 Dec 8.

Composition of the spindle pole body of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the proteins
involved in its duplication.

Helfant AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
helfanta@mail.upstate.edu

The microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) is the organelle that manages the
distribution of microtubule filaments in the cell. It includes such centers of
microtubule organization as basal bodies, nucleus-associated bodies, spindle pole
bodies and centrosomes. The centrosome is the MTOC in most animal cells. Despite 
the numerous studies that have been published on this organelle over the past 100
years, the protein composition of the animal centrosome remains poorly defined.
In order to study the MTOC, many researchers have chosen the budding yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a model organism. This review summarizes the budding 
yeast MTOC, referred to as the spindle pole body (SPB), including its structure
and function, its components and the factors involved in its duplication.
Electron microscopy and high-voltage electron tomographic analysis of this
organelle have contributed to the understanding of its morphology, whereas
analysis by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization has played a major role
in identifying many of the spindle pole components. In addition, genetic and
biochemical studies have revealed the functional and physical relationships of
certain spindle pole components and proteins important for SPB duplication.

PMID: 11935220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Exp Biol. 2002 Mar;205(Pt 5):677-85.

Interspecific- and acclimation-induced variation in levels of heat-shock proteins
70 (hsp70) and 90 (hsp90) and heat-shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1) in
congeneric marine snails (genus Tegula): implications for regulation of hsp gene 
expression.

Tomanek L(1), Somero GN.

Author information: 
(1)Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Pacific Grove, CA 93950-3094,
USA. tomanekl@leland.stanford.edu

In our previous studies of heat-shock protein (hsp) expression in congeneric
marine gastropods of the genus Tegula, we observed interspecific and
acclimation-induced variation in the temperatures at which heat-shock gene
expression is induced (T(on)). To investigate the factors responsible for these
inter- and intraspecific differences in T(on), we tested the predictions of the
'cellular thermometer' model for the transcriptional regulation of hsp
expression. According to this model, hsps not active in chaperoning unfolded
proteins bind to a transcription factor, heat-shock factor-1 (HSF1), thereby
reducing the levels of free HSF1 that are available to bind to the heat-shock
element, a regulatory element upstream of hsp genes. Under stress, hsps bind to
denatured proteins, releasing HSF1, which can now activate hsp gene
transcription. Thus, elevated levels of heat-shock proteins of the 40, 70 and 90 
kDa families (hsp 40, hsp70 and hsp90, respectively) would be predicted to
elevate T(on). Conversely, elevated levels of HSF1 would be predicted to decrease
T(on). Following laboratory acclimation to 13, 18 and 23 degrees C, we used
solid-phase immunochemistry (western analysis) to quantify endogenous levels of
two hsp70 isoforms (hsp74 and hsp72), hsp90 and HSF1 in the low- to
mid-intertidal species Tegula funebralis and in two subtidal to low-intertidal
congeners, T. brunnea and T. montereyi. We found higher endogenous levels of
hsp72 (a strongly heat-induced isoform) at 13 and 18 degrees C in T. funebralis
in comparison with T. brunnea and T. montereyi. However, T. funebralis also had
higher levels of HSF1 than its congeners. The higher levels of HSF1 in T.
funebralis cannot, within the framework of the cellular thermometer model,
account for the higher T(on) observed for this species, although they may explain
why T. funebralis is able to induce the heat-shock response more rapidly than T. 
brunnea. However, the cellular thermometer model does appear to explain the cause
of the increases in T(on) that occurred during warm acclimation of the two
subtidal species, in which warm acclimation was accompanied by increased levels
of hsp72, hsp74 and hsp90, whereas levels of HSF1 remained stable. T. funebralis,
which experiences greater heat stress than its subtidal congeners, consistently
had higher ratios of hsp72 to hsp74 than its congeners, although the sum of
levels of the two isoforms was similar for all three species except at the
highest acclimation temperature (23 degrees C). The ratio of hsp72 to hsp74 may
provide a more accurate estimate of environmental heat stress than the total
concentrations of both hsp70 isoforms.

PMID: 11907057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Cell Biol. 2002 Mar 4;156(5):775-81. Epub 2002 Mar 4.

In vivo binding of active heat shock transcription factor 1 to human chromosome 9
heterochromatin during stress.

Jolly C(1), Konecny L, Grady DL, Kutskova YA, Cotto JJ, Morimoto RI, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)DyOGen, INSERM U309, Institut A. Bonniot, Domaine de la Merci, 38706 La
Tronche cedex, France. caroline.jolly@ujf-grenoble.fr

Activation of the mammalian heat shock transcription factor (HSF)1 by stress is a
multistep process resulting in the transcription of heat shock genes. Coincident 
with these events is the rapid and reversible redistribution of HSF1 to discrete 
nuclear structures termed HSF1 granules, whose function is still unknown. Key
features are that the number of granules correlates with cell ploidy, suggesting 
the existence of a chromosomal target. Here we show that in humans, HSF1 granules
localize to the 9q11-q12 heterochromatic region. Within this locus, HSF1 binds
through direct DNA-protein interaction with a nucleosome-containing subclass of
satellite III repeats. HSF1 granule formation only requires the DNA binding
competence and the trimerization of the factor. This is the first example of a
transcriptional activator that accumulates transiently and reversibly on a
chromosome-specific heterochromatic locus.

PMCID: PMC2173303
PMID: 11877455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 8;291(4):1071-80.

NF-IL6 and HSF1 have mutually antagonistic effects on transcription in monocytic 
cells.

Xie Y(1), Chen C, Stevenson MA, Hume DA, Auron PE, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We have examined the functional antagonism between the regulator of the heat
shock response, HSF1, and NF-IL6, which plays a major role in control of the
acute phase response (APR). Agents that activate HSF1 such as heat shock and
sodium salicylate inhibit NF-IL6 induced transcription while NF-IL6 activators
such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interleukin 6 (IL-6) repressed the stress
responsive HSP70B promoter. In transfection studies, the inhibitory effects of
HSF1 and NF-IL6 on the c-fms promoter were shown to be highly dose-dependent.
Furthermore, heat shock is inhibitory to differentiation-linked expression of
macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) receptor, product of the c-fms gene,
which is transcriptionally activated by NF-IL6 but repressed by HSF1. Our studies
suggest a strong mutual antagonism between the heat shock response and APR, which
may influence the sensitivity and duration of inflammatory responses.

PMID: 11866474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):17308-14. Epub 2002 Feb 25.

Effect of hyaluronan oligosaccharides on the expression of heat shock protein 72.

Xu H(1), Ito T, Tawada A, Maeda H, Yamanokuchi H, Isahara K, Yoshida K, Uchiyama 
Y, Asari A.

Author information: 
(1)Seikagaku Corporation, Tateno 3-1253, Higashiyamato-shi, Tokyo 207-0021,
Japan.

We have previously shown that intraarticular treatment with a hyaluronan (HA)
preparation (840 kDa), HA84, up-regulates heat shock protein 72 (Hsp72)
expression and suppresses degeneration of synovial cells in an arthritis model.
In that study, the HA84 administered was degraded into HA oligosaccharides in the
synovial tissue, suggesting that HA84 or degradation products of HA may
up-regulate Hsp72 expression. Thus, in the present study, we examined the effects
of HA of various molecular sizes on Hsp72 expression and cell death in stressed
cells. Western blotting analysis showed that treatment of K562 cells with HA
tetrasaccharides up-regulated Hsp72 expression after exposure to hyperthermia. On
the other hand, treatment of the cells with HA of other sizes (di-, hexa-, deca-,
dodecasaccharides), HA84, or tetrasaccharides of keratan sulfate did not elicit
any change in expression of the Hsp72 protein. Treatment of the cells with
tetrasaccharides of HA up-regulated not only expression of the Hsp72 protein but 
also Hsp72 mRNA expression and enhanced activation of HSF1, a transcription
factor controlling Hsp72 expression, after exposure to hyperthermia. Because the 
level of Hsp72 protein was not affected by tetrasaccharides of HA when the K562
cells were kept at 37 degrees C without any stress, it is evident that
tetrasaccharides of HA did not act as a stress factor. In addition,
tetrasaccharides of HA suppressed cell death in the case of K562 cells exposed to
hyperthermia and of PC12 cells under serum deprivation. These results suggest
that a certain size of oligosaccharides, i.e. the tetrasaccharides of HA,
up-regulates Hsp72 expression by enhancing the activation of HSF1 under stress
conditions and suppresses cell death.

PMID: 11864979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochemistry. 2002 Feb 26;41(8):2580-8.

Redox-dependent regulation of the conformation and function of human heat shock
factor 1.

Manalo DJ(1), Lin Z, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell and Developmental Biology, Rutgers State University
of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8082, USA.

We present here evidence that redox-dependent thiol-disulfide exchange can
provide a mechanism regulating the conformation and activity of the human heat
shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Diamide and dithiothreitol were reagents
used respectively to promote and reverse disulfide cross-link, and the resolution
and detection of redox conformers of HSF1 were done according to recently
published methods [Manalo, D. J., and Liu, A. Y.-C. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276,
23554-23561]. We showed that preincubation of the latent HSF1 monomer with
diamide inhibited the in vitro heat-induced activation and trimerization of HSF1 
and caused the formation of ox-hHSF1, a compact, disulfide cross-linked HSF1
conformer detectable in immuno-Western blot assay. These effects of diamide were 
dose-dependent and were rapidly and quantitatively reversed by dithiothreitol.
Cysteine site-specific mutants of HSF1 were constructed and used to determine
which of the five cysteine residues may be engaged in disulfide cross-link.
Analysis of the in vitro transcribed and translated HSF1 proteins showed that
while mutation of C1 (amino acid 36) and C2 (amino acid 103) had no effect on the
redox sensitivity of HSF1, the mutation of C3 (amino acid 153) or double mutation
of C4 and C5 (amino acids 373 and 378, respectively) to serine rendered HSF1
insensitive to diamide and prevented its conversion to ox-HSF1. HSF1 with a
single cysteine to serine mutation at either the C4 or C5 position gave different
ox-HSF1 conformers in the presence of diamide, suggesting that C3 could be
disulfide cross-linked to either C4 or C5. The possibility that HSF1 may have
integrated redox chemistry of cysteine sulfhydryl into its functional response in
higher mammalian cells is discussed.

PMID: 11851405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2002 Mar;282(3):G415-23.

N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine inhibits inducible HSP-70 via Ca(2+), PKC, and PKA in
human intestinal epithelial T84 cells.

Kiang JG(1), Kiang SC, Juang YT, Tsokos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Injury, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver 
Spring 20910-7500, USA. Juliann.Kiang@na.amedd.army.mil

The nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine (L-NNA)
inhibits heat stress (HS)-induced NO production and the inducible 70-kDa heat
shock protein (HSP-70i) in many rodent organs. We used human intestinal
epithelial T84 cells to characterize the inhibitory effect of L-NNA on HS-induced
HSP-70i expression. Intracellular Ca(2+) concentration ([Ca(2+)](i)) was measured
using fura-2, and protein kinase C (PKC), and PKA activities were determined. HS 
increased HSP-70i mRNA and protein in T84 cells exposed to 45 degrees C for 10
min and allowed to recover for 6 h. L-NNA treatment for 1 h before HS inhibited
the induction of HSP-70i mRNA and protein, with an IC(50) of 0.0471 +/- 0.0007
microM. Because the HS-induced increase in HSP-70i mRNA and protein is Ca(2+)
dependent, we measured [Ca(2+)](i) after treating cells with L-NNA. L-NNA at 100 
microM significantly decreased resting [Ca(2+)](i). Likewise, treatment with 1
microM GF-109203X or H-89 (inhibitors of PKC and PKA, respectively) for 30 min
also significantly decreased [Ca(2+)](i) and inhibited HS-induced increase in
HSP-70i. GF-109203X- or H-89-treated cells failed to respond to L-NNA by further 
decreasing [Ca(2+)](i) and HSP-70i. L-NNA effectively blocked heat shock factor-1
(HSF1) translocation from the cytosol to the nucleus, a process requiring PKC
phosphorylation. These results suggest that L-NNA inhibits HSP-70i by reducing
[Ca(2+)](i) and decreasing PKC and PKA activity, thereby blocking HSF1
translocation from the cytosol to the nucleus.

PMID: 11841991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Feb 15;67(4):461-70.

Suppressive effects of ansamycins on inducible nitric oxide synthase expression
and the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Murphy P(1), Sharp A, Shin J, Gavrilyuk V, Dello Russo C, Weinberg G, Sharp FR,
Lu A, Heneka MT, Feinstein DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Illinois, 1819 West Polk Street,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The production of nitric oxide by the inflammatory isoform of nitric oxide
synthase (NOS2) in brain glial cells is thought to contribute to the causes and
development of neurological diseases and trauma. We previously demonstrated that 
activation of a heat shock response (HSR) by hyperthermia reduced NOS2 expression
in vitro, and in vivo attenuated the clinical and histological symptoms of the
demyelinating disease experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE; Heneka et
al. [2001] J. Neurochem. 77:568-579). Benzoquinoid ansamycins are fungal-derived 
antibiotics with tyrosine kinase inhibitory properties, and which also induce a
HSR by allowing activation of HS transcription factor HSF1. We now show that two 
members of this class of drugs (geldanamycin and
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin) also induce a HSR in primary rat
astrocytes and rat C6 glioma cells. Both drugs dose-dependently reduced nitrite
accumulation, NOS2 steady-state mRNA levels, and the cytokine-dependent
activation of a rat 2.2-kB NOS2 promoter construct stably expressed in C6 cells. 
These inhibitory effects were partially reversed by quercetin, a bioflavonoid
which prevents HSF1 binding to DNA and thus attenuates the HSR. Ansamycins
increased mRNA levels of the inhibitory IkappaBalpha protein, suggesting that
inhibition of NFkappaB activation could contribute to their suppressive effects. 
Finally, in C57BL/6 mice actively immunized to develop EAE, a single injection of
geldanamycin at 3 days after immunization reduced disease onset by over 50%.
These results indicate that ansamycins can exert potent anti-inflammatory effects
on brain glial cells which may provide therapeutic benefit in neuroinflammatory
diseases.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11835313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Feb 8;290(5):1454-61.

Blocking HSF1 by dominant-negative mutant to sensitize tumor cells to
hyperthermia.

Wang JH(1), Yao MZ, Gu JF, Sun LY, Shen YF, Liu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, 200031, People's Republic of China.

Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), an antiapoptotic chaperon protein, is highly
expressed in human breast tumors and renders them resistant to such therapy as
hyperthermia. In the present study, we inhibited the expression of HSP70 by
blocking the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) function with its
dominant-negative mutant (mHSF1) in Bcap37 cells, a thermotolerant breast cancer 
cell line. Here we report that retrovirus-mediated transfer of mHSF1 led to
massive cell death of Bcap37 after hyperthermia. mHSF1 sensitized Bcap37 cells to
hyperthermia by promoting apoptosis induced by heat shock. We also examined the
efficacy of mHSF1 gene therapy in the nude mouse. mHSF1 transfection led to
diminution of tumor growth with hyperthermia therapy. Thus, disrupting HSF1 in
combination with hyperthermia may open new possibilities for treatment of cancers
that have acquired resistance to heat treatment.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11820785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Feb 5;99(3):1200-5. Epub 2002 Jan 29.

Dynamic association of transcriptional activation domains and regulatory regions 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae heat shock factor.

Chen T(1), Parker CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is thought
to be a homotypic trimer that is bound to the promoters of heat shock protein
(HSP) genes at both normal and heat shock temperatures. Exposure to heat shock
greatly and rapidly induces HSF transcriptional activity without further
increasing DNA-binding affinity. It is believed that HSF is under negative
regulation at normal growth temperatures, but the detailed mechanism by which HSF
is activated is still not clear. We report the analysis of mutations in a
conserved arginine (residue 274) at the C-terminal end of the DNA-binding domain 
(DBD). Two mutations significantly increase both basal activity of HSF at normal 
temperatures and induced activity on heat shock. We demonstrate by
coimmunoprecipitation experiments that the mutations reduce the association
between the DNA-binding domain/oligomerization domain and the transcription
activation domains. Our studies suggest that the DNA-binding domain of HSF can
interact with activation domains directly, and this interaction is important for 
the repression of HSF activity under normal growth conditions. Destabilizing this
interaction by heat or by mutations results in HSF transcriptional activation. We
propose that Arg-274 is critical for intramolecular repression of HSF activity in
normally growing cells.

PMCID: PMC122167
PMID: 11818569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Exp Bot. 2002 Feb;53(367):371-5.

Interaction between Arabidopsis heat shock transcription factor 1 and 70 kDa heat
shock proteins.

Kim BH(1), Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Tübingen, ZMBP-Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen,
Allgemeine Genetik, Auf der Morgenstelle 28, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The activity of the Arabidopsis heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is
repressed at normal conditions but activated by cellular stresses. Circumstantial
evidence suggests that HSP70 may function as a negative feedback regulator of HSF
activity. Here the interaction between HSF and HSP70 is reported using
electrophoretic mobility shift and yeast two-hybrid assays. Subdomain mapping
indicates an interaction of the activation domain and DNA-binding domain of HSF1 
with HSP70.

PMID: 11807141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2001 Oct;6(4):326-36.

Heat shock factor 1-mediated thermotolerance prevents cell death and results in
G2/M cell cycle arrest.

Luft JC(1), Benjamin IJ, Mestril R, Dix DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, National Health and Environmental Effects
Research Laboratory, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27711, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to environmental stress by activating heat shock
transcription factors (eg, Hsf1) that regulate increased synthesis of heat shock 
proteins (Hsps). Hsps prevent the disruption of normal cellular mitosis, meiosis,
or differentiation by environmental stressors. To further characterize this
stress response, transformed wild-type Hsf1+/+ and mutant Hsf1-/- mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) were exposed to (1) lethal heat (45 degrees C, 60 minutes),
(2) conditioning heat (43 degrees C, 30 minutes), or (3) conditioning followed by
lethal heat. Western blot analysis demonstrated that only Hsf1+/+ MEFs expressed 
inducible Hsp70s and Hsp25 following conditioning or conditioning and lethal
heat. Exposure of either Hsf1+/+ or Hsf1-/- MEFs to lethal heat resulted in cell 
death. However, if conditioning heat was applied 6 hours before lethal heat, more
than 85% of Hsf1+/+ MEFs survived, and cells in G2/M transiently increased
3-fold. In contrast, conditioned Hsf1-/- MEFs neither survived lethal heat nor
exhibited this G2/M accumulation. Coinfection with adenoviral Hsp70 and Hsp25
constructs did not fully recreate thermotolerance in either Hsf1+/+ or Hsf1-/-
MEFs, indicating other Hsf1-mediated gene expression is required for complete
thermotolerance. These results demonstrate the necessity of Hsf1-mediated gene
expression for thermotolerance and the involvement of cell cycle regulation,
particularly the G2/M transition, in this thermotolerant response.

PMCID: PMC434415
PMID: 11795469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 5;277(14):11802-10. Epub 2002 Jan 18.

Heat shock factor 1 represses transcription of the IL-1beta gene through physical
interaction with the nuclear factor of interleukin 6.

Xie Y(1), Chen C, Stevenson MA, Auron PE, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Beth Israel and Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Heat shock factor (HSF) 1 is the major heat shock transcription factor that
regulates stress-inducible synthesis of heat shock proteins and is also essential
in protection against endotoxic shock. Following our previous study, which
demonstrated the transcriptional repression of the IL-1beta gene by HSF1 (Cahill,
C. M., Waterman, W. R., Xie, Y., Auron, P. E., and Calderwood, S. K. (1996) J.
Biol. Chem. 271, 24874-24879), we have examined the mechanisms of transcriptional
repression. Our studies show that HSF1 represses the
lipopolyliposaccharide-induced transcription of the IL-1beta promoter through
direct interaction with the nuclear factor of interleukin 6 (NF-IL6, also known
as CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBPbeta), an essential regulator in IL-1beta
transcription. We show for the first time that HSF1 binds directly to NF-IL6 in
vivo and antagonizes its activity. The HSF1/NF-IL6 interaction involves a
sequence of HSF1 containing the trimerization and regulatory domains and the bZip
region of NF-IL6. HSF1 has little effect on IL-1beta promoter activity stimulated
by the essential monocytic transcription factor Spi.1 but is strongly inhibitory 
to transcriptional activation by NF-IL6 and to the synergistic activation by
NF-IL6 and Spi.1. Because of its ability to bind to specific C/EBP elements in
the promoters of multiple genes and its ability to interact with other
transcription factors, NF-IL6 is involved in transcriptional regulation of a wide
range of genes. Interaction between HSF1 and NF-IL6 could thus be an important
mechanism in HSF1 regulation of general gene transcription during endotoxin
stress.

PMID: 11801594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Radiat Biol. 2002 Jan;78(1):17-27.

Ukrain, an alkaloid thiophosphoric acid derivative of Chelidonium majus L.
protects human fibroblasts but not human tumour cells in vitro against ionizing
radiation.

Cordes N(1), Plasswilm L, Bamberg M, Rodemann HP.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Radiobiology and Molecular Environmental Research,
Eberhard-Karls-University Tüebingen, Hoppe-Seyler-Strasse 3, 72076 Tübingen,
Germany.

PURPOSE: Ukrain, an alkaloid thiophosphoric acid derivative of Chelidonium majus 
L., has demonstrated a promising impact on chemotherapy in a variety of
malignancies. The effects of the drug on cell survival, alteration of the cell
cycle and induction of apoptosis were examined without and in combination with
ionizing radiation (IR). The TP53 status of the cell lines used was also
investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Exponentially growing human tumour cell lines MDA-MB-231
(breast), PA-TU-8902 (pancreas), CCL-221 (colorectal), U-138MG (glioblastoma),
and human skin and lung fibroblastic cells, HSF1, HSF2 and CCD32-LU were studied 
by colony assay, flow cytometry (cell-cycle, annexin-V staining for apoptosis)
and Western blotting. Ukrain was used in concentrations from 0.1 to 50 microg
ml(-1) for 1, 3 and 24 h and radiation as single doses of 1-10Gy. Combined
drug-radiation exposure employed 1 microg ml(-1) Ukrain for 24h plus 2-8 Gy.
RESULTS: Ukrain cytotoxicity was time- and dose-dependent. The combination of
Ukrain plus IR gave enhanced toxicity in CCL-221 and U-138MG cells, but not in
MDA-MB-231 and PA-TU-8902 cells. Most strikingly, a radioprotective effect was
found in normal human skin and lung fibroblasts. Flow-cytometry analyses
supported the differential and cell line-specific cytotoxicity of Ukrain. CCL-221
and U-138MG cells accumulated in G2 after 24-h Ukrain treatment, whereas no
alterations were detected in the other tumour cells and normal fibroblasts
tested. Western blotting of TP53 demonstrated non-functional overexpression in
all tumour cell lines without affecting p21. HSF1 presented wild-type TP53 and a 
p21 response after IR. Flowcytometric analyses of annexin-V staining showed no
induction of apoptosis after Ukrain treatment in comparison with untreated
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential effects of Ukrain in modulating radiation toxicity of
human cancer cell lines and its protective effect in normal human fibroblasts
suggest that this alkaloid may have potential properties for clinical
radiochemotherapy.

PMID: 11747550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Plant J. 2001 Oct;28(2):217-23.

Analysis of heat-shock transcription factor-DNA binding in Arabidopsis suspension
cultures by UV laser crosslinking.

Zhang L(1), Eggers-Schumacher G, Schöffl F, Prändl R.

Author information: 
(1)ZMBP-Allgemeine Genetik, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Auf der
Morgenstelle 28, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Crosslinking techniques are important in examining protein-DNA interactions in
living cells. Formaldehyde and UV light emitted by conventional lamps are the
most commonly used crosslinking agents. The crosslinking step is followed by
immunoprecipitation of specific protein-DNA adducts, and by analysis and
quantification of the co-immunoprecipitated DNA. There are a few reported cases
of fruitful in vivo protein-DNA crosslinking experiments, but not in plants. In
this report, we analyse the binding of heat-shock transcription factor (HSF) to
heat-shock promoters in intact Arabidopsis cells. Efficient protein-DNA
crosslinking by irradiation of Arabidopsis suspension culture tissue was achieved
using UV laser pulses. In addition, methods for immunoprecipitation and detection
of the co-immunoprecipitated DNA are reported. Our results suggest that
Arabidopsis HSFs immunoreactive for HSF1 antibodies bind constitutively to the
HSP18.2 gene.

PMID: 11722765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Brain Res Bull. 2001 Oct-Nov 1;56(3-4):353-62.

Analysis of heat shock transcription factor for suppression of polyglutamine
toxicity.

Rimoldi M(1), Servadio A, Zimarino V.

Author information: 
(1)Dibit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy.

Individually over-expressed chaperones can interfere with cytotoxicity and
aggregation of polyglutamine proteins in disease models. As chaperones cooperate,
the analysis of suppression or reversal of polyglutamine pathology may require
ways to up-regulate multiple chaperone coding genes. This condition might be
achieved by exogenous expression of de-repressed forms of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1), which mediates induction of several genes coding
cytosolic and nuclear chaperones. Here we present the rationale behind this
possible approach and the caveats, and employ a non-neuronal cell system to test 
whether Ataxin-1 aggregation can be modulated by de-repressed HSF1 mutants
through augmented expression of chaperone coding genes. In our experiments, HSF1 
mutants have induced heat shock protein 70 and Human DnaJ (HDJ)-1 to intermediate
levels. Cells expressing such mutants also showed partial reduction of Ataxin-1
[31Q] aggregation. A consolidated positive outcome of these tests in cellular
models would encourage experiments in transgenic mice and prospects for
pharmacological modulation of HSF1 activity or delivery.

PMID: 11719272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Exp Biol. 2001 Oct;204(Pt 20):3571-9.

Adjusting the thermostat: the threshold induction temperature for the heat-shock 
response in intertidal mussels (genus Mytilus) changes as a function of thermal
history.

Buckley BA(1), Owen ME, Hofmann GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1501, USA.

Spatio-temporal variation in heat-shock gene expression gives organisms the
ability to respond to changing thermal environments. The temperature at which
heat-shock genes are induced, the threshold induction temperature, varies as a
function of the recent thermal history of an organism. To elucidate the mechanism
by which this plasticity in gene expression is achieved, we determined heat-shock
protein (Hsp) induction threshold temperatures in the intertidal mussel Mytilus
trossulus collected from the field in February and again in August. In a separate
experiment, threshold induction temperatures, endogenous levels of both the
constitutive and inducible isoforms of Hsps from the 70 kDa family and the
quantity of ubiquitinated proteins (a measure of cellular protein denaturation)
were measured in M. trossulus after either 6 weeks of cold acclimation in the
laboratory or acclimatization to warm, summer temperatures in the field over the 
same period. In addition, we quantified levels of activated heat-shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in both groups of mussels (HSF1 inducibly
transactivates all classes of Hsp genes). Lastly, we compared the temperature of 
HSF1 activation with the induction threshold temperature in the congeneric M.
californianus. It was found that the threshold induction temperature in M.
trossulus was 23 degrees C in February and 28 degrees C in August. This agreed
with the acclimation/acclimatization experiment, in which mussels acclimated in
seawater tables to a constant temperature of 10-11 degrees C for 6 weeks
displayed a threshold induction temperature of 20-23 degrees C compared with
26-29 degrees C for individuals that were experiencing considerably warmer body
temperatures in the intertidal zone over the same period. This coincided with a
significant increase in the inducible isoform of Hsp70 in warm-acclimatized
individuals but no increase in the constitutive isoform or in HSF1. Levels of
ubiquitin-conjugated protein were significantly higher in the field mussels than 
in the laboratory-acclimated individuals. Finally, the temperature of HSF1
activation in M. californianus was found to be approximately 9 degrees C lower
than the induction threshold for this species.

PMID: 11707506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. FEBS Lett. 2001 Nov 9;508(1):61-6.

Role of cyclopentenone prostaglandins in rat carrageenin pleurisy.

Ianaro A(1), Ialenti A, Maffia P, Pisano B, Di Rosa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, University of Naples Federico II, Via
Domenico Montesano 49, 80131 Naples, Italy. ianaro@unina.it

In this study, using rat carrageenin-induced pleurisy, we found that treatment of
rats with either indomethacin or NS-398 suppressed the pleurisy at 2 h but
significantly exacerbated this reaction at 48 h. Exacerbated inflammation was
associated with reduced prostaglandin D(2) levels, decreased heat shock factor 1 
(HSF1) activation, reduced hsp72 expression and increased activation of nuclear
factor kappaB (NF-kappaB). Replacement of cyclopentenone prostaglandins by
treating rats with either prostaglandin J(2) or prostaglandin D(2) reversed the
exacerbating effects of cyclooxygenase inhibitors leading to the resolution of
the reaction. In conclusion, we demonstrate that cyclopentenone prostaglandins
may act as anti-inflammatory mediators by inducing in inflammatory cells
HSF1-dependent hsp72 expression and NF-kappaB inhibition, two crucial events for 
the remission of inflammation.

PMID: 11707269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 4;277(1):735-45. Epub 2001 Oct 25.

Structure-function analysis of the heat shock factor-binding protein reveals a
protein composed solely of a highly conserved and dynamic coiled-coil
trimerization domain.

Tai LJ(1), McFall SM, Huang K, Demeler B, Fox SG, Brubaker K, Radhakrishnan I,
Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Heat shock factor-binding protein (HSBP) 1 is a small, evolutionarily conserved
protein originally identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen using the
trimerization domain of heat shock factor (HSF) 1 as the bait. Similar in size to
HSF1 trimerization domain, human HSBP1 contains two arrays of hydrophobic heptad 
repeats (designated HR-N and HR-C) characteristic of coiled-coil proteins.
Proteins of the HSBP family are relatively small (<100 residues), comprising
solely a putative coiled-coil oligomerization domain without any other readily
recognizable structural or functional motif. Our biophysical and biochemical
characterization of human HSBP1 reveals a cooperatively folded protein with high 
alpha-helical content and moderate stability. NMR analyses reveal a single
continuous helix encompassing both HR-N and HR-C in the highly conserved central 
region, whereas the less conserved carboxyl terminus is unstructured and
accessible to proteases. Unlike previously characterized coiled-coils, backbone
15N relaxation measurements implicate motional processes on the millisecond time 
scale in the coiled-coil region. Analytical ultracentrifugation and native PAGE
studies indicate that HSBP1 is predominantly trimeric over a wide concentration
range. NMR analyses suggest a rotationally symmetric trimer. Because the highly
conserved hydrophobic heptad repeats extend over 60% of HSBP1, we propose that
HSBP most likely regulates the function of other proteins through coiled-coil
interactions.

PMID: 11679589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2001 Jul;6(3):177-89.

Arabidopsis and the heat stress transcription factor world: how many heat stress 
transcription factors do we need?

Nover L(1), Bharti K, Döring P, Mishra SK, Ganguli A, Scharf KD.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter of the Goethe University, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
nover@cellbiology.uni-frankfurt.de

Sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome revealed a unique complexity of the plant
heat stress transcription factor (Hsf) family. By structural characteristics and 
phylogenetic comparison, the 21 representatives are assigned to 3 classes and 14 
groups. Particularly striking is the finding of a new class of Hsfs (AtHsfC1)
closely related to Hsf1 from rice and to Hsfs identified from frequently found
expressed sequence tags of tomato, potato, barley, and soybean. Evidently, this
new type of Hsf is well expressed in different plant tissues. Besides the DNA
binding and oligomerization domains (HR-A/B region), we identified other
functional modules of Arabidopsis Hsfs by sequence comparison with the
well-characterized tomato Hsfs. These are putative motifs for nuclear import and 
export and transcriptional activation (AHA motifs). There is intriguing
flexibility of size and sequence in certain parts of the otherwise strongly
conserved N-terminal half of these Hsfs. We have speculated about possible
exon-intron borders in this region in the ancient precursor gene of plant Hsfs,
similar to the exon-intron structure of the present mammalian Hsf-encoding genes.

PMCID: PMC434399
PMID: 11599559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Proteins. 2001 Nov 15;45(3):219-28.

Crystal packing interaction that blocks crystallization of a site-specific DNA
binding protein-DNA complex.

Littlefield O(1), Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, USA.

We present here three high-resolution crystal structures of complexes between the
DNA-binding domain of the heat-shock transcription factor (HSF) and DNA
oligomers. Although the DNA oligomers contain HSF's specific binding sequence,
called a heat-shock element, the crystal structures do not contain the specific
protein-DNA complex. In one crystal structure, the 10 base pair DNA oligomer is
statically disordered. In the other two related structures, the 12 base pair DNA 
oligomers are in unique positions, but the protein-DNA contacts in these two
crystals are not sequence specific. In all three structures, the DNA appears to
act as a rigid, polyanion scaffold to support columns of proteins in a
crystalline lattice. A robust crystal packing interface between protein monomers 
obscures the true DNA-binding surface, known from previous genetic and
biochemical studies. By redesigning the protein to interfere with the crystal
lattice contacts, we were able to obtain physiologically relevant crystals in a
specific protein-DNA complex. Thus, a crystal-packing interface was able to
prevent the weak, but physiological relevant interactions between a protein and
DNA.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(21):7163-71.

Stress-specific activation and repression of heat shock factors 1 and 2.

Mathew A(1), Mathur SK, Jolly C, Fox SG, Kim S, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Rice
Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208, USA.

Vertebrate cells express a family of heat shock transcription factors (HSF1 to
HSF4) that coordinate the inducible regulation of heat shock genes in response to
diverse signals. HSF1 is potent and activated rapidly though transiently by heat 
shock, whereas HSF2 is a less active transcriptional regulator but can retain its
DNA binding properties for extended periods. Consequently, the differential
activation of HSF1 and HSF2 by various stresses may be critical for cells to
survive repeated and diverse stress challenges and to provide a mechanism for
more precise regulation of heat shock gene expression. Here we show, using a
novel DNA binding and detection assay, that HSF1 and HSF2 are coactivated to
different levels in response to a range of conditions that cause cell stress.
Above a low basal activity of both HSFs, heat shock preferentially activates
HSF1, whereas the amino acid analogue azetidine or the proteasome inhibitor MG132
coactivates both HSFs to different levels and hemin preferentially induces HSF2. 
Unexpectedly, we also found that heat shock has dramatic adverse effects on HSF2 
that lead to its reversible inactivation coincident with relocalization from the 
nucleus. The reversible inactivation of HSF2 is specific to heat shock and does
not occur with other stressors or in cells expressing high levels of heat shock
proteins. These results reveal that HSF2 activity is negatively regulated by heat
and suggest a role for heat shock proteins in the positive regulation of HSF2.

PMCID: PMC99891
PMID: 11585899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45160-7. Epub 2001 Sep 26.

Geldanamycin restores a defective heat shock response in vivo.

Winklhofer KF(1), Reintjes A, Hoener MC, Voellmy R, Tatzelt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie and the
Max-Planck-Institut für Neurobiologie, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

Induced expression of heat shock proteins (Hsps) plays a central role in
promoting cellular survival after environmental and physiological stress. We have
previously shown that scrapie-infected mouse neuroblastoma (ScN2a) cells fail to 
induce the expression of Hsp72 and Hsp28 after various stress conditions. Here we
present evidence that this impaired stress response is due to an altered
regulation of HSF1 activity. Upon stress in ScN2a cells, HSF1 was converted into 
hyperphosphorylated trimers but failed to acquire transactivation competence. A
kinetic analysis of HSF1 activation revealed that in ScN2a cells trimer formation
after stress was efficient, but disassembly of trimers proceeded much faster than
in the uninfected cell line. Geldanamycin, a Hsp90-binding drug, significantly
delayed disassembly of HSF1 trimers after a heat shock and restored
stress-induced expression of Hsp72 in ScN2a cells. Heat-induced Hsp72 expression 
required geldanamycin to be present; following removal of the drug ScN2a cells
again lost their ability to mount a stress response. Thus, our studies show that 
a defective stress response can be pharmacologically restored and suggest that
the HSF1 deactivation pathway may play an important role in the regulation of Hsp
expression.

PMID: 11574536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Cell Biochem. 2001;82(2):326-38.

JNK phosphorylates the HSF1 transcriptional activation domain: role of JNK in the
regulation of the heat shock response.

Park J(1), Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway 08854-8082, USA. JPARK@molbio.princeton.edu

The role of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling cascade in the
stress-inducible phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) was investigated
using known agonists and antagonists of JNK. We showed that treatment of HeLa
cells with MG132, a proteasome inhibitor and known INK activator, caused the
transcriptional activation domain of HSF1 to be targeted and phosphorylated by
JNK2 in vivo. Dose-response and time course studies of the effects of heat shock 
and anisomycin treatment showed a close correlation of the activation of JNK and 
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1. SB203580 inhibited INK at the 100 microM
concentration and significantly reduced the amount of hyperphosphorylated HSF1
upon heat shock or anisomycin treatment. SB203580 and dominant-negative JNK
suppress hsp70 promoter-driven reporter gene expression selectively at 45 degrees
C but not at 42 degrees C heat stress, suggesting that JNK would be
preferentially associated with the protective heat shock response against severe 
heat stress. The possibility that JNK-mediated phosphorylation of HSF1 may
selectively stabilize the HSF1 protein and confers protection to cells under
conditions of severe stress is discussed.

PMID: 11527157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 26;276(43):40263-7. Epub 2001 Aug 20.

Regulation of heat shock transcription factor 1 by stress-induced SUMO-1
modification.

Hong Y(1), Rogers R, Matunis MJ, Mayhew CN, Goodson ML, Park-Sarge OK, Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26708. Goodson M [corrected to Goodson ML].

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) mediates the induction of heat shock
protein gene expression in cells exposed to elevated temperature and other stress
conditions. In response to stress HSF1 acquires DNA binding ability and localizes
to nuclear stress granules, but the molecular mechanisms that mediate these
events are not understood. We report that HSF1 undergoes stress-induced
modification at lysine 298 by the small ubiquitin-related protein called SUMO-1. 
Antibodies against SUMO-1 supershift the HSF1 DNA-binding complex, and
modification of HSF1 in a reconstituted SUMO-1 reaction system causes conversion 
of HSF1 to the DNA-binding form. HSF1 colocalizes with SUMO-1 in nuclear stress
granules, which is prevented by mutation of lysine 298. Mutation of lysine 298
also results in a significant decrease in stress-induced transcriptional activity
of HSF1 in vivo. This work implicates SUMO-1 modification as an important
modulator of HSF1 function in response to stress.

PMID: 11514557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genes Dev. 2001 Aug 15;15(16):2134-45.

The loop domain of heat shock transcription factor 1 dictates DNA-binding
specificity and responses to heat stress.

Ahn SG(1), Liu PC, Klyachko K, Morimoto RI, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Eukaryotic heat shock transcription factors (HSF) regulate an evolutionarily
conserved stress-response pathway essential for survival against a variety of
environmental and developmental stresses. Although the highly similar HSF family 
members have distinct roles in responding to stress and activating target gene
expression, the mechanisms that govern these roles are unknown. Here we identify 
a loop within the HSF1 DNA-binding domain that dictates HSF isoform specific DNA 
binding in vitro and preferential target gene activation by HSF family members in
both a yeast transcription assay and in mammalian cells. These characteristics of
the HSF1 loop region are transposable to HSF2 and sufficient to confer
DNA-binding specificity, heat shock inducible HSP gene expression and protection 
from heat-induced apoptosis in vivo. In addition, the loop suppresses formation
of the HSF1 trimer under basal conditions and is required for heat-inducible
trimerization in a purified system in vitro, suggesting that this domain is a
critical part of the HSF1 heat-stress-sensing mechanism. We propose that this
domain defines a signature for HSF1 that constitutes an important determinant for
how cells utilize a family of transcription factors to respond to distinct
stresses.

PMCID: PMC312766
PMID: 11511544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 26;276(43):40254-62. Epub 2001 Aug 16.

The DNA-binding domain of yeast heat shock transcription factor independently
regulates both the N- and C-terminal activation domains.

Bulman AL(1), Hubl ST, Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Johnson Research Foundation, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 422 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

The expression of heat shock proteins in response to cellular stresses is
dependent on the activity of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF). In yeast,
HSF is constitutively bound to DNA; however, the mitigation of negative
regulation in response to stress dramatically increases transcriptional activity.
Through alanine-scanning mutagenesis of the surface residues of the DNA-binding
domain, we have identified a large number of mutants with increased
transcriptional activity. Six of the strongest mutations were selected for
detailed study. Our studies suggest that the DNA-binding domain is involved in
the negative regulation of both the N-terminal and C-terminal activation domains 
of HSF. These mutations do not significantly affect DNA binding. Circular
dichroism analysis suggests that a subset of the mutants may have altered
secondary structure, whereas a different subset has decreased thermal stability. 
Our findings suggest that the regulation of HSF transcriptional activity (under
both constitutive and stressed conditions) may be partially dependent on the
local topology of the DNA-binding domain. In addition, the DNA-binding domain may
mediate key interactions with ancillary factors and/or other intramolecular
regulatory regions in order to modulate the complex regulation of HSF's
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11509572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Hepatol. 2001 Jul;35(1):53-61.

A non-toxic heat shock protein 70 inducer, geranylgeranylacetone, suppresses
apoptosis of cultured rat hepatocytes caused by hydrogen peroxide and ethanol.

Ikeyama S(1), Kusumoto K, Miyake H, Rokutan K, Tashiro S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, The University of Tokushima, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: A stress-inducible heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is one of the
best-known endogenous factors protecting cell injury under various pathological
conditions. The aim of this study was to examine anti-apoptotic actions of a
non-toxic HSP70 inducer, geranylgeranylacetone (GGA), on hepatocytes exposed to
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or ethanol.
METHODS: Primary cultures of rat hepatocytes were treated with different
concentrations of GGA and exposed to 0.5 mM H202 or 100 mM ethanol. The heat
shock response was assessed by measuring the activation of heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), HSP70 mRNA expression, and accumulations of HSP70, HSP90, and HSP27.
Apoptosis was evaluated by DNA fragmentation.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with 1 microM GGA for 2 h enhanced nuclear translocation
and phosphorylation of HSF1, HSF1-DNA binding, HSP70 mRNA expression, and its
accumulation, when the cells were exposed to H202 or ethanol. In association with
this accelerated response, GGA suppressed the insult-induced activation of c-Jun 
N-terminal kinases, caspase 9, and caspase 3-like proteases, leading to
significant inhibition of apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: GGA exerted anti-apoptotic actions, at least in part, by priming
hepatocytes for enhanced HSP70 induction. Our results suggest that GGA may have a
potential benefit for the treatment of alcoholic and ischemia-reperfusion liver
injuries.

PMID: 11495042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genesis. 2001 Jul;30(3):195-7.

Suppression of heat shock transcription factor HSF1 in zebrafish causes
heat-induced apoptosis.

Wang G(1), Huang H, Dai R, Lee KY, Lin S, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

PMID: 11477707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Aug;15(8):1396-410.

Inhibition of heat shock transcription factor by GR.

Wadekar SA(1), Li D, Periyasamy S, Sánchez ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

The GR is a hormone-activated transcription factor that acts to regulate specific
gene expression. In the absence of hormone, the GR and other steroid receptors
have been shown to form complexes with several mammalian heat shock proteins. As 
heat shock proteins are produced by cells as an adaptive response to stress,
speculation has existed that communication between the heat shock and
glucocorticoid hormone signal pathways must exist. Only recently has evidence to 
support this hypothesis been reported. In almost all cases, the evidence has been
of an ability of heat shock to cause a potentiation of the glucocorticoid hormone
response. In this proposal, evidence is now presented that heat shock signaling
can, in turn, be regulated by glucocorticoids. In mouse L929 cells stably
expressing a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter controlled by the human
heat shock protein70 promoter and containing known binding sites for heat shock
transcription factor 1 treatment with glucocorticoid agonist (dexamethasone)
results in a dose-dependent decrease of stress-induced chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene expression. In these cells, inhibition of heat shock
protein70 promoter activity by dexamethasone was completely blocked by GR
antagonist (RU486). Similar treatment of L929 cells stably expressing a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter under the control of the
constitutively active SV40 promoter showed no such inhibition by dexamethasone.
More importantly, dexamethasone was also found to inhibit heat shock-induced
expression of the major heat shock proteins-heat shock proteins70, 90, and 110.
Thus, the inhibitory effect of dexamethasone appears to apply to most, if not
all, heat shock transcription factor 1-regulated genes. Although dexamethasone
did not prevent the DNA-binding function of heat shock-activated heat shock
transcription factor 1, it did inhibit a constitutively active mutant of human
heat shock transcription factor 1 under nonstress conditions, suggesting that
dexamethasone repression of heat shock transcription factor 1 was primarily
through an inhibition of heat shock transcription factor 1 transcription
enhancement activity. To more accurately characterize the stage of GR signaling
responsible for inhibition of heat shock transcription factor 1, a series of
Chinese hamster ovary cells containing either no GR, wild-type mouse GR, or
single-point mutations of GR were employed. Dexamethasone inhibition of heat
shock-induced heat shock transcription factor 1 activity was observed in the
presence of wild-type GR, but not in Chinese hamster ovary cells lacking GR,
suggesting that signaling cascades other than GR were not involved in this effect
of dexamethasone. Consistent with this conclusion was the observation that
dexamethasone had no effect on activity of the MAPKs (ERK1, ERK2, or c-jun
N-terminal kinase), which are known to negatively regulate heat shock
transcription factor 1. Dexamethasone inhibition of heat shock transcription
factor 1 was not seen in Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing GR defective for 
DNA-binding function. Moreover, dissociation of GR/Hsp90/Hsp70 complexes was
observed in response to hormone for both the wild-type and DNA binding-defective 
forms of GR, demonstrating that release of Hsp90 or Hsp70 (both of which are
known to keep heat shock transcription factor 1 in its inactive state) could be
ruled out as a potential mechanism. Thus, it appears that GR-mediated
transactivation or transrepression is required for the inhibitory effect of
dexamethasone on heat shock transcription factor 1 activity. Taken as a whole,
these results provide evidence for a novel mechanism of cross-talk in which
signaling by the GR can attenuate the heat shock response in cells through an
inhibition of the transcription enhancement activity of HSF1.

PMID: 11463862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 20;285(3):696-701.

A novel domain of the yeast heat shock factor that regulates its activation
function.

Sakurai H(1), Fukasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Kanazawa University, 5-11-80
Kodatsuno, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan. sakurai@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Heat shock factor Hsf1 of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae binds to the heat
shock element (HSE) of a subset of genes and activates their transcription in
response to various environmental stresses. Hsf1 protein contains discrete
domains respectively involved in DNA-binding, trimerization, transcription
activation, and transcription repression. Here we have identified a novel domain 
rich in basic amino acids at the extreme C-terminus of Hsf1. Deletion or point
mutations of the C-terminal basic region caused an inefficient heat shock
response of genes containing noncanonical HSEs such as CUP1 and HSP26. The basic 
region is also essential for oxidative stress-inducible transcription of CUP1 by 
Hsf1. By contrast, it was dispensable for heat induction through the canonical
HSE. We suggest that the basic region is a modulator involved in regulation of
the Hsf1-mediated activation depending on the architecture of its binding site.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11453649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Aug;33(8):1447-54.

Regulation of prostaglandin A1-induced heat shock protein expression in isolated 
cardiomyocytes.

Cornelussen RN(1), Gupta S, Knowlton AA.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine and the VA Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Prostaglandins of the A-type (PGAs) induce heat shock protein (HSP) synthesis in 
a wide variety of mammalian cells resulting in protection against cellular
stresses. The effect of PGAs on HSP-induction in cardiac myocytes is unknown.
Therefore, we investigated the effect of PGA1 on HSP synthesis in adult rat
cardiac myocytes. After 24 h of treatment, HSP72 was significantly increased
2.9-, 5.6- and 5.0-fold by PGA1 used at concentrations of 10, 20 or 40 microg/ml,
respectively (P<0.05). However, the PGA1-concentration of 40 microg/ml, was found
to be cytotoxic as evidenced by the release of LDH. In addition to HSP72, HSP32
was significantly increased by PGA1. The HSP32 induction was more vigorous with a
marked increase with only 4 microg/ml of PGA1. No differences in the levels of
HSP27, HSP60 or HSP90 were detected. When isolated cardiac myocytes were treated 
with PGA1, clear activation of heat shock factor (HSF) 1, one of the
transcription factors for HSPs, was observed. In addition, another stress-induced
transcription factor NFkappaB was also activated by PGA exposure. Despite the
significant upregulation of both HSP72 and HSP32 cytoprotective properties
against hypoxia and reoxygenation were absent. In conclusion, these experiments
show for the first time that PGA1 induces differential expression of heat shock
proteins in cardiac myocytes probably mediated through the activation of both
HSF1 and NFkappaB.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11448133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. EMBO J. 2001 Jul 16;20(14):3800-10.

Phosphorylation of serine 230 promotes inducible transcriptional activity of heat
shock factor 1.

Holmberg CI(1), Hietakangas V, Mikhailov A, Rantanen JO, Kallio M, Meinander A,
Hellman J, Morrice N, MacKintosh C, Morimoto RI, Eriksson JE, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
Finland.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a serine-rich constitutively phosphorylated
mediator of the stress response. Upon stress, HSF1 forms DNA-binding trimers,
relocalizes to nuclear granules, undergoes inducible phosphorylation and acquires
the properties of a transactivator. HSF1 is phosphorylated on multiple sites, but
the sites and their function have remained an enigma. Here, we have analyzed
sites of endogenous phosphorylation on human HSF1 and developed a phosphopeptide 
antibody to identify Ser230 as a novel in vivo phosphorylation site. Ser230 is
located in the regulatory domain of HSF1, and promotes the magnitude of the
inducible transcriptional activity. Ser230 lies within a consensus site for
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), and CaMKII
overexpression enhances both the level of in vivo Ser230 phosphorylation and
transactivation of HSF1. The importance of Ser230 was further established by the 
S230A HSF1 mutant showing markedly reduced activity relative to wild-type HSF1
when expressed in hsf1(-/-) cells. Our study provides the first evidence that
phosphorylation is essential for the transcriptional activity of HSF1, and hence 
for induction of the heat shock response.

PMCID: PMC125548
PMID: 11447121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Circulation. 2001 Jul 10;104(2):209-14.

Activation of heat-shock factor by stretch-activated channels in rat hearts.

Chang J(1), Wasser JS, Cornelussen RN, Knowlton AA.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University, Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology,
College Station, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we have observed that the isolated, erythrocyte-perfused 
rabbit heart has increased levels of heat-shock protein (HSP) 72 after a mild
mechanical stress. We hypothesized that stretch-activated ion channels (SACs)
mediated this increase. Methods and Results-- To test this hypothesis, we
subjected isolated, perfused rat hearts to mechanical stretch. Gel mobility shift
assay showed that heat-shock factor (HSF) was activated in hearts with mechanical
stretch, but not in controls. Supershift experiments demonstrated that HSF1 was
the transcription factor. Northern blots revealed the concomitant increase in
HSP72 mRNA in stretched rat hearts. In a separate set of experiments, gadolinium,
an inhibitor of SACs, was added to the perfusate. Gadolinium inhibited the
activation of HSF and decreased HSP72 mRNA level. Because gadolinium can inhibit 
both SACs and L-type calcium channels, we perfused a group of hearts with
diltiazem, a specific L-type calcium channel blocker, to eliminate the
involvement of L-type calcium channels. Diltiazem failed to inhibit the
activation of HSF.
CONCLUSIONS: Stretch in the rat heart results in activation of HSF1 and an
increase in HSP72 mRNA through SACs. This represents a novel mechanism of HSF
activation and may be an important cardiac signaling pathway for hemodynamic
stress.

PMID: 11447088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Exp Cell Res. 2001 Jul 15;267(2):165-72.

Heat-induced proteasomic degradation of HSF1 in serum-starved human fibroblasts
aging in vitro.

Bonelli MA(1), Alfieri RR, Poli M, Petronini PG, Borghetti AF.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Patologia Molecolare e Immunologia, Università degli Studi di
Parma, Parma, 43100, Italy.

The exposure of human fibroblasts (HF) aging in vitro to heat shock resulted in
an attenuated expression of the heat shock-inducible HSP70. When late passage
cells were cultured in the continuous presence of serum, we observed a reduced
accumulation of the cytoplasmic polyadenylated HSP70 mRNA. The levels of HSF1
activation and nuclear HSP70 mRNA were comparable to those of early passage cells
(M. A. Bonelli et al., Exp. Cell Res. 252, 20-32, 1999). When late passage cells 
were serum-starved overnight, we observed a reduced activation of HSF1 and a
decreased level of HSP70 mRNA during heat shock. However, at 37 degrees C the
levels of HSF1 differed little between late passage HF and early passage cells,
irrespective of the presence of serum. Interestingly, during heat shock a marked 
decrease in the level and, consequently, in the binding activity of HSF1 was
noted only in serum-starved, late passage HF. The decrease in the level of HSF1
was counteracted by back addition of serum to the cells during heat shock.
Addition of the specific proteasome inhibitor MG132 blocked a decrease in HSF1
during heat shock, maintaining levels observed in late passage cells and HSF1
activity comparable to that of early passage HF. The recovery of the level and
activity of HSF1 observed in late passage HF incubated in the presence of MG132
suggests that heat shock unmasks a latent proteasome activity responsible for
HSF1 degradation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11426935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 24;276(34):31713-9. Epub 2001 Jun 21.

Differential induction of Hsp70-encoding genes in human hematopoietic cells.

Leppä S(1), Kajanne R, Arminen L, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, P.O. Box 180,
Helsinki FIN-00029 HUCH, Finland. sirpa.leppa@helsinki.fi

The rapid transcriptional activation of heat shock genes in response to stress is
crucial for the cellular survival and the development of thermotolerance.
Although heat shock response is a widespread phenomenon, certain cells exhibit a 
diminished induction of heat shock gene expression upon stress stimuli. Here we
have analyzed the development of thermotolerance and induction of distinct Hsp70 
encoding genes in three cell lines representing different hematopoietic cell
types. We show that in response to heat shock, cell survival and induction of
thermotolerance are impaired in Raji and HL60 cells, as compared with K562 cells.
Accordingly, transcriptional induction of the hsp70 gene is diminished in Raji
and HL60 cells. This appears to be due to inability of transcription factors,
including HSF1 to bind to the hsp70.1 promoter in vivo. Consistent with the
genomic footprint, analysis of hsp70.1 mRNA expression using a specific
3'-untranslated region probe reveals that induction of the hsp70.1 gene upon heat
shock is completely abolished in Raji and HL60 cells. The suppression of the
hsp70.1 promoter is not caused by impaired function of HSF1, since HSF1 is
equally activated in all cell types and occupies another heat-inducible promoter,
hsp90 alpha. Furthermore, among distinct inducible hsp70 genes, suppression seems
to be specific for the hsp70.1 gene, since heat shock results in induction of
hsp70.2 and hsp70B' mRNA expression in all cell lines. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that distinct Hsp70-encoding genes contribute to the heat
shock response in a cell type-dependent manner.

PMID: 11423545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 22;499(3):239-44.

HSF1/hsp72 pathway as an endogenous anti-inflammatory system.

Ianaro A(1), Ialenti A, Maffia P, Pisano B, Di Rosa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, University of Naples Federico II, Via
Domenico Montesano 49, 80131, Naples, Italy. ianaro@unina.it

We investigated the occurrence and the role of HSF1 activation and inducible
hsp72 expression in the carrageenin pleurisy in the rat. Molecular analysis
performed on pleural cells collected from rat pleural cavity after carrageenin
challenge revealed increased HSF1 activation and hsp72 expression. Moreover,
local injection of a double-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) containing the
heat shock element sequence, acting as transcription factor decoy, exacerbated
the inflammatory reaction. The exacerbation, induced by wild-type, but not by
mutant ODN decoy, was associated to both inhibition of HSF1/DNA binding activity 
and reduction of hsp72 expression. In conclusion, this study shows that HSF1
activation and hsp72 expression both actually occur in acute inflammation and
that the remission of the inflammatory reaction is tightly associated to the
HSF1-dependent hsp72 expression, suggesting a a relevant role for the HSF1/hsp72 
pathway as an endogenous anti-inflammatory system.

PMID: 11423124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. EMBO J. 2001 Jun 1;20(11):2885-95.

Cell cycle transition under stress conditions controlled by vertebrate heat shock
factors.

Nakai A(1), Ishikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube 775-8505, Japan.
anakai@po.cc.yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

The roles of heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) under physiological
conditions have recently become the focus of intense study. We generated avian
cells lacking two heat-inducible HSFs, HSF1 and HSF3. In addition to complete
loss of activation of heat shock genes under stress conditions, these cells
exhibited a marked reduction in Hsp90alpha expression under normal growth
conditions. Reduction in Hsp90alpha expression caused instability of a
cyclin-dependent kinase, Cdc2, and cell cycle progression was blocked mainly at
the G2 phase, but also at G1 phase even at mild heat shock temperatures.
Restoration of Hsp90alpha expression rescued the temperature sensitivity without 
induction of HSPS: We demonstrated for the first time a molecular target affected
by heat shock in vivo that causes cell cycle arrest in vertebrates and a novel
mechanism of stress resistance controlled by vertebrate HSFS:

PMCID: PMC125499
PMID: 11387221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell. 2001 May 4;105(3):403-14.

Silenced chromatin is permissive to activator binding and PIC recruitment.

Sekinger EA(1), Gross DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

Chromatin is thought to repress transcription by limiting access of the DNA to
transcription factors. Using a yeast heat shock gene flanked by mating-type
silencers as a model system, we find that repressive, SIR-generated
heterochromatin is permissive to the constitutive binding of an activator, HSF,
and two components of the preinitiation complex (PIC), TBP and Pol II. These
factors cohabitate the promoter with Sir silencing proteins and deacetylated
nucleosomal histones. The heterochromatic HMRa1 promoter is also occupied by TBP 
and Pol II, suggesting that SIR regulates gene expression not by restricting
factor access to DNA but rather by blocking a step downstream of PIC recruitment.
Interestingly, activation of silent promoter chromatin occurs in the absence of
histone displacement and without change in histone acetylation state.

PMID: 11348596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. FASEB J. 2001 May;15(7):1118-31.

Roles of the heat shock transcription factors in regulation of the heat shock
response and beyond.

Pirkkala L(1), Nykänen P, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Finland.

The heat shock response, characterized by increased expression of heat shock
proteins (Hsps) is induced by exposure of cells and tissues to extreme conditions
that cause acute or chronic stress. Hsps function as molecular chaperones in
regulating cellular homeostasis and promoting survival. If the stress is too
severe, a signal that leads to programmed cell death, apoptosis, is activated,
thereby providing a finely tuned balance between survival and death. In addition 
to extracellular stimuli, several nonstressful conditions induce Hsps during
normal cellular growth and development. The enhanced heat shock gene expression
in response to various stimuli is regulated by heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs). After the discovery of the family of HSFs (i.e., murine and human HSF1,
2, and 4 and a unique avian HSF3), the functional relevance of distinct HSFs is
now emerging. HSF1, an HSF prototype, and HSF3 are responsible for heat-induced
Hsp expression, whereas HSF2 is refractory to classical stressors. HSF4 is
expressed in a tissue-specific manner; similar to HSF1 and HSF2, alternatively
spliced isoforms add further complexity to its regulation. Recently developed
powerful genetic models have provided evidence for both cooperative and specific 
functions of HSFs that expand beyond the heat shock response. Certain specialized
functions of HSFs may even include regulation of novel target genes in response
to distinct stimuli.

PMID: 11344080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Feb 5;1538(1):38-46.

Modulation of the stress response during apoptosis and necrosis induction in
cadmium-treated U-937 human promonocytic cells.

Galán A(1), Troyano A, Vilaboa NE, Fernández C, de Blas E, Aller P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Velázquez 144, 28006, Madrid,
Spain.

Treatment for 2 h with 200 microM cadmium chloride, followed by recovery, caused 
apoptosis and induced heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) expression in U-937
promonocytic cells. However, pre-incubation with the GSH depleting agent
L-buthionine-[S,R]-sulfoximine (BSO, 1 mM for 24 h) caused necrosis instead of
apoptosis and failed to induce HSP70 expression. This failure was a consequence
of necrosis instead of GSH depletion, since BSO allowed or even potentiated HSP70
induction when used in combination with heat shock (2 h at 42.5 degrees C) or
with 50 microM cadmium, which caused apoptosis. The administration of
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) at the beginning of recovery after BSO/200 microM
cadmium treatment prevented the execution of necrosis and restored the execution 
of apoptosis, but did not restore HSP70 induction, indicating that the inhibition
by BSO of HSP70 expression is an early regulated event. This contrasted with the 
capacity of NAC to prevent the alterations caused by BSO/200 microM cadmium in
other proteins, namely the suppression of Bax expression and the increase in
Bcl-2 and HSP-60 expression. Finally, it was observed that treatment with 200
microM cadmium rapidly increased the HSP70 mRNA level and stimulated heat-shock
factor 1 (HSF1) trimerization and binding, and that these effects were prevented 
by pre-incubation with BSO. Taken together, these results indicate that the
stress response is compatible with apoptosis but not with necrosis in
cadmium-treated promonocytic cells. The suppression of the stress response is
specifically due to the early inhibition of HSF1 activation.

PMID: 11341981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Yeast. 2001 May;18(7):605-10.

Identification of Candida tropicalis HSR1, a gene of the heat-shock
factor-related family, which confers salt tolerance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Ali R(1), Pascual-Ahuir A, Marquez JA, Malik KA, Serrano R.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Jhang Road,
Faisalabad, Pakistan.

A genomic library of Candida tropicalis in a yeast multicopy plasmid has been
screened for clones conferring salt tolerance upon transformation into S.
cerevisiae. The best halotolerance clone contained an open reading frame encoding
a predicted protein of 728 amino acids with homology to transcription factors of 
the heat-shock family. This novel gene was named HSR1 and is present in single
copy in the C. tropicalis genome. Upon transformation into S. cerevisiae it
increases the expression of ENA1, a major determinant of salt tolerance encoding 
a cation-extrusion pump. The sequence of CtHSR1 has been deposited in the EMBL
data library under Accession No. AJ296093.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11329171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biochem. 2001 May;129(5):813-20.

Heat shock factor 2 is involved in the upregulation of alphaB-crystallin by high 
extracellular potassium.

Sadamitsu C(1), Nagano T, Fukumaki Y, Iwaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Disease Genes, Institute of Genetic Information, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. aiwaki@gen.kyushu-u.ac.jp

alphaB-Crystallin, a member of the small heat shock protein (HSP) family,
accumulates in reactive astrocytes in a variety of pathological conditions. We
previously reported the upregulation of alphaB-crystallin in response to high
extracellular potassium concentration. In the present study, we investigated the 
regulatory mechanism of alphaB-crystallin expression by KCl. When human glioma
U-251MG cells were exposed to continuous KCl treatment, induction of
alphaB-crystallin mRNA was observed after 8 h and persisted for a few days.
Functional promoter analysis using deletion and mutation constructs revealed that
the proximal heat shock element (HSE-P), which contributes to heat shock
induction in HeLa cells, is essential for transcriptional activation of the
alphaB-crystallin gene by KCl in U-251MG cells. Gel mobility shift and antibody
supershift assays showed that KCl induces the HSE-binding activity of heat shock 
factor (HSF) 2, while heat shock induces that of HSF1. This is the first
demonstration that HSF2 can be activated by KCl and is involved in the
upregulation of alphaB-crystallin gene expression in glial cells.

PMID: 11328606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Eur J Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;80(3):213-21.

Alternative activation of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases in
curcumin and arsenite-induced HSP70 gene expression in human colorectal carcinoma
cells.

Chen YC(1), Tsai SH, Shen SC, Lin JK, Lee WR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy Science, Taipei Medical University,
Taiwan. yc3270@tmc.edu.tw

We have investigated the regulation mechanism of chemical stress-induced HSP70
gene expression in human colorectal carcinoma cells (COLO205 and HT29). Our data 
show that chemical treatments including sodium arsenite and curcumin, induced
significant synthesis of HSP70 and its mRNA. The induced HSP70 gene expression
appears to be increased at the transcriptional level. The increase in HSP70 gene 
expression by both chemicals is associated with an increase in HSF binding to HSE
and induction of HSF1 di- or trimerization. Phosphorylation and activation of
extracellular signal-regulated proteins (ERK1/2) were detected in sodium
arsenite-treated COLO205 and HT29 cells, and the free radical scavenger
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) was able to inhibit this ERK1/2 activation and HSP70
gene expression. MAPK blockade by the specific MEK1 inhibitor (PD98059) decreased
the ability of sodium arsenite to increase HSP70 gene expression in a
dose-dependent manner along with dephosphorylation of ERK1/2 proteins. In
contrast to arsenite treatment, activation of ERK1/2 was not detected in
curcumin-treated colorectal carcinoma cells, and NAC and PD98059 did not show any
inhibitory effect on HSP70 gene expression induced by curcumin. Overexpression of
a dominant negative mutant of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1
(MEKK1-DN) prevents arsenite-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation and HSP70 protein
synthesis. These results indicated that the ERK signaling pathway can participate
in HSP70 gene expression induced by the prooxidant sodium arsenite, but not by
the antioxidant curcumin.

PMID: 11322385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23554-61. Epub 2001 Apr 24.

Resolution, detection, and characterization of redox conformers of human HSF1.

Manalo DJ(1), Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell and Developmental Biology and Department of Cell
Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers State University, Piscataway, New Jersey
08854-8082, USA.

We describe here an experimental protocol for the resolution, detection, and
quantitation of the reduced and oxidized conformers of human heat shock factor 1 
(hHSF1) and report on the effects in vitro and in vivo of redox-active agents on 
the redox status, structure, and function of hHSF1. We showed that diamide, a
reagent that promotes disulfide bond formation, caused a loss of
immunorecognition of the monomeric hHSF1 protein in a standard Western blot
detection procedure. Modification of the Western blot procedure to include
dithiothreitol in the equilibration and transfer buffers after gel
electrophoresis allowed for the detection of a compact, intramolecularly
disulfide cross-linked oxidized hHSF1 (ox-hHSF1) in the diamide-treated sample.
The effect of diamide was blocked by pretreatment with N-ethylmaleimide and was
reversed by dithiothreitol added to the sample prior to gel electrophoresis.
Incubation with nitrosoglutathione at 42 degrees C also promoted the conversion
of HSF1 to ox-HSF1; at 25 degrees C, however, nitrosoglutathione was by itself
without effect but blocked the formation of ox-hHSF1 in the presence of diamide. 
The disulfide cross-linked ox-hHSF1 was monomeric and resistant to the in vitro
heat-induced trimerization and activation. The possibility that ox-HSF1 may occur
in oxidatively stressed cells was evaluated. Treatment of HeLa cells with 2 mm
l-buthionine sulfoximine promoted the formation of ox-HSF1 and blocked the
heat-induced activation of HSF DNA binding activity. Our result suggests that
hHSF1 may have integrated redox chemistry of cysteine sulfhydryl into its
functional responses.

PMID: 11320084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Apr 15;29(8):1715-23.

The wing in yeast heat shock transcription factor (HSF) DNA-binding domain is
required for full activity.

Cicero MP(1), Hubl ST, Harrison CJ, Littlefield O, Hardy JA, Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Johnson Research Foundation and Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6089, USA.

The yeast heat shock transcription factor (HSF) belongs to the winged helix
family of proteins. HSF binds DNA as a trimer, and additional trimers can bind
DNA co-operatively. Unlike other winged helix-turn-helix proteins, HSF's wing
does not appear to contact DNA, as based on a previously solved crystal
structure. Instead, the structure implies that the wing is involved in
protein-protein interactions, possibly within a trimer or between adjacent
trimers. To understand the function of the wing in the HSF DNA-binding domain, a 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain was created that expresses a wingless HSF
protein. This strain grows normally at 30 degrees C, but shows a decrease in
reporter gene expression during constitutive and heat-shocked conditions. Removal
of the wing does not affect the stability or trimeric nature of a protein
fragment containing the DNA-binding and trimerization domains. Removal of the
wing does result in a decrease in DNA-binding affinity. This defect was mainly
observed in the ability to form the first trimer-bound complex, as the formation 
of larger complexes is unaffected by the deletion. Our results suggest that the
wing is not involved in the highly co-operative nature of HSF binding, but may be
important in stabilizing the first trimer bound to DNA.

PMCID: PMC31317
PMID: 11292844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Hum Reprod. 2001 Apr;16(4):676-82.

Effects of human hydrosalpinx fluid on in-vitro murine fertilization.

de Vantéry Arrighi C(1), Lucas H, El-Mowafi D, Campana A, Chardonnens D.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique de Stérilité et d'Endocrinologie Gynécologique, Département de
Gynécologie et d'Obstétrique, Maternité, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève,
Geneva, Switzerland. Corrine.deVantery@heuge.ch

Patients with hydrosalpinges show a decrease of both fertility and clinical
outcome of IVF and embryo transfer treatment. Several reports have demonstrated
the negative effects of hydrosalpinx fluid (HSF) on embryo development and
implantation. The aim of this study was to determine whether human HSF, collected
from infertile patients, might exhibit a deleterious effect on gametes and
fertilization using a murine IVF system. Murine gametes were co-incubated during 
IVF until first cleavage with human HSF diluted to 50% from four patients
(HSF1-4). It was demonstrated that HSF affected fertilization, as determined by
the count of the 2-cell embryos. Pre-incubation of spermatozoa with HSF during
capacitation significantly lowered the percentage of 2-cell embryos (P < 0.05).
While HSF1-3 had no significant effect on motility and viability of spermatozoa, 
HSF4 almost completely affected their survival. In contrast, pre-incubation of
ovulated oocytes surrounded by their cumulus cells with HSF before IVF did not
impede first cleavage. Taken together, these results suggest that HSF has a
cytotoxic effect on spermatozoa and/or impairs the fertilization process,
probably by altering capacitation/acrosome reaction and/or ligand(s)-receptor(s) 
interactions. Hydrosalpinges may be partly associated with sterility through HSF 
inhibitory effects on fertilization.

PMID: 11278217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Mar;39(6):1523-32.

Hsf1p and Msn2/4p cooperate in the expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes
HSP26 and HSP104 in a gene- and stress type-dependent manner.

Amorós M(1), Estruch F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias
Biológicas, Universitat de Valencia, Spain.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae possesses several transcription factors involved in the 
transcriptional activation of stress-induced genes. Among them, the heat shock
factor (Hsf1p) and the zinc finger proteins of the general stress response (Msn2p
and Msn4p) have been shown to play a major role in stress protection. Some heat
shock protein (HSP) genes contain both heat shock elements (HSEs) and stress
response elements (STREs), suggesting the involvement of both transcription
factors in their regulation. Analysis of the stress-induced expression of two of 
these genes, HSP26 and HSP104, reveals that the contribution of Hsf1p and Msn2/4p
is different depending on the gene and the stress condition.

PMID: 11260469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Microbiol. 2001 Feb;39(4):914-23.

Activation of heat shock transcription factor in yeast is not influenced by the
levels of expression of heat shock proteins.

Hjorth-Sørensen B(1), Hoffmann ER, Lissin NM, Sewell AK, Jakobsen BK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) transiently induces the expression of a
universally conserved set of proteins, the heat shock proteins (Hsps), when cells
are exposed to elevated temperatures as well as to a wide range of other
environmental stresses. The tight control of heat shock gene expression has
prompted a model, according to which HSF activity and 'free' heat shock protein
levels are tied up in a regulatory loop. Other data have indicated that HSF
senses stress directly. Here, we report that yeast cells in which the basal
expression levels of Hsps have been significantly increased exhibit improved
thermotolerance but display no detectable difference in the temperature required 
for transient activation of HSF. In a separate experiment, overexpression of
SSA2, a member of the Hsp70 family and a prominent candidate for the feedback
regulation of HSF, did not inhibit the heat shock response. Our findings
challenge the dogma that relief of the suppression of HSF activity by Hsps can
account for the acute heat shock response.

PMID: 11251812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2000 Nov;5(5):432-7.

RSK2 represses HSF1 activation during heat shock.

Wang X(1), Asea A, Xie Y, Kabingu E, Stevenson MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Heat shock transcription factor 1(HSF1) activation is a multistep process. The
conversion of a latent cytoplasmic form to a nuclear, DNA binding state appears
to be activated by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In previous studies, we 
showed that HSF 1 is phosphorylated by the protein kinase RSK2 in vitro and that 
this effect is inhibited by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs at the
concentration that leads to the activation of HSF1 in vivo (Stevenson et al
1999). In the present study, using cells from a patient with Coffin-Lowry
syndrome (deficient in RSK2), we demonstrate that RSK2 slightly represses
activation of HSF1 in vivo at 37 degrees C. In Coffin-Lowry syndrome cells,
HSF1-HSE DNA binding activity after treatment with sodium salicylate was slightly
higher than that in untreated cells, indicating that although RSK2 is involved in
HSF1 regulation, it is not the unique protein kinase that suppresses HSF1-HSE
binding activity at 37 degrees C. However, heat shock treatment resulted in
significantly higher HSF1-HSE binding activity in Coffin-Lowry syndrome cells as 
compared with normal controls, suggesting that RSK2 represses HSF1-HSE binding
activity during heat shock.

PMCID: PMC312873
PMID: 11189448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2000 Nov;5(5):406-11.

HSP70 and heat shock factor 1 cooperate to repress Ras-induced transcriptional
activation of the c-fos gene.

He H(1), Chen C, Xie Y, Asea A, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston MA 02115, USA.

Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) is a molecular chaperone involved in protein
folding and resistance to the deleterious effects of stress. Here we show that
HSP70 suppresses transcription of c-fos, an early response gene that is a key
component of the ubiquitous AP-1 transcription factor complex. HSP70 repressed
Ras-induced c-fos transcription only in the presence of functional heat shock
factor1 (HSF1). This suggests that HSP70 functions as a corepressor with HSF1 to 
inhibit c-fos gene transcription. Therefore, besides its known function in the
stress response, HSP70 also has the property of a corepressor and combines with
HSF1 to antagonize Fos expression and may thus impact multiple aspects of cell
regulation.

PMCID: PMC312869
PMID: 11189444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Feb 23;281(2):367-72.

Activation of heat shock factor 1 by pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate is mediated by
its activities as pro-oxidant and thiol modulator.

Kim SH(1), Han SI, Oh SY, Chung HY, Kim HD, Kang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, Korea.

Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) is known to inhibit NF-kappa B, which plays a 
critical role(s) as an immediate early mediator of immune and inflammatory
responses. Here we show that PDTC induces heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) activation
and heat shock protein expression, while other antioxidants such as butylated
hydroxytoluene (BHT), n-propylgallate (PG), ascorbic acid (AA), and
N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) do not. Since PDTC exerts other functions than
antioxidant, e.g., a pro-oxidant, metal chelator, and thiol group modulator, we
examined which of these activities is responsible for the PDTC-induced HSF1
activation. PDTC-induced HSF1 activation was not prevented by metal chelators,
EDTAs, indicating that the metal chelating effect of PDTC is not linked to the
HSF1 activation. PDTC increased intracellular GSSG level. In addition,
PDTC-induced activation of HSF1 was significantly inhibited by NAC and a
thiol-reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT), while it was partially prevented by
other antioxidants, AA, BHT, and PG. These results suggest that the activation of
HSF1 by PDTC may be due to its activities as pro-oxidant and thiol group
modulator rather than anti-oxidant.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11181056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 12;280(1):280-5.

Repression of the HSP70B promoter by NFIL6, Ku70, and MAPK involves three
complementary mechanisms.

Tang D(1), Xie Y, Zhao M, Stevenson MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We have studied mechanisms of HSP70 gene regulation at 37 degrees C by the
cellular factors NF-IL6 and Ku70. As both factors repress HSF1, we first examined
whether phosphorylation on serine 303 and 307 of HSF1 by MAPK and GSK3, which has
known to inhibit HSF1, was involved in the repression. However, repression by
NF-IL6 was found using HSF1 mutants S303G and S307G refractory to the effects of 
MAPK and GSK3. We then examined whether NF-IL6 repressed HSP70B by a mechanism
resembling Ku proteins. However, in Ku-deficient cells, NF-IL6 was still able to 
displace HSF1 from heat shock element (HSE) and repressed HSF1 activation. In
addition, activation of the HSP 70B promoter by wild type, S303G, or S307G HSF1
was observed to be much more pronounced in Ku-deficient cells. In vitro
translated Ku70 interacted with HSF1 by binding to and displacing it from HSE.
These data indicate that the repression of the HSP70B promoter by NF-IL6, Ku70,
and MAPK occurs independently of each other and involves three complementary
mechanisms.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):H426-33.

Activation of the heat shock response: relationship to energy metabolites. A
(31)P NMR study in rat hearts.

Chang J(1), Knowlton AA, Xu F, Wasser JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843, TX.

Heat shock factor (HSF), the transcription factor for the heat shock proteins, is
activated by cardiac ischemia, but the mechanism of activation is unknown.
Ischemia is accompanied by changes in the energy state and acid-base conditions. 
We hypothesized that decreased ATP and/or intracellular pH (pH(i)) might activate
HSF. To test this hypothesis, we perfused rat hearts within an NMR spectrometer. 
NMR data showed that after 6.5, 13, and 20 min of ischemia, ATP dropped to 62.7, 
23.1, and 6.9% of the control level, and pH(i) was 6.16, 5.94, and 5.79,
respectively. Reperfusion after ischemia partially restored ATP levels, and this 
was associated with greater activation of HSF1. HSF1 was also activated after 6.5
min of ischemia. Activation of HSF1 was less after 13 min of ischemia and barely 
detectable after 20 min of ischemia. In conclusion, 1) a moderate decrease in
intracellular ATP correlates with activation of HSF1 in the heart; and 2) a
severe depletion in ATP correlates with an attenuation in HSF1 activation, and
the restoration of ATP leads to greater activation of HSF1, suggesting that a
critical ATP level is required for activation of HSF1.

PMID: 11123260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Cell Physiol. 2000 Dec;185(3):348-57.

Pervanadate induces the hyperphosphorylation but not the activation of human heat
shock factor 1.

Park J(1), Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cell and Developmental Biology, Rutgers State University
of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.

In this study, we evaluated the effects of pervanadate, a tyrosine phosphatase
inhibitor, on the regulation and function of heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) in HeLa
cells. We showed that 50-100 microM pervanadate induced the hyperphosphorylation 
of the latent HSF1, as demonstrated by a retarded mobility of the HSF1 protein in
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and as supported by the reversal of this
mobility shift upon treatment of the cell extract with acid phosphatase.
Pervanadate by itself had no effect on the monomeric stoichiometry and
DNA-binding activity of HSF1. Upon heat shock, the pervanadate-induced
hyperphosphorylated HSF1 formed DNA-binding trimers and translocated into the
nuclear compartment. At high concentration (approximately 500 microM),
pervanadate also induced the tyrosine phosphorylation of many cellular proteins
and blunted the heat-induced transcription of hsp 70. N-acetyl cysteine inhibited
these effects of pervanadate, suggesting a redox-based mechanism for its
activity. Analysis of the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs)
using antibodies specific for the phospho-form (activated) of the kinases in
Western blot showed that pervanadate activated extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK1/2), c-Jun-N-terminal kinase 1/2 (JNK1/2), and p-38 kinase.
Pharmacological inhibitors of the ERK1/2 kinase pathway or the p38 kinase had
little or no effect on the pervanadate-induced hyperphosphorylation of HSF1. Our 
results show that hyperphosphorylation of hHSF1 can occur prior to and
independent of other events involved in the activation of hHSF1. The possibility 
that activation of the MAPK signaling cascade, notably JNK, may contribute to the
hyperphosphorylation of human HSF1 (hHSF1) is discussed.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11056005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Plant Mol Biol. 2000 Jul;43(4):459-71.

Plants contain a novel multi-member class of heat shock factors without
transcriptional activator potential.

Czarnecka-Verner E(1), Yuan CX, Scharf KD, Englich G, Gurley WB.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Cell Science Department, University of Florida, Gainesville
32611-0700, USA. wgurley@ufl.edu

Based on phylogeny of DNA-binding domains and the organization of hydrophobic
repeats, two families of heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) exist in plants.
Class A HSFs are involved in the activation of the heat shock response, but the
role of class B HSFs is not clear. When transcriptional activities of full-length
HSFs were monitored in tobacco protoplasts, no class B HSFs from soybean or
Arabidopsis showed activity under control or heat stress conditions. Additional
assays confirmed the finding that the class B HSFs lacked the capacity to
activate transcription. Fusion of a heterologous activation domain from human
HSF1 (AD2) to the C-terminus of GmHSFB1-34 gave no evidence of synergistic
enhancement of AD2 activity, which would be expected if weak activation domains
were present. Furthermore, activity of AtHSFB1-4 (class B) was not rescued by
coexpression with AtHSFA4-21 (class A) indicating that the class A HSF was not
able to provide a missing function required for class B activity. The
transcriptional activation potential of Arabidopsis AtHSFA4-21 was mapped
primarily to a 39 amino acid fragment in the C-terminus enriched in bulky
hydrophobic and acidic residues. Deletion mutagenesis of the C-terminal activator
regions of tomato and Arabidopsis HSFs indicated that these plant HSFs lack
heat-inducible regulatory regions analogous to those of mammalian HSF1. These
findings suggest that heat shock regulation in plants may differ from metazoans
by partitioning negative and positive functional domains onto separate HSF
proteins. Class A HSFs are primarily responsible for stress-inducible activation 
of heat shock genes whereas some of the inert class B HSFs may be specialized for
repression, or down-regulation, of the heat shock response.

PMID: 11052198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Nature. 2000 Oct 12;407(6805):693-4.

Maternal effect of Hsf1 on reproductive success.

Christians E(1), Davis AA, Thomas SD, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary Medecine,
University of Liège, Belgium.

PMID: 11048707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 19;276(3):1889-95. Epub 2000 Oct 24.

Implication of a small GTPase Rac1 in the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase
and heat shock factor in response to heat shock.

Han SI(1), Oh SY, Woo SH, Kim KH, Kim JH, Kim HD, Kang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, Korea.

Heat shock induces c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation as well as heat shock
protein (HSP) expression through activation of the heat shock factor (HSF), but
its signal pathway is not clearly understood. Since a small GTPase Rac1 has been 
suggested to participate in the cellular response to stresses, we examined
whether Rac1 is involved in the heat shock response. Here we show that moderate
heat shock (39-41 degrees C) induces membrane translocation of Rac1 and membrane 
ruffling in a Rac1-dependent manner. In addition, Rac1N17, a dominant negative
mutant of Rac1, significantly inhibited JNK activation by heat shock. Since
Rac1V12 was able to activate JNK, it is suggested that heat shock may activate
JNK via Rac1. Similar inhibition by Rac1N17 of HSF activation in response to heat
shock was observed. However, inhibitory effects of Rac1N17 on heat shock-induced 
JNK and HSF activation were reduced as the heat shock temperature increased.
Rac1N17 also inhibited HSF activation by l-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid, a proline
analog, and heavy metals (CdCl)), suggesting that Rac1 may be linked to HSF
activation by denaturation of polypeptides in response to various proteotoxic
stresses. However, Rac1N17 did not prevent phosphorylation of HSF1 in response to
these proteotoxic stresses. Interestingly, a constitutively active mutant Rac1V12
did not activate the HSF. Therefore, Rac1 activation may be necessary, but not
sufficient, for heat shock-inducible HSF activation and HSP expression, or
otherwise a signal pathway(s) involving Rac1 may be indirectly involved in the
HSF activation. In sum, we suggest that Rac1 may play a critical role(s) in
several aspects of the heat shock response.

PMID: 11050083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Dev Biol. 2000 Aug;44(5):471-7.

Heat shock factor 2 is activated during mouse heart development.

Eriksson M(1), Jokinen E, Sistonen L, Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Haartman Institute, Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Two members of the heat shock transcription factor family, HSF1 and HSF2, have
been identified as activators of mammalian heat shock gene expression. HSF1 acts 
as a classical stress-responsive factor, whereas HSF2 might play a role in
embryogenesis, since it is active during pre- and post-implantation periods up to
15.5 days of mouse embryonic development. In this study, we analyzed HSF1 and
HSF2 expression and activation during mouse heart formation. Our results show an 
abundant expression of HSF1 throughout heart development. In contrast, expression
of the alternatively spliced HSF2-alpha and HSF2-beta, and an additional higher
molecular weight isoform is strongly upregulated in the developing mouse heart at
E11.5-12.5, a stage after which tubular heart has looped and chambers formed, and
the myocardial walls are maturating and the valves differentiating. At the same
developmental stage, HSF2 DNA-binding activity is transiently induced, whereas
the weak HSE-binding activity, which is detected throughout heart development,
consists primarily of HSF1. Interestingly, heat shock gene expression shows no
temporal or spatial correlation with HSF2 expression and activation. Taken
together, our results indicate that HSF2 activation is associated with specific
stages of heart formation but is not involved in the regulation of inducible heat
shock gene expression.

PMID: 11032181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2000 Nov;279(5):C1506-15.

Phenylarsine oxide inhibits heat shock protein 70 induction in cultured guinea
pig gastric mucosal cells.

Rokutan K(1), Miyoshi M, Teshima S, Kawai T, Kawahara T, Kishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, The University of Tokushima,
Tokushima 770-8503, Japan. rokutan@nutr.med.tokushims-u.ac.jp

Phenylarsine oxide (PAO) forms a stable ring complex with vicinal dithiols that
can be reversed with 2,3-dimercaptopropanol (DMP) but not by dithiothreitol (DTT)
or 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME). PAO at 2 microM or higher inhibited heat shock
protein 70 (HSP70) induction within minutes in cultured guinea pig gastric
mucosal cells exposed to heat (43 degrees C) for 30 min. PAO did not affect the
nuclear translocation and phosphorylation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) induced
by heat stress, but it completely blocked the binding activity of HSF1 to the
heat shock element (HSE), leading to the block of expression of HSP70 mRNA and
accumulation of HSP70 in the cells. These inhibitions were completely reversed
with 2 microM DMP but not with 0.1 mM DTT or 1 mM 2-ME, suggesting specific
interactions between PAO and vicinal dithiol-containing molecules. Thioredoxin
(Trx) reversed the inhibition of the binding activity of HSF1 in whole cell
extracts prepared from PAO-treated, heat-stressed cells. Our results suggest that
PAO may react with vicinal-containing molecules including Trx and specifically
block the interaction between HSF1 and HSE.

PMID: 11029298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2000 Jul;5(3):229-42.

Potential targets for HSF1 within the preinitiation complex.

Yuan CX(1), Gurley WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Program in Plant Molecular and
Cellular Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611-0700, USA.

Protein-protein interactions between human heat shock transcription factor 1
(hHSF1) and general transcription factors TFIIA-gamma, TFIIB, TBP, TAF(II)32, and
TAF(II)55 and positive coactivator PC4 were characterized in order to identify
potential targets of contact in the transcriptional preinitiation complex. These 
contacts represent one of the final steps in the signal transfer of heat stress
to the transcriptional apparatus. TATA-binding protein (TBP) and transcription
factor IIB (TFIIB) were identified as major targets for HSF1 transcriptional
activation domains AD1 and AD2 based on in vitro interaction assays. TBP showed
affinity for AD2 and a fragment containing AD1, while the core domain of TFIIB
interacted primarily with the AD1 fragment. Interactions were also detected
between full-length HSF1 and the small subunit (gamma) of TFIIA. PC4 interacted
weakly with HSF2 and showed even less affinity for HSF1. Coimmunoprecipitation of
transiently expressed TBP in HeLa cells demonstrated that HSF1 AD2 and AD1+AD2
are able to bind TBP in vivo. Assays based on transcriptional interference
confirmed predictions that both TBP and TFIIB can interact with HSF1 activation
domains in HeLa cells. The negative regulatory region (NR) of HSF1 did not
interact with any general factors tested in vitro but did bind TFIID in nuclear
extracts through contacts that probably involve TATA associated proteins (TAFs). 
These results suggest a model for transcriptional regulation by HSF1 that
involves a shift between formation of dysfunctional TFIID complexes with the NR
and transcriptionally competent complexes with the C-terminal activation domains.

PMCID: PMC312889
PMID: 11005381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2000 Jul;5(3):219-28.

Formation of nuclear HSF1 granules varies depending on stress stimuli.

Holmberg CI(1), Illman SA, Kallio M, Mikhailov A, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
Finland.

In concert with the stress-induced activation of human heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), the factor becomes inducibly phosphorylated and accumulates into nuclear 
granules. To date, these processes are not fully understood. Here, we show that
although stress caused by the proteasome inhibitors MG132 and clasto-lactacystine
beta-lactone induces the expression of Hsp70, the formation of HSF1 granules is
affected differently in comparison to heat shock. Furthermore, proteasome
inhibition increases serine phosphorylation on HSF1, but to a lesser extent than 
heat stress. Our results suggest that, depending on the type of stress stimulus, 
the multiple events associated with HSF1 activation might be affected
differently.

PMCID: PMC312888
PMID: 11005380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2000 Jul;5(3):207-18.

Heat shock and arsenite induce expression of the nonclassical class I
histocompatibility HLA-G gene in tumor cell lines.

Ibrahim EC(1), Morange M, Dausset J, Carosella ED, Paul P.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, Service de Recherches en Hémato-Immunologie, DSV/DRM, Hôpital
Saint-Louis, Centre Hayem, Paris, France.

The nonclassical histocompatibility class I gene HLA-G has a tissue-restricted
expression. To explore mechanisms involved in HLA-G transcriptional regulation,
we have investigated the effect of stress, including heat shock and arsenite
treatment, on HLA-G expression in tumor cell lines. We show that stress induces
an increase of the level of the different HLA-G alternative transcripts without
affecting other MHC class I HLA-A, -B, -E, and -F transcripts. A heat shock
element (HSE) that binds to heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) on stress conditions was
further identified within the HLA-G promoter. Considering the ability of HLA-G to
modulate the function of immunocompetent cells, we hypothesize a new feature of
HLA-G as a signal regulating the immune response to stress.

PMCID: PMC312887
PMID: 11005379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Mol Biol. 2000 Sep 22;302(3):581-92.

Structural analysis of yeast HSF by site-specific crosslinking.

Bonner JJ(1), Chen D, Storey K, Tushan M, Lea K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
jbonner@bio.indiana.edu

We have introduced cysteine substitutions into the yeast HSF1 gene at a variety
of locations. Most have no phenotypic effect, and therefore provide site-specific
probes for thiol-specific reagents. Crosslinking of single mutants identifies
locations where equivalent regions of individual monomers can approach each other
in the HSF trimer. Crosslinking of double mutants indicates regions that can
approach closely within a single subunit. Results for the DNA binding domain and 
trimerization domain are consistent with known structural information, and
provide essential controls on the validity of the technique. In contrast to these
two domains, the N-terminal and C-terminal domains, wherein lie the
transcriptional activators, are highly flexible, and do not appear to be in
stable contact with any other portions of the protein. None of these patterns are
affected by the conformational change that is induced by superoxide or heat
shock. We suggest a new model for the mechanism of HSF regulation that
accomodates the structural information provided by these studies.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10986120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Transpl Int. 2000;13(4):297-302.

During ischemia-reperfusion in rat kidneys, heat shock response is not regulated 
by expressional changes of heat shock factor 1.

Akçetin Z(1), Pregla R, Darmer D, Brömme HJ, Holtz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

Ischemia-reperfusion injury is known to induce the inducible form of the 70 kDa
heat shock protein HSP70i (or HSP72) mainly via rapid activation of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1). However, little is known about the regulation of
the HSF1 gene. We therefore studied the time course of HSF1 mRNA transcription
and its relation to the expression pattern of the HSP70i mRNA in the renal
cortex, this being the most vulnerable and functionally most important part of
the kidney, after different periods of unilateral renal ischemia (10-180 min) and
reperfusion (up to 60 min) in male Wistar rats (10 weeks old). Immediately after 
ischemia there was a significant induction of HSP70i genes. While HSP70i
expression constantly increased (up to 4-fold) during reperfusion, even to a
higher extent with prolongation of ischemia, HSF1 mRNA remained constitutively
expressed under all conditions. Thus, we conclude that during
ischemia-reperfusion in rat kidneys, the heat shock response is regulated by
other means than expressional changes of HSF1.

PMID: 10959483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Aug;6(8):3312-8.

Induction of a heat shock factor 1-dependent stress response alters the cytotoxic
activity of hsp90-binding agents.

Bagatell R(1), Paine-Murrieta GD, Taylor CW, Pulcini EJ, Akinaga S, Benjamin IJ, 
Whitesell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Steele Memorial Children's Research Center,
University of Arizona, Tucson 85724, USA.

In addition to its classic role in the cellular stress response, heat shock
protein 90 (Hsp90) plays a critical but less well appreciated role in regulating 
signal transduction pathways that control cell growth and survival under basal,
nonstress conditions. Over the past 5 years, the antitumor antibiotics
geldanamycin and radicicol have become recognized as selective Hsp90-binding
agents (HBA) with a novel ability to alter the activity of many of the receptors,
kinases, and transcription factors involved in these cancer-associated pathways. 
As a consequence of their interaction with Hsp90, however, these agents also
induce a marked cellular heat shock response. To study the mechanism of this
response and assess its relevance to the anticancer action of the HBA, we
verified that the compounds could activate a reporter construct containing
consensus binding sites for heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), the major transcriptional
regulator of the vertebrate heat shock response. We then used transformed
fibroblasts derived from HSF1 knock-out mice to show that unlike conventional
chemotherapeutics, HBA increased the synthesis and cellular levels of heat shock 
proteins in an HSF1-dependent manner. Compared with transformed fibroblasts
derived from wild-type mice, HSF1 knock-out cells were significantly more
sensitive to the cytotoxic effects of HBA but not to doxorubicin or cisplatin.
Consistent with these in vitro data, we found that systemic administration of an 
HBA led to marked increases in the level of Hsp72 in both normal mouse tissues
and human tumor xenografts. We conclude that HBA are useful probes for studying
molecular mechanisms regulating the heat shock response both in cells and in
whole animals. Moreover, induction of the heat shock response by HBA will be an
important consideration in the clinical application of these drugs, both in terms
of modulating their cytotoxic activity as well as monitoring their biological
activity in individual patients.

PMID: 10955818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Lab Clin Med. 2000 Aug;136(2):138-48.

A non-toxic heat shock protein 70 inducer, geranyl-geranyl-acetone, restores the 
heat shock response in gastric mucosa of protein-malnourished rats.

Kawai T(1), Teshima S, Kusumoto K, Kawahara T, Kondo K, Kishi K, Rokutan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Physiology, School of Medicine, The University of
Tokushima, Japan.

Acute gastric mucosal lesions caused by stress or noxious stimuli are important
to consider in the management of critically or chronically ill patients. Protein 
malnutrition has been implicated as a risk factor for stress ulcer and subsequent
complications in those patients. When male Wistar rats fed a 5% or 20% casein
diet for 3 weeks were exposed to restraint and water-immersion stress, the
low-protein diet significantly increased the ulcer index. The low-protein diet
did not change the level of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in gastric mucosa but it
did attenuate the HSF1 activation after exposure to the stress, resulting in the 
inhibition of HSP70 mRNA expression and HSP70 induction in gastric mucosa. HSP70 
is crucial for the maintenance of cell integrity during pathophysiologic
conditions; therefore the impaired HSP70 induction appeared to at least in part
aggravate stress ulcer. We also tested whether a non-toxic HSP70 inducer,
geranyl-geranyl-acetone (GGA), effectively improved the mucosal integrity by
stimulating HSP70 induction under protein malnutrition. Intragastric
administration of GGA (200 mg/kg twice a day) to the protein-malnourished rats
for up to 1 week failed to stimulate the HSP70 induction. However, the
administration of GGA (200 mg/kg twice a day) for 3 weeks restored HSP70
induction and induced higher resistance against stress ulcer as compared with
results in vehicle-treated, normally nourished rats. Our results suggest that GGA
may have a potential benefit for the prevention of stress ulcer in chronically or
critically ill patients with protein malnutrition.

PMID: 10945242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34665-71.

A nuclear localization signal is essential for stress-induced dimer-to-trimer
transition of heat shock transcription factor 3.

Nakai A(1), Ishikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan.

Expression of heat shock genes is regulated mainly at the level of transcription 
by heat shock transcription factors (HSFs). In avian, HSF1 and HSF3 are
maintained in a cryptic monomer and dimer form, respectively, in the cytoplasm in
the absence of stress. Upon heat stress, they undergo conformational change
associated with the formation of a trimer and nuclear translocation. In this
study, we identified regions that are necessary for the dimer-to-trimer
transition of chicken HSF3 (cHSF3) upon stress conditions. One of these regions
coincides with a functional nuclear localization signal (NLS) of cHSF3 that was
recognized by a nuclear transport receptor importin alpha. Point mutations of
basic amino acids in the NLS inhibit both nuclear translocation and trimer
formation of cHSF3. These results demonstrate that the NLS acts positively on the
trimer formation of cHSF3 upon stress conditions.

PMID: 10942768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6435-48.

Cell cycle-dependent binding of yeast heat shock factor to nucleosomes.

Venturi CB(1), Erkine AM, Gross DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130, USA.

In the nucleus, transcription factors must contend with the presence of chromatin
in order to gain access to their cognate regulatory sequences. As most nuclear
DNA is assembled into nucleosomes, activators must either invade a stable,
preassembled nucleosome or preempt the formation of nucleosomes on newly
replicated DNA, which is transiently free of histones. We have investigated the
mechanism by which heat shock factor (HSF) binds to target nucleosomal heat shock
elements (HSEs), using as our model a dinucleosomal heat shock promoter
(hsp82-DeltaHSE1). We find that activated HSF cannot bind a stable,
sequence-positioned nucleosome in G(1)-arrested cells. It can do so readily,
however, following release from G(1) arrest or after the imposition of either an 
early S- or late G(2)-phase arrest. Surprisingly, despite the S-phase
requirement, HSF nucleosomal binding activity is restored in the absence of hsp82
replication. These results contrast with the prevailing paradigm for
activator-nucleosome interactions and implicate a nonreplicative,
S-phase-specific event as a prerequisite for HSF binding to nucleosomal sites in 
vivo.

PMCID: PMC86119
PMID: 10938121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Acta Med Austriaca. 2000;27(3):94-8.

[Reciprocal modification of Fas activation and stress protein response decides
apoptosis or resistance development of cells].

[Article in German]

Schett G(1), Steiner CW, Winkler S, Graninger W, Smolen J, Xu Q, Steiner G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Rheumatologie der Universitätsklinik für Innere Medizin III, Wien.
georg.schett@akh-wien.ac.at

Activation of heat shock factor (HSF)-1 DNA binding and heat shock protein
(hsp)-70 expression enable resistance of cells to various forms of stress and
maintain cell survival. Fas, a membrane-bound protein, is a central pro-apoptotic
factor. Its activation leads to a cascade of events resulting in programmed cell 
death. Herein, these two mechanisms with contrary functions, promoting either
cell survival or death, were addressed for their potential to inhibit each
other's activation. Induction of Fas-mediated signalling was followed by a rapid 
decrease of HSF1 DNA binding and inducible hsp70 expression. Inhibition of HSF1
DNA binding was demonstrated to be based on absent hyperphosphorylation of HSF1
during FAS-signalling. These effects of Fas-activation on the HSF1/hsp70 stress
response were blocked by ICE (caspase 1)-inhibitors, suggesting an ICE-mediated
process. Furthermore, inhibition of HSF1/hsp70 was accompanied by an increase of 
apoptosis rates from 20% to 50% in response to heat stress. When analyzing
Fas-mediated apoptosis in the presence of HSF1/hsp70 activation, decreased
apoptosis rates were detected with induced expression of hsp70 but not with
activation of HSF1-DNA binding alone. Thus, we conclude that inhibition of the
HSF1/hsp70 stress response during Fas-mediated apoptosis and vice versa may
facilitate a cell to pass a previously chosen pathway, stress resistance or
apoptosis.

PMID: 10897390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 Jul;11(7):2335-47.

The Skn7 response regulator of Saccharomyces cerevisiae interacts with Hsf1 in
vivo and is required for the induction of heat shock genes by oxidative stress.

Raitt DC(1), Johnson AL, Erkine AM, Makino K, Morgan B, Gross DS, Johnston LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Yeast Genetics, National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom. desmond_raitt@dfci.harvard.edu

The Skn7 response regulator has previously been shown to play a role in the
induction of stress-responsive genes in yeast, e.g., in the induction of the
thioredoxin gene in response to hydrogen peroxide. The yeast Heat Shock Factor,
Hsf1, is central to the induction of another set of stress-inducible genes,
namely the heat shock genes. These two regulatory trans-activators, Hsf1 and
Skn7, share certain structural homologies, particularly in their DNA-binding
domains and the presence of adjacent regions of coiled-coil structure, which are 
known to mediate protein-protein interactions. Here, we provide evidence that
Hsf1 and Skn7 interact in vitro and in vivo and we show that Skn7 can bind to the
same regulatory sequences as Hsf1, namely heat shock elements. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that a strain deleted for the SKN7 gene and containing a
temperature-sensitive mutation in Hsf1 is hypersensitive to oxidative stress. Our
data suggest that Skn7 and Hsf1 cooperate to achieve maximal induction of heat
shock genes in response specifically to oxidative stress. We further show that,
like Hsf1, Skn7 can interact with itself and is localized to the nucleus under
normal growth conditions as well as during oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC14923
PMID: 10888672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. FEBS Lett. 2000 Jun 23;475(3):283-6.

Protein synthesis is required for stabilization of hsp70 mRNA upon exposure to
both hydrostatic pressurization and elevated temperature.

Kaarniranta K(1), Holmberg CI, Helminen HJ, Eriksson JE, Sistonen L, Lammi MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.

We have recently described that in chondrocytic cells high hydrostatic pressure
(HP) causes a heat shock response via mRNA stabilization without a
transcriptional activation of the hsp70 gene. In this study, we investigated
whether this exceptional regulatory mechanism occurs more generally in different 
types of cells. Indeed, hsp70 mRNA and protein accumulated in HeLa, HaCat and
MG-63 cells under 30 MPa HP, without DNA-binding of heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) to the heat shock element of the hsp70 gene or formation of
nuclear HSF1 granules, revealing a lack of transcriptional activation. Moreover, 
we observed that protein synthesis is needed for mRNA stabilization. Thus, high
HP offers a model to study the mechanisms of hsp70 mRNA stabilization without
HSF1-mediated induction of the heat shock gene response.

PMID: 10869572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Cell Physiol. 2000 Aug;184(2):183-90.

Activation of heat shock factor 1 by hyperosmotic or hypo-osmotic stress is
drastically attenuated in normal human fibroblasts during senescence.

Lu J(1), Park JH, Liu AY, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers-The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8087, USA.

We have previously reported that osmotic stress prominently induces the DNA
binding activity of the heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). In the present 
study, we examined the effects of medium osmolarity on both the activation of
HSF1 and the programmed cell death in normal human fibroblasts during cellular
senescence. The activation of HSF1 occurred rapidly in presenescent (early
passage) IMR-90 cells when exposed to either hypo-osmotic or hyperosmotic stress.
In contrast, the activation of HSF1 was significantly attenuated in senescent
cells. Western blot analysis indicated that equal amounts of HSF1 were present as
monomers in the cytoplasm of both presenescent and senescent cells in normal
growth medium. Under either hypo-osmotic or hyperosmotic stress, trimerization
and nuclear localization of HSF1 occurred in presenescent cells but not in
senescent cells. More than 80% of HSF1 in senescent cells remained as monomers in
the cytoplasm under osmotic stress, suggesting a defect in the signal
transduction pathways that lead to HSF1 trimerization or a dysfunction in the
HSF1 protein itself. Possible involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signal transduction pathways in the activation HSF1 was investigated by
monitoring the activation of the three MAPKs, ERK1/2, JNK1/2, and p38, in cells
exposed to hypo-osmotic or hyperosmotic stress. All three MAPKs were activated by
hyperosmotic stress but not hypo-osmotic stress, suggesting that the MAPK signal 
transduction pathways may not be directly linked to the osmotic stress-induced
activation of HSF1. In contrast to the rapid heat shock transcription factor
(HSF) activation, apoptosis occurred only after long-term exposure to
hypo-osmotic or hyperosmotic stress. Despite the prominent induction of HSF1
activation, the presenescent cells were more sensitive than the senescent cells
to the osmotic stress-induced apoptosis.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10867642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26058-65.

Heat and chemical shock potentiation of glucocorticoid receptor transactivation
requires heat shock factor (HSF) activity. Modulation of HSF by vanadate and
wortmannin.

Li DP(1), Periyasamy S, Jones TJ, Sánchez ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, Ohio 43614, USA.

Heat shock and other forms of stress increase glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
activity in cells, suggesting cross-talk between the heat shock and GR signal
pathways. An unresolved question concerning this cross-talk is whether heat shock
factor (HSF1) activity is required for this response. We addressed this issue by 
modulating HSF1 activity with compounds acting by distinct mechanisms: sodium
vanadate (SV), an inhibitor of protein phosphatases; and wortmannin, an inhibitor
of DNA-dependent protein kinase. Using HSF1- and GR-responsive CAT reporters, we 
demonstrate that SV inhibits both HSF1 activity and the stress potentiation of
GR, while having no effect on the hormone-free GR or HSF1. Paradoxically, SV
increased hormone-induced GR activity in the absence of stress. In contrast,
wortmannin increased HSF1 activity in stressed cells and had no effect on HSF1 in
the absence of stress. Using the pMMTV-CAT reporter containing the negative
regulatory element 1 site for DNA-dependent protein kinase, wortmannin was found 
to increase the GR response. However, in cells expressing a minimal promoter
lacking negative regulatory element 1 sites, wortmannin had no effect on the GR
in the absence of stress but increased the stress potentiation of GR. Our results
show that the mechanism by which GR activity is increased in stressed cells
requires intrinsic HSF1 activity.

PMID: 10862623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 15;275(37):29147-52.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta negatively regulates both DNA-binding and
transcriptional activities of heat shock factor 1.

Xavier IJ(1), Mercier PA, McLoughlin CM, Ali A, Woodgett JR, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5E5, Canada.

Stress activation of heat shock factor (HSF1) involves the conversion of
repressed monomers to DNA-binding homotrimers with increased transcriptional
capacity and results in transcriptional up-regulation of the heat shock protein
(hsp) gene family. Cells tightly control the activity of HSF1 through
interactions with hsp90 chaperone complexes and through integration into a number
of different signaling cascades. A number of studies have shown that HSF1
transcriptional activity is negatively regulated by constitutive phosphorylation 
in the regulatory domain by glycogen synthase kinase (GSK3) isoforms alpha/beta. 
However, previous studies have not examined the ability of GSK3 to regulate the
DNA-binding activity of native HSF1 in vivo under heat shock conditions. Here we 
show that GSK3beta inhibits both DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of
HSF1 in heat-shocked cells. Specific inhibition of GSK3 increased the levels of
DNA binding and transcription after heat shock and delayed the attenuation of
HSF1 during recovery. In contrast, the overexpression of GSK3beta resulted in
significant reduction in heat-induced HSF1 activities. These results confirm the 
role of GSK3beta as a negative regulator of HSF1 transcription in cells during
heat shock and demonstrate for the first time that GSK3beta functions to repress 
DNA binding.

PMID: 10856293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Neurochem. 2000 Jul;75(1):363-72.

Heat shock transcription factors and the hsp70 induction response in brain and
kidney of the hyperthermic rat during postnatal development.

Morrison AJ(1), Rush SJ, Brown IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto at Scarborough, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF) 1 levels increase in brain regions and
decline in kidney during postnatal rat development. In both neonatal and adult
rats, levels of HSF1 protein in brain and kidney are proportional to the levels
of HSF DNA-binding activity and the magnitude of heat shock protein hsp70
induction after thermal stress. There appears to be more HSF1 protein in adult
brain than is needed for induction of hsp70 after thermal stress, suggesting that
HSF1 may have other functions in addition to its role as a stress-inducible
activator of heat shock genes. HSF2 protein levels decline during postnatal rat
development in brain regions and kidney. Gel mobility shift analysis shows that
HSF2 is not in a DNA-binding form in the neonatal brain and kidney, suggesting
that HSF2 may not be involved in the constitutive expression of hsps in early
postnatal development. There is no apparent relationship between levels of HSF2
protein and basal levels of hsp90, hsp70, heat shock cognate protein hsc70, and
hsp60.

PMID: 10854282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Circ Res. 2000 Jun 9;86(11):1122-8.

Mechanical stress-induced heat shock protein 70 expression in vascular smooth
muscle cells is regulated by Rac and Ras small G proteins but not
mitogen-activated protein kinases.

Xu Q(1), Schett G, Li C, Hu Y, Wick G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Innsbruck, Austria. qingbo.xu@oeaw.ac.at

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2000 Jun 9;86(11):1101-3.

-Previous studies have documented that acute elevation in blood pressure results 
in heat shock protein (hsp) 70-mRNA expression followed by hsp70-protein
production in rat aortas. In this article, we provide evidence that mechanical
forces evoke rapid activation of heat shock transcription factor (HSF) and hsp70 
accumulation. In our study, Western blot analysis demonstrated that hsp70-protein
induction peaked between 6 and 12 hours after treatment with cyclic stain stress 
(60 cycles/minute, up to 30% elongation). Elevated protein levels were preceded
by hsp70-mRNA transcription, which was associated with HSF1 phosphorylation and
activation stimulated by mechanical forces, suggesting that the response was
regulated at the transcriptional level. Conditioned medium from cyclic
strain-stressed vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) did not result in
HSF-DNA-binding activation. Furthermore, mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs), including extracellular signal-regulated kinases, c-Jun NH(2)-terminal
protein kinases or stress-activated protein kinases, and p38 MAPKs, were also
highly activated in response to cyclic strain stress. Inhibition of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase and p38-MAPK activation by their specific inhibitors (PD 
98059 and SB 202190) did not influence HSF1 activation. Interestingly, VSMC lines
stably expressing dominant-negative rac (rac N17) abolished hsp-protein
production and HSF1 activation induced by cyclic strain stress, whereas a
significant reduction of hsp70 expression was seen in ras N17-transfected VSMC
lines. Thus, our findings demonstrate that cyclic strain stress-induced hsp70
expression is mediated by HSF1 activation and regulated by rac and ras
GTP-binding proteins. Induction of hsp70 could be important in maintaining VSMC
homeostasis during vascular remodeling in response to hemodynamic stimulation.

PMID: 10850962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Exp Biol. 2000 Jun;203(Pt 12):1817-24.

Tissue-specific expression of zebrafish (Danio rerio) heat shock factor 1 mRNAs
in response to heat stress.

Råbergh CM(1), Airaksinen S, Soitamo A, Björklund HV, Johansson T, Nikinmaa M,
Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Department of Biology, University of Turku,
Finland. craber@utu.fi

All organisms respond to environmental, chemical and physiological stresses by
enhanced synthesis of an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins known as
heat shock proteins (HSPs) or stress proteins. Certain HSPs are also expressed
constitutively during cell growth and development, and they function as molecular
chaperones. The transcriptional regulation of hsp genes is mediated by the heat
shock transcription factor (HSF). The stress response has been studied mostly in 
mammalian cell lines or organisms normally maintained under constant laboratory
conditions. There is much less information on the regulation of the stress
response of animals, such as fish, that have to tolerate large fluctuations in
environmental and internal conditions. To characterize the regulation of the heat
shock response in fish, we have cloned the first heat shock transcription factor 
from fish, zebrafish Danio rerio. Phylogenetic analysis confirms that the
isolated zebrafish HSF belongs to the HSF1 family and is therefore designated
zHSF1. Analysis by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) shows
the presence of two zHSF1 mRNA forms that are expressed in a tissue-specific
fashion upon exposure to heat stress. Both forms are expressed in gonads under
all conditions; in liver and to a lesser extent in the gills, the longer splice
form of zHSF1 disappears upon heat shock. We present evidence for a unique
tissue-specific regulation of HSF1 upon exposure to elevated temperature.

PMID: 10821739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 11;275(32):24970-6.

Regulation of multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1)/P-glycoprotein gene expression and
activity by heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1).

Vilaboa NE(1), Galán A, Troyano A, de Blas E, Aller P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, 28006 Madrid, Spain.

Infection of HeLa cells with adenovirus-carrying HSF1(+) cDNA, which encodes a
mutated form of HSF1 with constitutive transactivation capacity, increased
multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) mRNA level and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) cell surface
content and stimulated rhodamine 123 accumulation and vinblastine efflux
activity. On the other hand, infection with adenovirus-carrying HSP70 and HSP27
cDNAs did not increase MDR1/P-gp expression. HSF1 regulates MDR1/P-gp expression 
at the transcriptional level, since HSF1(+) bound the heat-shock consensus
elements (HSEs) in the MDR1 gene promoter and also activated the expression of an
MDR1 promoter-driven reporter plasmid (pMDR1(-1202)). In addition, heat-shock
increased pMDR1(-1202) promoter activity but not the activity of a similar
reporter plasmid with point mutations at specific HSEs, and the heat-induced
increase was totally inhibited by co-transfection with an expression plasmid
carrying HSF1(-), a dominant negative mutant of HSF1. The stress inducers
arsenite, butyrate, and etoposide also increased pMDR1(-1202) promoter activity, 
but the increase was not inhibited (in the case of butyrate) or was only
partially inhibited (in the case of arsenite and etoposide) by HSF1(-). These
results demonstrate that HSF1 regulates MDR1 expression, and that the HSEs
present in the -315 to -285 region mediate the heat-induced activation of the
MDR1 promoter. However, other factors may also participate in MDR1 induction by
stressing agents.

PMID: 10816597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Cell Physiol. 2000 Jun;183(3):425-31.

Sensitization of tumor cells to fas killing through overexpression of heat-shock 
transcription factor 1.

Xia W(1), Voellmy R, Spector NL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.

Activation of the heat-shock or stress response is generally considered a
cytoprotective response to heat or other proteotoxic stresses. In mammalian
cells, stress-induced transcription of heat-shock genes is regulated by
heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). We now show that activation of the Fas 
death receptor transactivates HSF1 in HeLa cells, a Fas-expressing cervical
carcinoma line. Whereas HSF1 is constitutively expressed in a non-DNA-binding,
transcriptionally inactive state, activation of Fas leads to enhanced
transcription of a heat-shock reporter gene. The effects of Fas on
heat-shock-gene transcription do not appear to be a consequence of cell death as 
they (1) precede apoptotic changes and (2) are not abrogated by YVAD-CMK, an
inhibitor of Fas apoptosis that acts by blocking downstream effector proteases.
Despite expressing Fas, HeLa cells are relatively insensitive to Fas-mediated
killing, indicating that Fas expression alone, although necessary, is not
sufficient for apoptosis. By overexpressing a constitutively activated form of
HSF1, we sensitize HeLa cells to Fas-mediated killing. These findings shed new
light on the interaction between two of the most evolutionarily conserved cell
programs in nature, the Fas death pathway and the heat-shock response. Strategies
designed to upregulate HSF1 in tumor cells, either through pharmacologic or
gene-therapy approaches will hopefully provide a means with which to sensitize
tumors to the killing effects of cancer therapies operating through the Fas
receptor.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10797318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 May;11(5):1753-64.

The yeast heat shock transcription factor changes conformation in response to
superoxide and temperature.

Lee S(1), Carlson T, Christian N, Lea K, Kedzie J, Reilly JP, Bonner JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biology and Chemistry, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana
47405-3700, USA.

In vitro DNA-binding assays demonstrate that the heat shock transcription factor 
(HSF) from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae can adopt an altered conformation
when stressed. This conformation, reflected in a change in electrophoretic
mobility, requires that two HSF trimers be bound to DNA. Single trimers do not
show this change, which appears to represent an alteration in the cooperative
interactions between trimers. HSF isolated from stressed cells displays a higher 
propensity to adopt this altered conformation. Purified HSF can be stimulated in 
vitro to undergo the conformational change by elevating the temperature or by
exposing HSF to superoxide anion. Mutational analysis maps a region critical for 
this conformational change to the flexible loop between the minimal DNA-binding
domain and the flexible linker that joins the DNA-binding domain to the
trimerization domain. The significance of these findings is discussed in the
context of the induction of the heat shock response by ischemic stroke, hypoxia, 
and recovery from anoxia, all known to stimulate the production of superoxide.

PMCID: PMC14881
PMID: 10793149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 May;11(5):1739-51.

Complex regulation of the yeast heat shock transcription factor.

Bonner JJ(1), Carlson T, Fackenthal DL, Paddock D, Storey K, Lea K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47405-3700,
USA. jbonner@bio.indiana.edu

The yeast heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is regulated by posttranslational
modification. Heat and superoxide can induce the conformational change associated
with the heat shock response. Interaction between HSF and the chaperone hsp70 is 
also thought to play a role in HSF regulation. Here, we show that the Ssb1/2p
member of the hsp70 family can form a stable, ATP-sensitive complex with HSF-a
surprising finding because Ssb1/2p is not induced by heat shock. Phosphorylation 
and the assembly of HSF into larger, ATP-sensitive complexes both occur when HSF 
activity decreases, whether during adaptation to a raised temperature or during
growth at low glucose concentrations. These larger HSF complexes also form during
recovery from heat shock. However, if HSF is assembled into ATP-sensitive
complexes (during growth at a low glucose concentration), heat shock does not
stimulate the dissociation of the complexes. Nor does induction of the
conformational change induce their dissociation. Modulation of the in vivo
concentrations of the SSA and SSB proteins by deletion or overexpression affects 
HSF activity in a manner that is consistent with these findings and suggests the 
model that the SSA and SSB proteins perform distinct roles in the regulation of
HSF activity.

PMCID: PMC14880
PMID: 10793148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000 Mar;15 Suppl:D12-9.

Role of heat shock proteins in gastric mucosal protection.

Rokutan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Physiology, School of Medicine, The University of
Tokushima, Japan. rokutan@nutr.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Heat shock proteins (HSP) are crucial for the maintenance of cellular homeostasis
during normal cell growth and for survival during and after various cellular
stresses. Gastric surface mucous cells are the first line of defence against
insults derived from ingested foods and Helicobacter pylori infection. Primary
cultures of gastric surface mucous cells from guinea-pig fundic glands exhibited 
a typical heat shock response after exposure to elevated temperature or metabolic
insults, such as ethanol and hydrogen peroxide, and they were able to acquire
resistance to these stressors. Restraint and water immersion stress rapidly
activated heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in rat gastric mucosa within 15 min and
induced HSP70 mRNA expression and its protein accumulation. The extent of the
induction inversely correlated with the severity of mucosal lesions, suggesting
an important role of HSP70 in gastric mucosal defence. This heat shock response
appeared to be mediated by the alpha1A-adrenoceptor. The HSP70 family functions
as a molecular chaperone and reduces stress-induced denaturation and aggregation 
of intracellular proteins. In addition to its chaperoning activities, HSP70 has
been suggested to exert its cytoprotective action by protecting mitochondria and 
by interfering with the stress-induced apoptotic programme. Recently, we
introduced geranylgeranylacetone as a non-toxic HSP70 inducer. This compound
weakly stimulated HSP70 induction in cultured gastric mucosal cells and gastric
mucosa by directly activating HSF1 and markedly augmented HSP70 induction in
response to subsequent exposure to stress. Thus, non-toxic HSP70 inducers may
have a potential benefit for the prevention and treatment of stress ulcer.

PMID: 10759215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2000 Apr 15;185(2):255-61.

Interaction of the Neurospora crassa heat shock factor with the heat shock
element during heat shock and different developmental stages.

Meyer U(1), Monnerjahn C, Techel D, Rensing L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of
Bremen, Leobener Strasse, NW2, D-28359, Bremen, Germany.

The interaction of the heat shock factor (HSF) with the heat shock element (HSE) 
was determined by a non-radioactive electrophoretic mobility shift assay, in
order to analyze HSF regulation in Neurospora crassa. HSF binds to HSE under
normal, non-stress conditions and is thus constitutively trimerized. Upon heat
shock, the HSF-HSE complex shows a retarded mobility. This was also observed in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where this mobility shift was shown to be due to HSF
phosphorylation [Sorger and Pelham (1988) Cell 54, 855-864]. In N. crassa,
HSE-dependent electrophoretic mobility shift is temperature- and time-dependent. 
Under normal growth conditions, the HSF is located in the cytoplasm as well as in
the nucleus. In germinating conidia the HSF shows a retarded mobility typical for
heat shock even at normal growth temperatures. No HSF-dependent mobility shift
was detectable in aerial hyphae.

PMID: 10754257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. EMBO J. 2000 Apr 3;19(7):1545-54.

Arrest of spermatogenesis in mice expressing an active heat shock transcription
factor 1.

Nakai A(1), Suzuki M, Tanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397, USA.
nakai@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In mammals, testicular temperature is lower than core body temperature, and the
vulnerable nature of spermatogenesis to thermal insult has been known for a
century. However, the primary target affected by increases in temperature is not 
yet clear. We report here that male mice expressing an active form of heat shock 
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in the testis are infertile due to a block in
spermatogenesis. The germ cells entered meiotic prophase and were arrested at
pachytene stage, and there was a significant increase in the number of apoptotic 
germ cells in these mice. In wild-type mice, a single heat exposure caused the
activation of HSF1 and similar histological changes such as a stage-specific
apoptosis of pachytene spermatocytes. These results suggest that male infertility
caused by thermal insult is at least partly due to the activation of HSF1, which 
induces the primary spermatocytes to undergo apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC310224
PMID: 10747023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Apr 10;256(1):83-93.

Age-related alterations in the activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 in
rat hepatocytes.

Heydari AR(1), You S, Takahashi R, Gutsmann-Conrad A, Sarge KD, Richardson A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition & Food Science, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan 48202, USA.

The induction of hsp70 transcription by heat shock is significantly reduced in
hepatocytes isolated from old rats compared to hepatocytes isolated from
young/adult rats, and the decline in hsp70 transcription is correlated with a
decrease in the induction of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) binding to 
the heat shock element. However, the decreased HSF1 binding activity to DNA is
not due to reduced levels of HSF1 that are available for activation by heat
shock. In fact, the levels of HSF1 are two- to threefold higher in hepatocytes
from old rats, and the age-related increase in the levels of HSF1 protein in
hepatocytes appears to arise from a decrease in the degradation of the HSF1
because HSF1 mRNA levels do not change and the synthesis of HSF1 decreases
approximately 50% with age. No evidence was found for an impairment in HSF1
oligomerization in hepatocytes from old rats, e.g., the level of HSF1 trimers,
the nuclear translocation of HSF1, and the phosphorylation of HSF1 after heat
shock are similar in hepatocytes isolated from young/adult and old rats. However,
the thermostability of the DNA binding activity of HSF1 was significantly reduced
with age in a cell-free system as well as in isolated hepatocytes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10739655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Apr;20(8):2670-5.

Disruption of heat shock factor 1 reveals an essential role in the ubiquitin
proteolytic pathway.

Pirkkala L(1), Alastalo TP, Zuo X, Benjamin IJ, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
FIN-20521 Turku, Finland.

Inhibition of proteasome-mediated protein degradation machinery is a potent
stress stimulus that causes accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins and increased 
expression of heat shock proteins (Hsps). Hsps play pivotal roles in homeostasis 
and protection in a cell, through their well-recognized properties as molecular
chaperones. The inducible Hsp expression is regulated by the heat shock
transcription factors (HSFs). Among mammalian HSFs, HSF1 has been shown to be
important for regulation of the heat-induced stress gene expression, whereas the 
function of HSF2 in stress response is unclear. Recent reports have suggested
that both HSF1 and HSF2 are affected during down-regulation of
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (Y. Kawazoe et al., Eur. J. Biochem. 255:356-362,
1998; A. Mathew et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 18:5091-5098, 1998; D. Kim et al.,
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 254:264-268, 1999). To date, however, no
unambiguous evidence has been presented as to whether a single specific HSF or
multiple members of the HSF family are required for transcriptional induction of 
heat shock genes when proteasome activity is down-regulated. Therefore, by using 
loss-of-function and gain-of-function strategies, we investigated the specific
roles of mammalian HSFs in regulation of the ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated stress
response. Here we demonstrate that HSF1, but not HSF2, is essential and
sufficient for up-regulation of Hsp70 expression during down-regulation of the
ubiquitin proteolytic pathway. We propose that specificity of HSF1 could be an
important therapeutic target during disease pathogenesis associated with abnormal
ubiquitin-dependent proteasome function.

PMCID: PMC85482
PMID: 10733569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Mar 16;269(2):464-9.

Cyclosporin A induces an atypical heat shock response.

Paslaru L(1), Rallu M, Manuel M, Davidson S, Morange M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 8541 CNRS, Département de Biologie, ENS,
46 rue d'Ulm, Paris Cedex 05, 75230, France.

Cyclosporin A is a widely used immunosuppressive drug having toxic side effects, 
in particular on kidneys and liver, as a result of its action on different
molecular targets. Here we demonstrate that low doses of CsA are able to induce
the expression of the heat shock protein HSP27 and its hyperphosphorylation. It
also activates the two heat shock transcription factors, HSF1 and HSF2. Since
these factors have been shown to be activated by proteasome inhibition, we tested
the hypothesis that the inhibitory action of CsA on the proteasome might be
responsible for the activation of HSFs and the subsequent expression of HSP27.
The increase in multiubiquitinated proteins as well as the stabilization of p53
following CsA addition argues in favor of this hypothesis. The kidney BSC-1 cells
are highly responsive to the addition of CsA: the possible link between HSP27
induction and hyperphosphorylation and nephrotoxicity is discussed.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10708576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Am J Pathol. 2000 Mar;156(3):857-64.

A novel association between the human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1)
and prostate adenocarcinoma.

Hoang AT(1), Huang J, Rudra-Ganguly N, Zheng J, Powell WC, Rabindran SK, Wu C,
Roy-Burman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

A search for differentially expressed genes in a pair of nonmetastatic (PC-3)
versus metastatic variant (PC-3M) human prostate carcinoma cell lines led to
identification of the human heat shock factor (HSF1) as an overexpressed gene
product in PC-3M cells. Analysis of primary prostate cancer specimens indicated
that HSF1 is generally up-regulated in most of the malignant prostate epithelial 
cells relative to the normal prostate cells. Among the known effectors of HSF1
action, constitutive levels of HSP70 and HSP90 are not significantly altered by
the naturally elevated expression of HSF1 as in PC-3M cells or by transduced
overexpression of HSF1 in PC-3 cells. The basal levels of HSP27 in both cases
are, however, consistently increased by two- to threefold. With respect to
response to heat shock, high basal concentration of HSP90 is not further enhanced
in these cells, and HSP70 is up-regulated irrespective of HSF1 level. Heat shock,
however, causes an increase in HSP27 when HSF1 is up-regulated, except when the
expression of HSF1 is already too high. These results document for the first time
that HSF1 is overexpressed in human prostate cancer cells, at least one
consequence of which in the prostate cancer cell lines tested is stimulation of
both basal and stress-induced expression of HSP27, an important factor in cell
growth, differentiation, or apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC1876857
PMID: 10702402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2000 Jan;5(1):8-13.

Enhanced protein denaturation in indomethacin-treated cells.

Roussou I(1), Nguyen vT, Pagoulatos GN, Bensaude O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of General Biology, Medical School, University of Ioannina, Greece.
eroussou@cc.uoi.gr

Indomethacin, a potent anti-inflammatory drug, activates the DNA-binding activity
of human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), but this is insufficient to
elevate heat shock gene expression. However, indomethacin pretreatment leads to a
complete heat shock response at temperatures that are by themselves insufficient.
Here, we showed that the heat-induced loss of enzymatic activity of a nuclear or 
a cytoplasmic luciferase expressed in murine cells was enhanced when cells had
been pretreated with indomethacin. Additionally, in these cells the 70-kDa
constitutive heat shock protein exhibited an enhanced aggregation in the presence
of indomethacin. Similarly an increase in the aggregation of beta-galactosidase
was observed. These data suggest that indomethacin at moderate temperatures
accelerates the presence of denatured proteins in the cell, thus lowering the
temperature threshold for a heat shock response.

PMCID: PMC312904
PMID: 10701834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Feb 29;1490(3):348-54.

Transcriptional regulation involving the intronic heat shock element of the rat
hsp27 gene.

Cooper LF(1), Uoshima K, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, 308 Brauer
Hall, CB #7450, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
lyndon_cooper@dentistry.unc.edu

While sequencing the first intron of the rat heat shock protein 27 gene (hsp27), 
we identified a consensus heat shock regulatory element (HSE). This intronic HSE 
(i-HSE) is conserved among mammalian hsp27 genes. The aim of this study was to
investigate possible effects of this intronic HSE (i-HSE) on transcription from
the rat hsp27 promoter. Gel mobility shift assays indicated that the i-HSE bound 
heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in a manner equivalent to that of HSE
present in hsp27 promoter (p-HSE). The effect of i-HSE on transcription from the 
hsp27 promoter was evaluated using reporter constructs transiently transfected in
the osteosarcoma cell line ROS17/2.8. When inserted 5' to a 145 bp fragment of
the hsp27 promoter not containing p-HSE, a 215 bp fragment of hsp27 intron 1
containing i-HSE enhanced CAT activity and conferred heat shock-inducible
activity to the construct. This intronic fragment containing i-HSE also enhanced 
CAT activity in either normal or heat-shocked culture conditions when inserted 3'
to the CAT open reading frame. However, in chimeric reporter constructs with a
273 bp hsp27 promoter containing p-HSE directly 5' to CAT reporter, and with a
215 bp fragment containing i-HSE inserted 3' to the CAT open reading frame,
transcription from hsp27 promoter was reduced under normal and heat-stressed
culture conditions. Mutation of the i-HSE reversed this effect. Further study is 
required to define the mechanism by which the i-HSE-containing region of the
hsp27 promoter may mediate negative regulation of hsp27 transcription.

PMID: 10684980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Exp Biol. 2000 Mar;203(Pt 6):1017-25.

Thermotolerant desert lizards characteristically differ in terms of heat-shock
system regulation.

Zatsepina OG(1), Ulmasov KA, Beresten SF, Molodtsov VB, Rybtsov SA, Evgen'ev MB.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
117984, Russia.

We compare the properties and activation of heat-shock transcription factor
(HSF1) and the synthesis of a major family of heat-shock proteins (HSP70) in
lizard species inhabiting ecological niches with strikingly different thermal
parameters. Under normal non-heat-shock conditions, all desert-dwelling lizard
species studied so far differ from a northern, non-desert species (Lacerta
vivipara) in the electrophoretic mobility and content of proteins constitutively 
bound to the regulatory heat-shock elements in the heat-shock gene promoter.
Under these conditions, levels of activated HSF1 and of both HSP70 mRNA and
protein are higher in the desert species than in the non-desert species. Upon
heat shock, HSF1 aggregates in all species studied, although in desert species
HSF1 subsequently disaggregates more rapidly. Cells of the northern species have 
a lower thermal threshold for HSP expression than those of the desert species,
which correlates with the relatively low constitutive level of HSPs and high
basal content of HSF1 in their cells.

PMID: 10683161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Feb;267(4):1161-7.

Activation and regulation of Hsp32 and Hsp70.

Stuhlmeier KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunobiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. karlms@excite.com

Endothelial cells (EC) play a key role in the propagation of inflammatory
responses. Better understanding of inflammatory processes in EC might provide new
ways of controlling inflammation. We report here that the known antioxidant
pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate (PDTC) leads to time and dose dependent activation of 
heat-shock protein 70 (Hsp70) as well as Hsp32 in EC. We further demonstrate that
PDTC activates heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1), one of several transcription factor
involved in the upregulation of heat-shock proteins. And more importantly, we
demonstrate that Hsp32 as well as Hsp70 can be upregulated independently of the
transcription factor nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB). The presented data
provide further insight into the mechanism of Hsp32 and Hsp70 regulation, as well
as further distinguishing these genes from other so called 'protective genes'
whose upregulation depends on the activation of NF-kappaB. These findings
indicate that Hsp32 and Hsp70 might be ideal candidates among protective genes.
Hsp32 and Hsp70 provide many desirable protective effects but, being independent 
of NF-kappaB, would leave open the option to interfere with the upregulation of
proinflammatory genes by modulating the activation of NF-kappaB.

PMID: 10672026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. IUBMB Life. 1999 Oct;48(4):429-33.

Geldanamycin induces heat shock protein expression through activation of HSF1 in 
K562 erythroleukemic cells.

Kim HR(1), Kang HS, Kim HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Korea.

HSP90 is one of the most abundant heat shock proteins (HSPs) in eukaryotic cells 
and is found in complex with several regulatory proteins such as kinases and
transcription factors. Geldanamycin (GA), a benzoquinone ansamycin, specifically 
binds to HSP90 and disrupts the interaction of HSP90 and target proteins. Thus,
GA has been used as a specific inhibitor of HSP90. In this study, we examined
whether GA could affect protein synthesis and gene expression in the human
erythroleukemic cell line K562. Treatment with GA, but not herbimycin A (another 
benzoquinone ansamycin), highly induced a 70-kDa protein, which was revealed to
be HSP70 by immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation with anti-HSP70 antibody. The 
expression of HSP28 was also enhanced by GA. Furthermore, GA induced the
activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), but not HSF2, as determined by
electromobility shift and electromobility supershift assay. In addition, similar 
to heat shock treatment, GA induced the phosphorylation of HSF1. Heat shock
element-binding activity and phosphorylation of HSF1 were attenuated 3 h after GA
treatment. These results indicate that the functional inactivation of HSP90 by GA
potentially stimulates the expression of heat shock proteins through activation
of HSF1.

PMID: 10632574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1999 Nov;114(5):265-72.

[Molecular stress response in the stomach].

[Article in Japanese]

Rokutan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, Japan.

Stress response is mediated by a number of stress-related gene products and is
crucial for maintenance of homeostasis during and after various cellular
stresses. Exposure of rats to restraint and water-immersion stress rapidly and
transiently activated heart shock factor 1 (HSF1) and caused rapid HSP70 mRNA
expression and HSP70 accumulation in gastric mucosa. Using protein-malnourished, 
bilateral adrenalectomized, and subdiaphragmatically vagotomized rats, we showed 
that this heat shock response was regulated by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical or the sympathoadrenal systems. Experiments
with inhibitors for adrenoceptor subtypes and glucocorticoids suggested that the 
alpha 1A-adrenergic receptor appeared to mediate the HSP70 induction. The extent 
of HSP70 induction inversely correlated to the severity of mucosal damage,
suggesting an important role of the heat shock response in gastric mucosal
defense under conditions of stress. Recently, we found that gastric surface
mucous cells possessed a phagocyte NADPH oxidase-like system and secreted
abundant superoxide anion (O2.-). Helicobactor pylori lipopolysaccharide markedly
up-regulated this secretion. The enhanced O2.- production activated nuclear
factor kappa B by autocrine/paracrine mechanisms, resulting in activation of
proinflammatory cytokine gene expressions. These results suggest that surface
mucous cells may actively regulate stress responses of Helicobacter
pylori-infected gastric mucosa through a phagocyte NADPH oxidase-like activity.

PMID: 10621939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 30;265(3):763-9.

Differential temperature dependency of chemical stressors in HSF1-mediated stress
response in mammalian cells.

Hatayama T(1), Hayakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, 5 Nakauchi-cho,
Misasagi, Yamashina-ku, Kyoto, 607-8414, Japan. hatayama@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp

Expression of stress proteins is generally induced by a variety of stressors. To 
gain a better understanding of the sensing and induction mechanisms of stress
responses, we studied the effects of culture temperature on responses to various 
stressors, since the induction of hsp70 in mammalian cells by heat shock is
somehow modulated by culture temperature. Hsp70 was not induced by treatment with
sodium arsenite, azetidine-2-carboxylic acid, or zinc sulfate at the level of
heat shock factor (HSF) 1 activation in cells incubated at low temperature,
although these treatments induced hsp70 in cells incubated at 37 degrees C. The
repression of sodium arsenite or zinc sulfate-induced HSF1 activation by low
temperature was not simply due to the inhibition of protein synthesis. On the
other hand, heat shock and iodoacetamide induced HSF 1 activation in cells
incubated at either temperature. Thus, there seem to be two kinds of stressors
that induce HSF1 activation independently of or dependent on culture temperature.
Furthermore, the reduction of glutathione level seemed to be essential for HSF1
activation by chemical stressors.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10600494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Shock. 1999 Dec;12(6):443-8.

Expression of HSP70 is impaired at the transcriptional level in stressed murine
neuroblastoma cells.

Drujan D(1), De Maio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, MD 21205,
USA.

Although the expression of heat shock or stress proteins (hsps) is a well
conserved response to stress, the accumulation of these proteins is different
between various cell-types. Particularly, cells of neuronal origin show a reduced
expression of Hsp70 after stress. The possible mechanism of this reduced Hsp70
expression was studied in thermally stressed murine neuroblastoma cells (N18).
These cells showed no detectable levels of Hsp70 or Hsp70 mRNA after heat shock. 
Hsp70 transcription was not detectable after stress. However, heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is active in these cells under stress conditions.
Cells transiently transfected with the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
gene under control of the human heat shock promoter showed a stress-dependent
expression of CAT, suggesting that the cells contain the factors necessary for
the expression of Hsp70. Integration of the foreign human heat shock promoter
into genomic DNA did not affect its transcriptional inducibility. These results
suggest that the impairment of Hsp70 expression in N18 cells is due to the
environment (chromatin structure, methylation pattern) of the Hsp70 locus.

PMID: 10588512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Dev. 1999 Nov 15;13(22):2934-9.

Different upstream transcriptional activators have distinct coactivator
requirements.

Lee DK(1), Kim S, Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Activated transcription by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) requires coactivators, one 
of which is the SRB/mediator. Whereas Srb4, an essential subunit of the
SRB/mediator, is broadly required for Pol II transcription in yeast, we have
shown that it is dispensable for the transcriptional activation of some genes.
Here, we show that transcriptional activation by different natural activators,
and by artificial recruitment of various transcription factors, have very
different degrees of Srb4 independence. These data, and the analysis of an rgr1
mutant, point to an Rgr1 subcomplex of the SRB/mediator as the mechanistic route 
of activation by Srb4-independent activators in vivo.

PMCID: PMC317159
PMID: 10580000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8033-41.

Multiple components of the HSP90 chaperone complex function in regulation of heat
shock factor 1 In vivo.

Bharadwaj S(1), Ali A, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 5E5.

Rapid and transient activation of heat shock genes in response to stress is
mediated in eukaryotes by the heat shock transcription factor HSF1. It is well
established that cells maintain a dynamic equilibrium between inactive HSF1
monomers and transcriptionally active trimers, but little is known about the
mechanism linking HSF1 to reception of various stress stimuli or the factors
controlling oligomerization. Recent reports have revealed that HSP90 regulates
key steps in the HSF1 activation-deactivation process. Here, we tested the
hypothesis that components of the HSP90 chaperone machine, known to function in
the folding and maturation of steroid receptors, might also participate in HSF1
regulation. Mobility supershift assays using antibodies against chaperone
components demonstrate that active HSF1 trimers exist in a heterocomplex with
HSP90, p23, and FKBP52. Functional in vivo experiments in Xenopus oocytes
indicate that components of the HSF1 heterocomplex, as well as other components
of the HSP90 cochaperone machine, are involved in regulating oligomeric
transitions. Elevation of the cellular levels of cochaperones affected the time
of HSF1 deactivation during recovery: attenuation was delayed by immunophilins,
and accelerated by HSP90, Hsp/c70, Hip, or Hop. In immunotargeting experiments
with microinjected antibodies, disruption of HSP90, Hip, Hop, p23, FKBP51, and
FKBP52 delayed attenuation. In addition, HSF1 was activated under nonstress
conditions after immunotargeting of HSP90 and p23, evidence that these proteins
remain associated with HSF1 monomers and function in their repression in vivo.
The remarkable similarity of HSF1 complex chaperones identified here (HSP90, p23,
and FKBP52) and components in mature steroid receptor complexes suggests that
HSF1 oligomerization is regulated by a foldosome-type mechanism similar to
steroid receptor pathways. The current evidence leads us to propose a model in
which HSF1, HSP90 and p23 comprise a core heterocomplex required for rapid
conformational switching through interaction with a dynamic series of HSP90
subcomplexes.

PMCID: PMC84888
PMID: 10567529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. FEBS Lett. 1999 Nov 12;461(1-2):125-9.

Transcriptional activation of mouse cytosolic chaperonin CCT subunit genes by
heat shock factors HSF1 and HSF2.

Kubota H(1), Matsumoto S, Yokota S, Yanagi H, Yura T.

Author information: 
(1)HSP Research Institute, Kyoto Research Park, 17 Chudoji Minami-machi,
Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. kubota@hsp.co.jp

The chaperonin containing TCP-1 (CCT) is a eukaryotic molecular chaperone
consisting of eight subunit species and assists in the folding of cytosolic
proteins. We show here that all eight mouse CCT subunit genes contain sequences
called heat shock elements for binding heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and that these genes are transcriptionally 
activated by HSFs in reporter gene assays using HeLa cells transiently
overexpressing HSFs. These results suggest that HSF1 and/or HSF2 play a role in
Cct gene expression.

PMID: 10561509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. EMBO J. 1999 Nov 1;18(21):5953-62.

The Sch9 protein kinase regulates Hsp90 chaperone complex signal transduction
activity in vivo.

Morano KA(1), Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0606, USA.

Basal and stress-induced synthesis of the components of the highly conserved heat
shock protein Hsp90 chaperone complex require the heat shock transcription factor
(HSF); Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells expressing the HSF allele HSF(1-583)
reversibly arrest growth at 37 degrees C in the G(2)/M phase of the cell cycle
due to diminished expression of these components. A suppressor mutant capable of 
restoring high-temperature growth to HSF(1-583) cells was identified, harboring a
disruption of the SCH9 protein kinase gene, homologous to the protein kinase A
and protein kinase B/Akt families of mammalian growth control kinases. Loss of
Sch9 in HSF(1-583) cells derepresses Hsp90 signal transduction functions as
demonstrated by restoration of transcriptional activity by the mammalian
glucocorticoid receptor and the heme-dependent transcription factor Hap1, and by 
enhanced pheromone-dependent signaling through the Ste11 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK). Moreover, Sch9-deficient cells with normal levels of Hsp90
chaperone complex components display hyperactivation of the pheromone response
MAPK pathway in the absence of pheromone. These results demonstrate that the
evolutionarily conserved function of the Hsp90 chaperone complex as a signal
transduction facilitator is modulated by a growth regulatory kinase.

PMCID: PMC1171661
PMID: 10545107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. EMBO J. 1999 Nov 1;18(21):5943-52.

HSF1 is required for extra-embryonic development, postnatal growth and protection
during inflammatory responses in mice.

Xiao X(1), Zuo X, Davis AA, McMillan DR, Curry BB, Richardson JA, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75235-8573, USA.

HSF1 is the major heat shock transcriptional factor that binds heat shock element
(HSE) in the promoter of heat shock proteins (Hsps) and controls rapid Hsp
induction in cells subjected to various environmental stresses. Although at least
four members of the vertebrate HSF family have been described, details of their
individual physiological roles remain relatively obscure. To assess whether HSF1 
exhibited redundant or unique in vivo functions, we created Hsf1(-/-) deficient
mice. We demonstrate that homozygous Hsf1(-/-) mice can survive to adulthood but 
exhibit multiple phenotypes including: defects of the chorioallantoic placenta
and prenatal lethality; growth retardation; female infertility; elimination of
the 'classical' heat shock response; and exaggerated tumor necrosis factor alpha 
production resulting in increased mortality after endotoxin challenge. Because
basal Hsp expression is not altered appreciably by the HSF1 null mutation, our
findings suggest that this factor, like Drosophila Hsf protein, might be involved
in regulating other important genes or signaling pathways. Our results establish 
direct causal effects for the HSF1 transactivator in regulating critical
physiological events during extra-embryonic development and under pathological
conditions such as sepsis to modulate pro-inflammatory responses, indicating that
these pathways have clinical importance as therapeutic targets in humans.

PMCID: PMC1171660
PMID: 10545106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Oct 22;264(2):352-8.

Proteasome inhibitors lactacystin and MG132 inhibit the dephosphorylation of HSF1
after heat shock and suppress thermal induction of heat shock gene expression.

Kim D(1), Li GC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Physics and Radiation Oncology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York, 10021, USA.

Recently, we have shown that two proteasome inhibitors, MG132 and lactacystin,
induce hyperphosphorylation and trimerization of HSF1, and transactivate heat
shock genes at 37 degrees C. Here, we examined the effects of these proteasome
inhibitors and, in addition, a phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A (CCA) on the
activation of HSF1 upon heat shock and during post-heat-shock recovery, with
emphasis on HSF1 hyperphosphorylation and the ability of HSF1 to transactivate
heat shock genes. When lactacystin, MG132, or CCA was present after heat shock,
HSF1 remained hyperphosphorylated during post-heat-shock recovery at 37 degrees
C. Failure of HSF1 to recover to its preheated dephosphorylated state correlated 
well with the suppression of the heat-induced hsp70 expression. In vitro, HSF1
from heat-shocked cells, when dephosphorylated, showed an increase in HSE-binding
affinity. Taken together, these data suggest that phosphorylation of HSF1 plays
an important role in the negative regulation of heat-shock response.
Specifically, during post-heat-shock recovery phase, prolonged
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 suppresses heat-induced expression of heat shock
genes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10529368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Oct;265(2):688-97.

HSF3 is a major heat shock responsive factor duringchicken embryonic development.

Kawazoe Y(1), Tanabe M, Sasai N, Nagata K, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan.

The expression of heat shock genes in vertebrates is regulated mainly at the
level of transcription by four heat shock transcription factors (HSFs 1-4). Avian
cells express at least three HSFs (HSFs 1-3). HSF1 is rapidly activated by even
mild heat shock, while HSF3 is activated only by severe heat shock. In contrast, 
HSF2 is not activated by heat stress and has been speculated to have
developmental functions. Here, we examined the temporal and spatial profiles of
changes in the levels of these three HSFs in various tissues during chicken
development. We found that HSF3 was almost constantly expressed in various
tissues during early to late chicken development. The expression of HSF1 was
equally high in most tissues early in development and thereafter declined to
different levels in a tissue-dependent manner. Thus, HSF3 became the dominant
heat-responsive factor in all tissues examined. The magnitude of heat shock
response determined by Northern blotting did not always correlate with the level 
of HSF1 expression, suggesting that not only HSF1 but also HSF3 may be a major
factor mediating stress signals to heat shock gene expression in the chicken. In 
addition, the high-level and ubiquitous expression of HSF2 as well as HSF1 and
HSF3 in early embryogenesis suggested the involvement of these factors in all
developmental processes.

PMID: 10504401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cell Biochem. 1999 Jul;197(1-2):129-35.

The protein kinase inhibitor, H-7, suppresses heat induced activation of heat
shock transcription factor 1.

Ohnishi K(1), Wang X, Takahashi A, Matsumoto H, Ohnishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Nara Medical University, Kashihara, Japan.

We investigated the effects of a protein kinase (PK) inhibitor, H-7
(1-(5-isoquinolinesulfonyl)-2-methylpiperazine dihydrochloride), on the
regulation of heat shock protein (hsp)72 gene expression in a human glioblastoma 
cell line (A-172) using a gel mobility-shift assay and Western blot analysis.
Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) was phosphorylated immediately after
heat treatment (44 degrees C, 30 min) and the phosphorylation of HSF1 was
suppressed by H-7. The increase in DNA binding ability of HSFI to heat shock
element (HSE) by heat shock was significantly suppressed by the addition of H-7
in a dose-dependent manner. Similarly, the accumulation of hsp72 by heat shock
was suppressed by the addition of H-7 in a dose-dependent manner. Since H-7 is
known to be a potent inhibitor of some PKs, especially calcium-dependent PK
(PKC), cyclicAMP-dependent PK (PKA) and cyclicGMP-dependent PK (PKG), it is
possible that the activation of HSF1 by phosphorylation and subsequent hsp72 gene
expression are dependent on some of those PKs. The nature of H-7 as a
non-specific inhibitor for PKs is discussed in relation to its availability for
regulation of heat sensitivity of cells depending on cellular level of hsp72.

PMID: 10485332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Shock. 1999 Jul;12(1):63-8.

Evidence of multi-step regulation of HSP72 expression in experimental sepsis.

Chen HW(1), Chou FP, Lue SI, Hsu HK, Yang RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
College, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Heat shock proteins (Hsps) are a family of highly conserved proteins induced in
response to various stresses. Hsps protect cells against subsequent lethal
circumstances. Previous work from our laboratory has indicated that Hsp72 is not 
induced during experimental sepsis in rats, but the regulation of the induction
of Hsp72 synthesis in this disease cascade has not been investigated. In the
present study, we evaluated the expression of the hsp72gene, focusing on the
activation and DNA-binding ability of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), hsp mRNA
accumulation, and Hsp72 synthesis in animal sepsis models induced by cecal
ligation and puncture procedure. The results were compared with those of
sham-treated and heat-shocked rats. It was shown that the expression of the hsp72
gene in sepsis was a multi-step process, as previously documented in in vitro
studies. Hsp72 synthesis was not induced during sepsis, whereas DNA binding of
HSF was detectable, suggesting that the induction of Hsp72 is blocked downstream 
to HSF-DNA complex formation by the metabolic alteration occurring during sepsis.
The dissociation failure of the constitutive heat shock element binding factor
(CHBF) from the heat shock element may play an important role in this negative
regulation.

PMID: 10468053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1999 Mar;4(1):36-45.

Activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 to a DNA binding form during the 
G(1)phase of the cell cycle.

Bruce JL(1), Chen C, Xie Y, Zhong R, Wang YQ, Stevenson MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Joint Center
for Radiation Therapy, JFB 205, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) genes encode proteins that bind to the 
heat shock elements (HSE) of stress-inducible genes. We have observed the
induction of HSF1, the ubiquitous member of the HSF family from a latent
cytoplasmic state to a form competent to bind HSE during early G(1)in HeLa cells 
in the absence of stress. The induction of DNA-binding HSF1 coincided with a
burst in cellular protein synthesis in early G(1)and inhibition of this
translational peak prevented the formation of DNA binding-activated HSF1. A
potential role for HSF1 in cell cycle regulation was suggested by the finding
that cell lines stably overexpressing HSF1 showed an increased proportion of
G(1)cells relative to other cell cycle phases. However, in contrast to the
effects of heat shock, entry into G(1)did not lead to HSF1 hyperphosphorylation
or increased activity of a heat shock promoter-reporter gene and did not cause
the induction of heat shock protein 70 expression. Thus HSF1, previously
implicated in the heat shock response is activated to a DNA binding from in
G(1)under non-stress conditions and may play a role in G(1)regulation that does
not involve the transcription of heat shock genes.

Copyright 1999 Harcourt Brace & Co. Ltd.

PMCID: PMC312916
PMID: 10467107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1999 Mar;4(1):8-18.

Modulation of tolerance by mutant heat shock transcription factors.

Xia W(1), Vilaboa N, Martin JL, Mestril R, Guo Y, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Miami School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL, 33136, USA.

It ought to be possible to recruit normal cellular defenses to mitigate
ischemia/reperfusion damage and to reduce toxicity of chemotherapeutic drugs.
Stress-preconditioned cells acquire a tolerant state characterized by increased
resistance to such insults. This state is widely believed to be mediated,
partially, by heat shock proteins (Hsps). Indirect evidence suggests that
stress-induced Hsp expression is controlled by heat shock transcription factor 1 
(Hsf1), which factor may therefore represent a preferred target for therapeutic
modulation of tolerance. In support, positively acting (Hsf1(+)) and negatively
acting (Hsf1(-)) mutants of Hsf1 were identified. Inhibition of endogenous Hsf1
activity by Hsf1(-) prevents stress-induced Hsp synthesis and development of
tolerance. Hsf1(+) drastically enhances expression of major Hsps in the absence
of stress and induces tolerance against heat, simulated ischemia and toxicity by 
cyclophosphamide. Where compared, tolerance induced was slightly better than that
produced by heat preconditioning. Thus, development of the tolerant state is
dependent on increased levels of the cohort of Hsps induced by stress
preconditioning, and Hsf1 can induce accumulation of a typical set of Hsps, which
proteins are alone capable of providing tolerance at a similar level as heat
preconditioning. These findings make Hsf1 a preferred target for pharmacological 
intervention to deliberately induce tolerance.

Copyright 1999 Harcourt Brace and Co. Ltd.

PMCID: PMC312913
PMID: 10467104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cancer Res. 1999 Aug 15;59(16):4012-7.

Ku autoantigen affects the susceptibility to anticancer drugs.

Kim SH(1), Kim D, Han JS, Jeong CS, Chung BS, Kang CD, Li GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Pusan National University,
South Korea.

The Ku70/80 autoantigens (Ku) are the DNA-binding components of a DNA-dependent
protein kinase (PK) involved in DNA double strand breaks repairing a V(D)J
recombination. Because apoptosis is associated with DNA fragmentation and,
consequently, creation of double strand breaks, and a variety of DNA-damaging
drugs kill tumor cells by apoptosis, we tested the impact of Ku deficiency on the
sensitivity of anticancer drugs. Ku-null mutant cell lines Ku70-/- and Ku80-/-
were highly sensitive to anticancer drugs, compared with their wild-type cells.
Ku-deficient cells were more sensitive to bleomycin-induced DNA fragmentation and
exhibited a higher level of c-jun NH2-kinase/stress-activated PK activity than
wild-type cells, whereas R7080-6 cells overexpressing both human Ku70 and Ku80
were resistant to bleomycin-induced apoptosis and exhibited a lower level of
c-jun NH2-kinase/stress-activated PK activity. The Ku-protein level and Ku DNA
binding activity were decreased after treatment with bleomycin, adriamycin, or
vincristine, and the decreases were blocked by the treatment of z-DEVD-fmk, a
specific inhibitor of caspase-3, suggesting that loss of Ku DNA binding is, in
part, due to a caspase-mediated decrease in Ku protein levels. By contrast, HSF1 
DNA-binding activity was increased by the treatment of these anticancer drugs
and, subsequently, mitochondrial heat shock protein HSP75 was specifically
induced. Our data suggest that Ku can affect the susceptibility to anticancer
drug-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 10463600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 27;262(2):516-22.

Involvement of c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase pathway in differential regulation of 
heat shock proteins by anticancer drugs.

Kim SH(1), Kim D, Jung GS, Um JH, Chung BS, Kang CD.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Pusan National University, Pusan, 602-739, Korea.

In the present study, we examined the modulation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
activity and expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) after exposure to
anticancer drugs. Anticancer drugs induced HSF1 DNA-binding activity, and this
was followed by an increase of mitochondrial HSP75 and HSP60 levels and
concurrent decrease of cytoplasmic HSP70 levels. Unlike heat shock-induced full
phosphorylation, HSF1 was partially phosphorylated after exposure to vincristine,
and this result was tightly correlated with the kinetics of JNK/SAPK activation, 
and up-regulation of mitochondrial HSP75 level and concurrent down-regulation of 
HSP70. Furthermore, the dominant-negative mutant of SEK1 blocked the
phosphorylation of HSF1 and up-regulation of mitochondrial HSP75 in response to
vincristine or vinblastine. These data suggest that anticancer drugs regulate the
HSF1 transcriptional activity differently from heat shock, and JNK/SAPK pathway
appears to be involved in anticancer drug-induced HSF1 phosphorylation and
consequently differential regulation of mitochondrial HSP75 and HSP60 and
cytoplasmic HSP70.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10462506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Physiol. 1999 Aug;277(2 Pt 2):F227-34.

Thresholds for cellular disruption and activation of the stress response in renal
epithelia.

van Why SK(1), Kim S, Geibel J, Seebach FA, Kashgarian M, Siegel NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Pathology and Surgery, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8064, USA.

Renal ischemia causes a rapid fall in cellular ATP, increased intracellular
calcium (Ca(i)), and dissociation of Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase from the cytoskeleton
along with initiation of a stress response. We examined changes in Ca(i),
Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase detergent solubility, and activation of heat-shock
transcription factor (HSF) in relation to graded reduction of ATP in LLC-PK(1)
cells to determine whether initiation of the stress response was related to any
one of these perturbations alone. Ca(i) increased first at 75% of control ATP.
Triton X-100 solubility of Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase increased below 70% control ATP.
Reducing cellular ATP below 50% control consistently activated HSF. Stepped
decrements in cellular ATP below the respective thresholds caused incremental
increases in Ca(i), Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase solubility, and HSF activation. ATP
depletion activated both HSF1 and HSF2. Proteasome inhibition caused activation
of HSF1 and HSF2 in a pattern similar to ATP depletion. Lactate dehydrogenase
release remained at control levels irrespective of the degree of ATP depletion.
Progressive accumulation of nonnative proteins may be the critical signal for the
adaptive induction of the stress response in renal epithelia.

PMID: 10444577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 11;261(3):734-9.

Activator-specific requirement for the general transcription factor IIE in yeast.

Sakurai H(1), Fukasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Kanazawa University, 5-11-80 Kodatsuno, Kanazawa,
Ishikawa, 920-0942, Japan. sakurai@kenroku.ipc.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

The general transcription factor (TF) IIE is required for mRNA synthesis of many,
but not all, genes in yeast. In the transcription process, TFIIE regulates TFIIH 
kinase activity that phosphorylates the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the
largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. The CTD and the CTD kinase Kin28, a subunit
of TFIIH, have been shown to be dispensable for activation of several heat shock 
genes and the copper metallothionein gene CUP1. Here we analyzed requirement of
TFIIE for transcription of these genes and found that TFIIE is necessary for
activation of the heat shock genes by heat shock transcription factor Hsf1. By
contrast, transcription of CUP1 mediated by both Hsf1 and copper-activated
transcription factor Ace1 was inducible after inactivating TFIIE. These results
show that both TFIIE and the CTD/the CTD kinase exhibit "gene specificities"
which are overlapping, but not identical to each other, and thereby suggest that 
TFIIE functions with or without involvement of the CTD/the CTD kinase depending
on the gene to be transcribed.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10441494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Gene Expr. 1999;7(4-6):283-91.

A role for RNA metabolism in inducing the heat shock response.

Carlson T(1), Christian N, Bonner JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405, USA.

Yeast HSF is constitutively trimeric and DNA bound. Heat shock is thought to
activate HSF by inducing a conformational change. We have developed an assay in
which we can follow a conformational change of HSF that correlates with activity 
and thus appears to be the active conformation. This conformational change
requires two HSF trimers bound cooperatively to DNA. The conformational change
can be induced in whole cell extracts, and is thus amenable to biochemical
analysis. We have purified a factor that triggers the conformational change. The 
factor is sensitive to dialysis, insensitive to NEM, and is not extractable by
phenol. It is small, and apparently not a peptide. Mass spectroscopy identifies a
novel guanine nucleotide that tracks with activity on columns. This novel
nucleotide, purchased from Sigma, induces the conformational change (although
this does not prove the identity of the activating factor unambiguously, because 
Sigma's preparation is contaminated with other compounds). What is the source of 
this nucleotide in cells? Activity can be generated by treating extracts with
ribonuclease; this implicates RNA degradation as a source of HSF-activating
activity. The heat shock response is primarily responsible for monitoring the
levels of protein chaperones; how can RNA degradation be involved? Synthetic
lethal interactions link HSF activity to ribosome biogenesis, suggesting a
possible model. Ribosomal proteins are produced in large quantities, and in
excess of rRNA; unassembled r-proteins are rapidly degraded (t1/2 approximately 3
min). Unassembled r-proteins aggregate readily. It is likely that unassembled
r-proteins represent a major target of chaperones in vivo, and for
proteasome-dependent degradation. Interference with rRNA processing (e.g., by
heat shock) requires hsp70s to handle the aggregation-prone r-proteins, and
proteasome proteins to help degrade the unassembled r-proteins before they
aggregate. A nucleotide signal could be generated from the degradation products
of the rRNA itself.

PMID: 10440229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7848-52.

Fine mapping of the friend retrovirus resistance gene, Rfv3, on mouse chromosome 
15.

Super HJ(1), Hasenkrug KJ, Simmons S, Brooks DM, Konzek R, Sarge KD, Morimoto RI,
Jenkins NA, Gilbert DJ, Copeland NG, Frankel W, Chesebro B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Persistent Viral Diseases, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Hamilton, Montana 59840, USA.

Rfv3 is a host resistance gene that operates through an unknown mechanism to
control the development of the virus-neutralizing antibody response required for 
recovery from infection with Friend retrovirus. The Rfv3 gene was previously
mapped to an approximately 20-centimorgan (cM) region of chromosome 15. More
refined mapping was not possible, due to a lack of microsatellite markers and
leakiness in the Rfv3 phenotype, which prevented definitive phenotyping of
individual recombinant mice. In the present study, we overcame these difficulties
by taking advantage of seven new microsatellite markers in the Rfv3 region and by
using progeny tests to accurately determine the Rfv3 phenotype of recombinant
mice. Detailed linkage analysis of relevant crossovers narrowed the location of
Rfv3 to a 0.83-cM region. Mapping of closely linked genes in an interspecific
backcross panel allowed us to exclude two previous candidate genes, Ly6 and
Wnt7b. These studies also showed for the first time that the Hsf1 gene maps to
the Rfv3-linked cluster of genes including Il2rb, Il3rb, and Pdgfb. This
localization of Rfv3 to a region of less than 1 cM now makes it feasible to
attempt the cloning of Rfv3 by physical methods.

PMCID: PMC104315
PMID: 10438878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Sci. 1999 Aug;112 ( Pt 16):2765-74.

Human heat shock factor 1 is predominantly a nuclear protein before and after
heat stress.

Mercier PA(1), Winegarden NA, Westwood JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada L5L
1C6.

The induction of the heat shock genes in eukaryotes by heat and other forms of
stress is mediated by a transcription factor known as heat shock factor 1 (HSF1).
HSF1 is present in unstressed metazoan cells as a monomer with low affinity for
DNA, and upon exposure to stress it is converted to an 'active' homotrimer that
binds the promoters of heat shock genes with high affinity and induces their
transcription. The conversion of HSF1 to its active form is hypothesized to be a 
multistep process involving physical changes in the HSF1 molecule and the
possible translocation of HSF1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. While all
studies to date have found active HSF1 to be a nuclear protein, there have been
conflicting reports on whether the inactive form of HSF is predominantly a
cytoplasmic or nuclear protein. In this study, we have made antibodies against
human HSF1 and have reexamined its localization in unstressed and heat-shocked
human HeLa and A549 cells, and in green monkey Vero cells. Biochemical
fractionation of heat-shocked HeLa cells followed by western blot analysis showed
that HSF1 was mostly found in the nuclear fraction. In extracts made from
unshocked cells, HSF1 was predominantly found in the cytoplasmic fraction using
one fractionation procedure, but was distributed approximately equally between
the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions when a different procedure was used.
Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that HSF1 was predominantly a nuclear
protein in both heat shocked and unstressed cells. Quantification of HSF1
staining showed that approximately 80% of HSF1 was present in the nucleus both
before and after heat stress. These results suggest that HSF1 is predominantly a 
nuclear protein prior to being exposed to stress, but has low affinity for the
nucleus and is easily extracted using most biochemical fractionation procedures. 
These results also imply that HSF1 translocation is probably not part of the
multistep process in HSF1 activation for many cell types.

PMID: 10413683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Microbiol. 1999 Jul;33(2):274-83.

The heat shock response in yeast: differential regulations and contributions of
the Msn2p/Msn4p and Hsf1p regulons.

Boy-Marcotte E(1), Lagniel G, Perrot M, Bussereau F, Boudsocq A, Jacquet M,
Labarre J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Information Génétique et Développement, Institut de Génétique et
Microbiologie, UMR C8621, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 400, 91405 Orsay Cedex, 
France. boy@igmors.u-psud.fr

The heat shock transcription factor Hsf1p and the stress-responsive transcription
factors Msn2p and Msn4p are activated by heat shock in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Their respective contributions to heat shock protein induction have
been analysed by comparison of mutants and wild-type strains using
[35S]-methionine labelling and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Among 52
proteins induced by a shift from 25 degrees C to 38 degrees C, half of them were 
found to be dependent upon Msn2p and/or Msn4p (including mostly antioxidants and 
enzymes involved in carbon metabolism), while the other half (including mostly
chaperones and associated proteins) were dependent upon Hsf1p. The two sets of
proteins overlapped only slightly. Three proteins were induced independently of
these transcription factors, suggesting the involvement of other transcription
factor(s). The Ras/cAMP/PKA signalling pathway cAMP had a negative effect on the 
induction of the Msn2p/Msn4p regulon, but did not affect the Hsf1p regulon. Thus,
the two types of transcription factor are regulated differently and control two
sets of functionally distinct proteins, suggesting two different physiological
roles in the heat shock cellular response.

PMID: 10411744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Neurosci Lett. 1999 Jun 18;268(2):73-6.

Cell-specific expression of heat shock transcription factors 1 and 2 in
unstressed rat spinal cord.

Stacchiotti A(1), Rezzani R, Rodella L, Tiberio L, Schiaffonati L, Bianchi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Anatomy, University of Brescia, Italy.

We investigated the intracellular distribution of heat shock factors 1 and 2
(HSF1, HSF2) in rat spinal cord by immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry using 
selective policlonal antibodies. Our results showed that both HSF1 and HSF2 were 
expressed in spinal cord cells (both neurons and glia) but at different intensity
and cell localization. HSF1 was unusually distributed in the perinuclear
compartment of selected neurons of the gray matter while astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes and ependymal cells were predominantly stained in the nucleus.
HSF2 was expressed at lower levels than HSF1 and was scattered in both nucleus
and cytoplasm of the motoneurons of the ventral horns while glial cells again
showed a nuclear positivity. This study suggested that the different ability of
neurons vs. glial cells to react against adverse conditions might well be
correlated with the different constitutive localization of HSFs.

PMID: 10400081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mech Ageing Dev. 1999 Mar 15;107(3):255-70.

Expression of heat shock protein 70 decreases with age in hepatocytes and
splenocytes from female rats.

Gutsmann-Conrad A(1), Pahlavani MA, Heydari AR, Richardson A.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, South Texas Veterans Health
Care System, Audie L. Murphy Division, San Antonio 78284, USA.

A decline in the induction of heat shock protein 70 (hsp70) expression with age
has been shown to occur in a variety of tissues from male rodents. Because the
age-related change in the expression of many genes often differ in male and
female rodents, we have measured the induction of hsp70 expression in hepatocytes
and splenocytes from young/adult (4-8 months) and old (20-22 months) female
Fischer 344 rats. Hepatocytes and splenocytes isolated from old female rats
showed a marked decrease in the induction of hsp70 mRNA and protein levels by
heat shock when compared to hepatocytes and splenocytes isolated from young/adult
female rats. Because the heat shock transcription factor HSF1 mediates the
heat-induced transcription of hsp70, the effect of age on HSF1 was also studied. 
The ability of extracts from heat-shocked splenocytes to bind to the heat shock
element (HSE) decreased with age. Interestingly, the levels of HSF1 protein were 
similar in splenocytes and hepatocytes from old female rats compared to
young/adult female rats, even though the levels of HSE-binding were lower for
splenocytes isolated from old rats. In this study, we show an age-related decline
in the expression of hsp70, and this decline was similar to what we had
previously observed in male Fischer 344 rats.

PMID: 10360681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 8;96(12):6769-74.

Rapid and reversible relocalization of heat shock factor 1 within seconds to
nuclear stress granules.

Jolly C(1), Usson Y, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, 2153 North Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is essential for the stress-induced expression of heat
shock genes. On exposure to heat shock, HSF1 localizes within seconds to discrete
nuclear granules. On recovery from heat shock, HSF1 rapidly dissipates from these
stress granules to a diffuse nucleoplasmic distribution, typical of unstressed
cells. Subsequent reexposure to heat shock results in the rapid relocalization of
HSF1 to the same stress granules with identical kinetics. Although the appearance
of HSF1 stress granules corresponds to the hyperphosphorylated, trimeric
DNA-binding state of HSF1 and correlates temporally with the inducible
transcription of heat shock genes, they are also present in heat-shocked mitotic 
cells that are devoid of transcription. This finding suggests a role for HSF1
stress granules as a nuclear compartment for the temporal regulation and spatial 
organization of HSF1 activity and reveals new features of the dynamics of nuclear
organization.

PMCID: PMC21990
PMID: 10359787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):17219-25.

Modulation of human heat shock factor trimerization by the linker domain.

Liu PC(1), Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA. dthiele@umich.edu

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) are stress-responsive proteins that
activate the expression of heat shock genes and are highly conserved from bakers'
yeast to humans. Under basal conditions, the human HSF1 protein is maintained as 
an inactive monomer through intramolecular interactions between two coiled-coil
domains and interactions with heat shock proteins; upon environmental,
pharmacological, or physiological stress, HSF1 is converted to a homotrimer that 
binds to its cognate DNA binding site with high affinity. To dissect regions of
HSF1 that make important contributions to the stability of the monomer under
unstressed conditions, we have used functional complementation in bakers' yeast
as a facile assay system. Whereas wild-type human HSF1 is restrained as an
inactive monomer in yeast that is unable to substitute for the essential yeast
HSF protein, mutations in the linker region between the DNA binding domain and
the first coiled-coil allow HSF1 to homotrimerize and rescue the viability defect
of a hsfDelta strain. Fine mapping by functional analysis of HSF1-HSF2 chimeras
and point mutagenesis revealed that a small region in the amino-terminal portion 
of the HSF1 linker is required for maintenance of HSF1 in the monomeric state in 
both yeast and in transfected human 293 cells. Although linker regions in
transcription factors are known to modulate DNA binding specificity, our studies 
suggest that the human HSF1 linker plays no role in determining HSF1 binding
preferences in vivo but is a critical determinant in regulating the HSF1
monomer-trimer equilibrium.

PMID: 10358080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 May 27;259(1):15-20.

HSF1 activation occurs at different temperatures in somatic and male germ cells
in the poikilotherm rainbow trout.

Le Goff P(1), Michel D.

Author information: 
(1)UPRES-A 6026 CNRS, Université de Rennes, 1, Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes Cedex, 
35042, France. pascale.le-goff@univ-rennes1.fr

The heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the central actor of the response to
hyperthermia in eukaryotic cells. In mammals, male germ cells are an exception
among all cellular populations for their HSF1 activation occurs at low
temperature. This feature was believed to be specific of homeotherms whose
testicular compartment is located outside the main body cavity, where temperature
is lower. In the present study, we show that in the poikilotherm rainbow trout,
the maximal heat shock response of male germ cells, that are located in the same 
body compartment than the other organs, occurs also at a significantly lower
temperature (22 degrees C) than for somatic cells (28 degrees C), regardless of
culture conditions before heat shock. In addition, the acquisition of the
HSE-binding activity of HSF1 upon heat shock is not associated with the classical
hsp70 mRNA accumulation. Taken together, these results strongly suggest the
existence of a particular mode of heat shock response that could be specific of
male germ cells but not restricted to homeotherms.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10334908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nat Struct Biol. 1999 May;6(5):464-70.

A new use for the 'wing' of the 'winged' helix-turn-helix motif in the HSF-DNA
cocrystal.

Littlefield O(1), Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720-3206, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Apr;7(4):261-2.

The 1.75 A crystal structure of the Kluyveromyces lactis heat shock transcription
factor (HSF) DNA-binding domain (DBD) complexed with DNA reveals a protein-DNA
interface with few direct major groove contacts and a number of phosphate
backbone contacts that are primarily water-mediated interactions. The DBD, a
'winged' helix-turn-helix protein, displays a novel mode of binding in that the
'wing' does not contact DNA like all others of that class. Instead, the monomeric
DBD, which crystallized as a symmetric dimer to a pair of nGAAn inverted repeats,
uses the 'wing' to form part of the protein-protein contacts. This dimer
interface is likely important for increasing the DNA-binding specificity and
affinity of the trimeric form of HSF, as well as for increasing cooperativity
between adjacent trimers.

PMID: 10331875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Gene. 1999 May 17;232(1):115-24.

Genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the mouse Hsf2 gene and
promoter sequences.

Manuel M(1), Sage J, Mattéi MG, Morange M, Mezger V.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire, ENS, 75230, Paris Cedex 05, France.

The mouse heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) cDNA was previously cloned by homology to
HSF1, the heat shock factor involved in the cellular response to stress [Sarge,
K.D., Zimarino, V., Holm, K., Wu, C., Morimoto, R.I., Cloning and
characterization of two mouse heat shock factors with distinct inducible and
constitutive DNA-binding ability. Genes Dev. 5 (1991) 1902-1911]. HSF2 is active 
in restricted cell types during pre- and post-implantation stages of development,
and only in male germ cells of adult mice. However, the function of this factor
remains elusive. We report here the cloning of the mouse Hsf2 gene and its
genomic structure. We show that the gene is composed of 13 exons of variable
sizes spanning at least 43kb in the genome. The transcription start site has been
determined, and upstream sequences with promoter activity have been identified by
their ability to direct the expression of a luciferase reporter gene in
transfected cells. A preliminary analysis of the proximal promoter sequence
determined that the TATA box is absent, but that a GC-rich region with several
potential binding sites for transcription factors is present. The gene has been
mapped to mouse chromosome 10 by in-situ hybridization on metaphase chromosomes.

PMID: 10333528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 21;274(21):14988-96.

DNA-dependent protein kinase protects against heat-induced apoptosis.

Nueda A(1), Hudson F, Mivechi NF, Dynan WS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Program in Gene Regulation,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Purified heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) binds to both the regulatory
and catalytic components of the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). This
observation suggests that DNA-PK may have a physiological role in the heat shock 
response. To investigate this possibility, we performed a comparison of cell
lines that were deficient in either the Ku protein or the DNA-PK catalytic
subunit versus the same cell lines that had been rescued by the introduction of a
functional gene. DNA-PK-negative cell lines were up to 10-fold more sensitive to 
heat-induced apoptosis than matched DNA-PK-positive cell lines. There may be a
regulatory interaction between DNA-PK and HSF1 in vivo, because constitutive
overexpression of HSF1 sensitized the DNA-PK-positive cells to heat but had no
effect in DNA-PK-negative cells. The initial burst of hsp70 mRNA expression was
similar in DNA-PK-negative and -positive cell lines, but the DNA-PK-negative
cells showed an attenuated rate of mRNA synthesis at later times and, in some
cases, lower heat shock protein expression. These findings provide evidence for
an antiapoptotic function of DNA-PK that is experimentally separable from its
mechanical role in DNA double strand break repair.

PMID: 10329701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Cytokine. 1999 May;11(5):347-58.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit the expression of cytokines and
induce HSP70 in human monocytes.

Housby JN(1), Cahill CM, Chu B, Prevelige R, Bickford K, Stevenson MA, Calderwood
SK.

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Joint Center for Radiation Therapy, Jimmy
Fund Laboratories 205, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Recent studies have shown that the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
activate heat shock transcription factor (HSF1) from a latent cytoplasmic form to
a nuclear, DNA binding state. As HSF1 can function as both an activator of heat
shock genes and a repressor of non-heat shock genes such as IL1B and c- fos, we
have examined the potential role of HSF1 in the effects of NSAIDs on gene
expression in a human monocytic cell line THP-1. We found that two members of the
NSAIDs, sodium salicylate and sulindac repress the IL1B promoter to similar
degree to heat shock or HSF1 overexpression. In addition, sodium salicylate and
additional NSAIDs used at concentrations that activate HSF1 also inhibited the
expression of other monocytic genes (TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10,
ICAM-1) activated by exposure to a pro-inflammatory stimulus (lipopolysaccharide,
LPS). At least in the case of the IL1B promoter, repression did not seem to
involve another factor whose activity is affected by the NSAIDs, NFkappaB as the 
IL1B promoter fragment used in our studies is not NFkappaB responsive and binds
specifically to HSF1. Exposure to NSAIDs had a complex effect on HSP gene
expression and while sulindac activated the stress responsive HSP70B promoter,
sodium salicylate did not. In addition, only a subset of the NSAIDs induced HSP70
mRNA species. These findings reflect the properties of HSF1 which can be
activated to at least two DNA binding forms only one of which activates heat
shock promoters and suggest that individual NSAID family members may
differentially induce one or other of these forms. Overall therefore, exposure to
NSAIDs leads to a profound switch in gene expression in monocytic cells, with
suppression of genes involved in macrophage activation and induction of stress
genes and HSF1 appears to play a regulatory role in these effects.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10328874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Bacteriol. 1999 May;181(10):3136-43.

SSB, encoding a ribosome-associated chaperone, is coordinately regulated with
ribosomal protein genes.

Lopez N(1), Halladay J, Walter W, Craig EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706,
USA.

Genes encoding ribosomal proteins and other components of the translational
apparatus are coregulated to efficiently adjust the protein synthetic capacity of
the cell. Ssb, a Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsp70 cytosolic molecular chaperone, is
associated with the ribosome-nascent chain complex. To determine whether this
chaperone is coregulated with ribosomal proteins, we studied the mRNA regulation 
of SSB under several environmental conditions. Ssb and the ribosomal protein rpL5
mRNAs were up-regulated upon carbon upshift and down-regulated upon amino acid
limitation, unlike the mRNA of another cytosolic Hsp70, Ssa. Ribosomal protein
and Ssb mRNAs, like many mRNAs, are down-regulated upon a rapid temperature
upshift. The mRNA reduction of several ribosomal protein genes and Ssb was
delayed by the presence of an allele, EXA3-1, of the gene encoding the heat shock
factor (HSF). However, upon a heat shock the EXA3-1 mutation did not
significantly alter the reduction in the mRNA levels of two genes encoding
proteins unrelated to the translational apparatus. Analysis of gene fusions
indicated that the transcribed region, but not the promoter of SSB, is sufficient
for this HSF-dependent regulation. Our studies suggest that Ssb is regulated like
a core component of the ribosome and that HSF is required for proper regulation
of SSB and ribosomal mRNA after a temperature upshift.

PMCID: PMC93769
PMID: 10322015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. FASEB J. 1999 May;13(8):833-42.

Activation of Fas inhibits heat-induced activation of HSF1 and up-regulation of
hsp70.

Schett G(1), Steiner CW, Gröger M, Winkler S, Graninger W, Smolen J, Xu Q,
Steiner G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Vienna, Austria.

Activation of heat shock factor (HSF) 1-DNA binding and inducible heat shock
protein (hsp) 70 (also called hsp72) expression enables cells to resist various
forms of stress and survive. Fas, a membrane-bound protein, is a central
proapoptotic factor; its activation leads to a cascade of events, resulting in
programmed cell death. These two mechanisms with contradictory functions,
promoting either cell survival or death, were examined for their potential to
inhibit each other's activation. Induction of FAS-mediated signaling was followed
by a rapid decrease in HSF1-DNA binding and inducible hsp70 expression.
Inhibition of HSF1-DNA binding was demonstrated to be based on absent
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 during FAS signaling. These effects of FAS
activation on the HSF1/hsp70 stress response were blocked by ICE (caspase 1)
inhibitors, suggesting an ICE-mediated process. Furthermore, inhibition of
HSF1/hsp70 was accompanied by an increase in apoptosis rates from 20% to 50% in
response to heat stress. When analyzing the effects of HSF1/hsp70 activation on
Fas-mediated apoptosis, protection from apoptosis was seen in cells with induced 
hsp70 protein levels, but not in cells that were just induced for HSF1-DNA
binding. Thus, we conclude that inhibition of HSF1/hsp70 stress response during
Fas-mediated apoptosis and vice versa may facilitate a cell to pass a previously 
chosen pathway, stress resistance or apoptosis, without the influence of
inhibitory signals.

PMID: 10224227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Cell Sci. 1999 May;112 ( Pt 10):1465-76.

A novel hnRNP protein (HAP/SAF-B) enters a subset of hnRNP complexes and
relocates in nuclear granules in response to heat shock.

Weighardt F(1), Cobianchi F, Cartegni L, Chiodi I, Villa A, Riva S, Biamonti G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Biochimica ed Evoluzionistica, CNR Via Abbiategrasso 207,
Italy.

A two-hybrid screening in yeast for proteins interacting with the human hnRNP A1,
yielded a nuclear protein of 917 amino acids that we termed hnRNP A1 associated
protein (HAP). HAP contains an RNA binding domain (RBD) flanked by a negatively
charged domain and by an S/K-R/E-rich region. In in vitro pull-down assays, HAP
interacts with hnRNP A1, through its S/K-R/E-rich region, and with several other 
hnRNPs. HAP was found to be identical to the previously described Scaffold
Attachment Factor B (SAF-B) and to HET, a transcriptional regulator of the Heat
Shock Protein 27 gene. We show that HAP is a bona fide hnRNP protein, since
anti-HAP antibodies immunoprecipitate from HeLa cell nucleoplasm the complete set
of hnRNP proteins. Unlike most hnRNP proteins, the subnuclear distribution of HAP
is profoundly modified in heat-shocked HeLa cells. Heat-shock treatment at 42
degrees C causes a transcription-dependent recruitment of HAP to a few large
nuclear granules that exactly coincide with sites of accumulation of Heat Shock
Factor 1 (HSF1). The recruitment of HAP to the granules is temporally delayed
with respect to HSF1 and persists for a longer time during recovery at 37 degrees
C. The hnRNP complexes immunoprecipitated from nucleoplasm of heat-shocked cells 
with anti-HAP antibodies have an altered protein composition with respect to
canonical complexes. Altogether our results suggest an involvement of HAP in the 
cellular response to heat shock, possibly at the RNA metabolism level.

PMID: 10212141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Apr 14;1445(1):123-33.

Higher induction of heat shock protein 72 by heat stress in cisplatin-resistant
than in cisplatin-sensitive cancer cells.

Abe T(1), Gotoh S, Higashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Japan, Iseigaoka 1-1, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka
807-8555, Japan. abetetsu@med.uoeh-u.ac.jp

Induction of the heat shock proteins (HSPs) is involved in the increased
resistance to cancer therapies such as chemotherapy and hyperthermia. We used two
human ovarian cancer cell lines; a cisplatin (CDDP)-sensitive line A2780 and its 
CDDP-resistant derivative, A2780CP. The concentration of intracellular
glutathione (GSH) is higher (2.7-fold increase) in A2780CP cells than in A2780
cells. A mild treatment with a heat stress (42 degrees C for 30 min) induced
synthesis of both the heat shock protein 72 (Hsp72) mRNA and the HSP72 protein in
A2780CP cells, but not in A2780 cells. In contrast, a severe heat stress (45
degrees C for 30 min) increased synthesis of the HSP72 protein in the two cell
lines. The induced level of the HSP72 protein by the severe treatment was higher 
in A2780CP than in A2780 cells. The gel mobility shift assay showed that DNA
binding activities of the heat shock factor (HSF) in the two cell lines were
induced similarly and significantly by the mild heat stress. Immunocytochemistry 
using an anti HSF1 antibody also indicated that mild heat stress activated the
HSF1 translocation from the cytosol to the nucleus similarly in the both cell
lines. Pretreatment of CDDP-sensitive A2780 cells with N-acetyl-L-cysteine, a
precursor of GSH, effectively enhanced induction of the Hsp72 mRNA by the mild
heat stress. The present findings demonstrate that induction of the Hsp72 mRNA by
the mild heat stress was more extensive in CDDP-resistant A2780CP cells. It is
likely that the higher GSH concentration in A2780CP cells plays an important role
in promoting Hsp72 gene expression induced by the mild heat stress probably
through processes downstream of activation of HSF-DNA binding.

PMID: 10209264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochem Soc Symp. 1999;64:105-18.

Stress-induced activation of the heat-shock response: cell and molecular biology 
of heat-shock factors.

Cotto JJ(1), Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Rice Institute
for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Exposure of cells to environmental and physiological stress leads to an imbalance
in protein metabolism, which challenges the cell to respond rapidly and precisely
to the deleterious effects of stress on protein homoeostasis. The heat-shock
response, through activation of heat-shock transcription factors (HSFs) and the
elevated expression of heat-shock proteins and molecular chaperones, protects the
cell against the accumulation of non-native proteins. Activation of HSF1 involves
a complex multi-step pathway in which the inert monomer oligomerizes to a
DNA-binding, transcriptionally active, trimer which relocalizes within the the
nucleus to form stress-induced HSF1 granules. Attenuation of the heat-shock
response involves molecular chaperones which repress the HSF1 transactivation
domain and HSF-binding protein 1 (HSBP1), which interacts with the HSF1
oligomerization domain of HSF1 to negatively regulate its activity, thus insuring
that the expression of chaperones is precisely determined.

PMID: 10207624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3237-45.

Glycogen synthase phosphatase interacts with heat shock factor to activate CUP1
gene transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lin JT(1), Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853-2703, USA. JTL10@cornell.edu

Upon heat shock, transcription of many stress-inducible genes is rapidly and
dramatically stimulated by heat shock factor (HSF). A central region of the yeast
HSF (designated HSFrr for "repression region") was previously identified and
proposed to be involved in repressing the activation domain under non-heat-shock 
conditions. Here, we used the phage display system to isolate proteins that
interact with HSFrr. This should identify factors that modulate HSF activity or
directly participate in HSF-mediated transcriptional activation. We constructed a
randomly sheared yeast genomic library to express yeast proteins on the surface
of lambda phage. HSFrr binding phages were selected by cycles of affinity
chromatography. DNA sequencing identified an HSFrr-interacting phage that
contains the GAC1 gene. The GAC1 gene encodes the regulatory subunit for a type 1
serine/threonine phosphoprotein phosphatase, Glc7. Both gac1 and glc7 mutations
had little effect on HSF activation of gene transcription of two heat shock
genes, SSA4 and HSP82. In contrast, heat shock induction of CUP1 gene expression 
was completely abolished in a glc7 mutant and reduced in a gac1 mutant. The
results demonstrate that the Glc7 phosphatase and its Gac1 regulatory subunit
play positive roles in HSF activation of CUP1 transcription.

PMCID: PMC84118
PMID: 10207049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Microbiology. 1999 Jan;145 ( Pt 1):231-9.

Stress induction of HSP30, the plasma membrane heat shock protein gene of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, appears not to use known stress-regulated transcription
factors.

Seymour IJ(1), Piper PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University College London,
UK.

More than one transcription factor contributes to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
heat shock response. Many genes are induced through the activation of heat shock 
factor (Hsf1), a protein that is constitutively bound to heat shock promoter
elements (HSEs). Other genes are switched on by Msn2/Msn4-dependent activation of
a quite separate promoter element (the stress response element, STRE). While Hsf 
directs gene activation mainly in response to heat stress, STRE-directed
transcription is stimulated not only by heat but also by several other stresses, 
starvation included. HSP30, encoding the plasma membrane heat shock protein, is
shown in this study to be activated by several stresses. It is most strongly
induced with heat shock, ethanol and weak organic acid exposure. The HSP30
promoter has no good agreement to the HSE consensus and its stress activation is 
unaffected by a mutation (hsf1-m3) that causes defective heat shock activation of
Hsf1-dependent genes. Activation of HSP30 occurs with some, but not all,
STRE-inducing stresses and is largely unaffected either by loss of the Msn2/Msn4 
transcription factors or with mutation of all STRE-like consensus sequences of
the promoter. Stress activation of HSP30 appears therefore to involve as yet
unidentified components of the yeast transcriptional apparatus.

PMID: 10206703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Radiat Res. 1999 Mar;151(3):283-92.

Activation of heat-shock transcription factor 1 in heated Chinese hamster ovary
cells is dependent on the cell cycle and is inhibited by sodium vanadate.

He L(1), Fox MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins 80523, USA.

Inducible heat-shock protein 70 (HSP72) is expressed in a cell cycle-specific
manner in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells after heating for 15 min at 45.0
degrees C, with the highest level in S-phase cells. Since heat shock induces the 
transcription of heat-shock proteins through the transactivation of heat-shock
elements (HSEs) by heat-shock factor HSF1, we wished to determine whether the
cell cycle-specific expression of HSP72 was regulated at the level of
transcription. The levels of HSF1 did not vary through the cell cycle, as
measured by polyclonal antibodies and flow cytometry. The binding of HSF1 to the 
heat-shock element was measured with the gel mobility shift assay using cell
extracts from Hoechst 33342-labeled heated cells sorted from G1, S and G2/M
phases. The HSF1-HSE binding activity was twofold higher in S phase than in G1 or
G2/M phase. When CHO cells were exposed to 10 microM sodium vanadate, an
inhibitor of tyrosine phosphatase, for 24 h before heat shock, the binding of
HSF1 to HSE was reduced by a factor of 2 and the level of HSP72 was greatly
reduced. The HSF1 binding to HSE was completely eliminated by using anti-HSF1
antibody in the gel mobility shift assays. Antibodies against HSP73 did not
reduce the HSF1-HSE binding activity, but antibodies against HSP40 actually
increased the binding activity. These results support the hypothesis that cell
cycle-dependent binding of HSF1 to HSE is the cause of the cell cycle-specific
expression of HSP72 in heated CHO cells and is regulated by phosphorylation.

PMID: 10073666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Gen Genet. 1999 Feb;261(1):161-9.

Mutations in the Schizosaccharomyces pombe heat shock factor that differentially 
affect responses to heat and cadmium stress.

Saltsman KA(1), Prentice HL, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA.

Heat shock factor (hsf) is the transcriptional activator that governs the
transcriptional response of eukaryotic cells to stressful conditions. The
structure and regulation of hsf is highly conserved. We describe deletion
mutations in hsf+ that alter the ability of Schizosaccharomyces pombe to respond 
to different stressful conditions. One mutation causes increased sensitivity to
cadmium while maintaining near normal sensitivity to heat stress, while another
mutation confers increased sensitivity to heat stress but retains normal
sensitivity to cadmium. Despite the differential sensitivity of these two strains
to cadmium and heat stress, the mutant hsf proteins in each strain were activated
by both cadmium and heat. However, we found that these mutations differentially
affected the ability of hsf to activate different promoters: one mutated hsf
activated the ssp1+ gene better than the wis2+ gene following either stress,
while the other mutated hsf activated wis2+ better than ssp1+. We propose that
the differential ability of strains that contain these mutant hsfs to survive
cadmium and heat stress is not caused by differences in activation of hsf, but is
caused instead by differential abilities of the mutant hsfs to activate the
appropriate sets of genes needed for survival.

PMID: 10071222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Brain Res. 1999 Mar 13;821(2):333-40.

Cellular localization of the heat shock transcription factors HSF1 and HSF2 in
the rat brain during postnatal development and following hyperthermia.

Brown IR(1), Rush SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto at Scarborough, 1265 Military
Trail, West Hill, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ibrown@scar.utoronto.ca

The heat shock transcription factor HSF1 mediates the induction of heat shock
genes in response to temperature elevation and other traumatic events. The
induced hsps play roles in cellular repair and protective mechanisms.
Immunocytochemistry revealed that in the unstressed rat, HSF1 was already
prepositioned in the nucleus at abundant levels in both neuronal and glial cell
types. Following a fever-like temperature, glial cells rapidly induced hsp70
whereas populations of large neurons did not. The lack of hsp70 induction in
these neurons in vivo did not appear to be due to deficiencies in levels of
nuclear HSF1. During postnatal development of the cerebellum, levels of HSF1
increased progressively from day 1 to 30. Members of the hsp gene set are also
constitutively expressed in the unstressed animal and play roles as molecular
chaperones. HSF2, which has been proposed as a developmental regulator of
constitutive heat shock gene expression, demonstrated a developmental alteration 
in cellular localization, namely a nuclear distribution in neurons at postnatal
day 2 and a cytoplasmic localization at day 30. During postnatal development the 
overall levels of neural HSF2 declined. This profile showed no obvious
correlation with previously observed levels of constitutive hsp expression during
postnatal neural development.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10064819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Circulation. 1999 Feb 23;99(7):934-41.

Reactive oxygen species play an important role in the activation of heat shock
factor 1 in ischemic-reperfused heart.

Nishizawa J(1), Nakai A, Matsuda K, Komeda M, Ban T, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for
Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The myocardial protective role of heat shock protein (HSP) has been
demonstrated. Recently, we reported that ischemia/reperfusion induced a
significant activation of heat shock factor (HSF) 1 and an accumulation of mRNA
for HSP70 and HSP90. We examined the role of reactive oxygen species (ROSs) in
the induction of stress response in the ischemic-reperfused heart.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat hearts were isolated and perfused with Krebs-Henseleit
buffer by the Langendorff method. Whole-cell extracts were prepared for gel
mobility shift assay using oligonucleotides containing the heat shock element.
Induction of mRNA for HSP70 and HSP90 was examined by Northern blot analysis.
Repetitive ischemia/reperfusion, which causes recurrent bursts of free radical
generation, resulted in burst activation of HSF1, and this burst activation was
significantly reduced with either allopurinol 1 mmol/L (an inhibitor of xanthine 
oxidase) or catalase 2x10(5) U/L (a scavenger of H2O2). Significant activation of
HSF1 was observed on perfusion with buffer containing H2O2 150 micromol/L or
xanthine 1 mmol/L plus xanthine oxidase 5 U/L. The accumulation of mRNA for HSP70
or HSP90 after repetitive ischemia/reperfusion was reduced with either
allopurinol or catalase.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that ROSs play an important role in the
activation of HSF1 and the accumulation of mRNA for HSP70 and HSP90 in the
ischemic-reperfused heart.

PMID: 10027818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):1627-39.

Cooperative binding of heat shock factor to the yeast HSP82 promoter in vivo and 
in vitro.

Erkine AM(1), Magrogan SF, Sekinger EA, Gross DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Medical Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 71130, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1999 May;19(5):3929.

Previous work has shown that heat shock factor (HSF) plays a central role in
remodeling the chromatin structure of the yeast HSP82 promoter via constitutive
interactions with its high-affinity binding site, heat shock element 1 (HSE1).
The HSF-HSE1 interaction is also critical for stimulating both basal (noninduced)
and induced transcription. By contrast, the function of the adjacent, inducibly
occupied HSE2 and -3 is unknown. In this study, we examined the consequences of
mutations in HSE1, HSE2, and HSE3 on HSF binding and transactivation. We provide 
evidence that in vivo, HSF binds to these three sites cooperatively. This
cooperativity is seen both before and after heat shock, is required for full
inducibility, and can be recapitulated in vitro on both linear and supercoiled
templates. Quantitative in vitro footprinting reveals that occupancy of HSE2 and 
-3 by Saccharomyces cerevisiae HSF (ScHSF) is enhanced approximately 100-fold
through cooperative interactions with the HSF-HSE1 complex. HSE1 point mutants,
whose basal transcription is virtually abolished, are functionally compensated by
cooperative interactions with HSE2 and -3 following heat shock, resulting in
robust inducibility. Using a competition binding assay, we show that the affinity
of recombinant HSF for the full-length HSP82 promoter is reduced nearly an order 
of magnitude by a single-point mutation within HSE1, paralleling the effect of
these mutations on noninduced transcript levels. We propose that the remodeled
chromatin phenotype previously shown for HSE1 point mutants (and lost in HSE1
deletion mutants) stems from the retention of productive, cooperative
interactions between HSF and its target binding sites.

PMCID: PMC83957
PMID: 10022851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jan 8;254(1):264-8.

Proteasome inhibitors MG132 and lactacystin hyperphosphorylate HSF1 and induce
hsp70 and hsp27 expression.

Kim D(1), Kim SH, Li GC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Physics and Radiation Oncology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, New York, 10021, USA.

MG132 and lactacystin, two 26S proteasome-specific protease inhibitors, can
upregulate heat-shock gene transcription without heat shock. In this study, we
showed that both of these inhibitors induce hyperphosphorylation and DNA-binding 
activity of HSF1 in the absence of heat shock (at 37 degreesC). Since
trimerization of HSF1 is known to precede the acquisition of HSF1-DNA binding
activity, it seems that MG132- and lactacystin-induced hyperphosphorylation of
HSF1 causes conformational changes of HSF1 molecules at 37 degreesC and
subsequently triggers its trimerization. Inhibition of protein synthesis by
cycloheximide abolished the MG132- or lactacystin-induced hyperphosphorylation
and DNA-binding activity of HSF1. These data suggest that the activity of a
putative kinase(s) targeting HSF1 is upregulated in the presence of MG132 or
lactacystin. The upregulation of the kinase activity requires de novo protein
synthesis and is likely due to the inhibition of protein degradation of a
short-lived, kinase(s) targeting HSF1 and/or the cofactor(s) for the kinases,
through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9920768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Exp Mol Med. 1998 Jun 30;30(2):87-92.

Suppression of multidrug resistance via inhibition of heat shock factor by
quercetin in MDR cells.

Kim SH(1), Yeo GS, Lim YS, Kang CD, Kim CM, Chung BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Pusan National University,
Korea.

MDR1 promoter has been shown to contain heat shock elements (HSE), and it has
been reported that FM3A/M and P388/M MDR cells show a constitutively activated
heat shock factor (HSF), suggesting that HSF might be an important target for
reversing the multidrug resistance. Therefore, it was examined whether quercetin,
which has been shown to interfere with the formation of the complex between HSE
and HSF, and to downregulate the level of HSF1, can sensitize MDR cells against
anticancer drugs by inhibition of HSF DNA-binding activity. In this study,
quercetin appeared to inhibit the constitutive HSF DNA-binding activity and the
sodium arsenite-induced HSF DNA-binding activity in the MDR cells. The basal and 
sodium arsenite-induced MDRCAT activities were remarkably suppressed by the
treatment of quercetin. These results were well consistent with the finding that 
the treatment of quercetin decreased the expression level of P-gp, MDR1 gene
product, in dose-dependent manner, and markedly increased the sensitivity of MDR 
cells to vincristine or vinblastine. These results suggest that quercetin can
decrease the expression of P-gp via inhibition of HSF DNA-binding activity, and
might be useful as a chemosensitizer in MDR cells.

PMID: 9873828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):402-11.

A trans-activation domain in yeast heat shock transcription factor is essential
for cell cycle progression during stress.

Morano KA(1), Santoro N, Koch KA, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

Gene expression in response to heat shock is mediated by the heat shock
transcription factor (HSF), which in yeast harbors both amino- and
carboxyl-terminal transcriptional activation domains. Yeast cells bearing a
truncated form of HSF in which the carboxyl-terminal transcriptional activation
domain has been deleted [HSF(1-583)] are temperature sensitive for growth at 37
degreesC, demonstrating a requirement for this domain for sustained viability
during thermal stress. Here we demonstrate that HSF(1-583) cells undergo
reversible cell cycle arrest at 37 degreesC in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle
and exhibit marked reduction in levels of the molecular chaperone Hsp90. As in
higher eukaryotes, yeast possesses two nearly identical isoforms of Hsp90: one
constitutively expressed and one highly heat inducible. When expressed at
physiological levels in HSF(1-583) cells, the inducible Hsp90 isoform encoded by 
HSP82 more efficiently suppressed the temperature sensitivity of this strain than
the constitutively expressed gene HSC82, suggesting that different functional
roles may exist for these chaperones. Consistent with a defect in Hsp90
production, HSF(1-583) cells also exhibited hypersensitivity to the Hsp90-binding
ansamycin antibiotic geldanamycin. Depletion of Hsp90 from yeast cells wild type 
for HSF results in cell cycle arrest in both G1/S and G2/M phases, suggesting a
complex requirement for chaperone function in mitotic division during stress.

PMCID: PMC83898
PMID: 9858564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Physiol. 1998 Jun;274(6 Pt 2):F1029-36.

Role of heat stress response in the tolerance of immature renal tubules to
anoxia.

Gaudio KM(1), Thulin G, Mann A, Kashgarian M, Siegel NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

The stress response was studied in suspensions of tubules from immature (IT) and 
mature (MT) rats after noninjury, heat, oxygen, and anoxia. Under all conditions,
IT exhibited more exuberant activation of heat shock transcription factor (HSF)
than MT. Characterization of activated HSF in immature cortex revealed HSF1.
Also, 2 h after each condition, heat shock protein-72 (HSP-72) mRNA was twofold
in IT. As the metabolic response to 45 min of anoxia, 20-min reoxygenation was
assessed by measuring O2 consumption (O2C). Basal O2C was manipulated with
ouabain, nystatin, and carbonylcyanide p-chloromethyoxyphenylhydrazone (CCCP).
Basal O2C in IT were one-half the value of MT. After anoxia, basal O2C was
reduced by a greater degree in MT. Ouabain reduced O2C to half the basal value in
both noninjured and anoxic groups. Basal O2C was significantly stimulated by
nystatin but not to the same level following anoxia in MT and IT. Basal O2C was
also stimulated by CCCP, but after anoxia, CCCP O2C was significantly less in MT 
with no decrease in IT, suggesting mitochondria are better preserved in IT. Also,
O2C devoted to nontransport activity was better maintained in IT.

PMID: 9841493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 27;252(3):561-5.

The role of PKN in the regulation of alphaB-crystallin expression via heat shock 
transcription factor 1.

Kitagawa M(1), Mukai H, Takahashi M, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Technology, Faculty of Science, Kobe, 657-8501,
Japan.

We previously reported that PKN, a fatty acid-activated serine/threonine protein 
kinase, translocates from the cytosol to the nucleus by stresses such as heat
shock, sodium arsenite, and serum starvation. To clarify the role of PKN under
heat stress, we examined whether PKN regulates the expression of heat shock
proteins. Co-expression of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and the
catalytically active fragment of PKN induced the accumulation of
alphaB-crystallin but not HSP27 and HSP70 in HeLa S3 cells. The expression of the
reporter gene for alphaB-crystallin promoter was activated by co-expression of
HSF1 and the catalytically active fragment of PKN, and this activation was
dependent on the protein kinase activity of PKN. Deletion analysis of the
alphaB-crystallin promoter region revealed that both the proximal and the distal 
heat shock elements were necessary for the transactivation. These results raise
the possibility that there is a signal transduction pathway mediating stress
signals for the accumulation of alphaB-crystallin by HSF1 and PKN.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9837746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Eur J Neurosci. 1998 Nov;10(11):3343-50.

Delivery of a constitutively active form of the heat shock factor using a virus
vector protects neuronal cells from thermal or ischaemic stress but not from
apoptosis.

Wagstaff MJ(1), Smith J, Collaco-Moraes Y, de Belleroche JS, Voellmy R, Coffin
RS, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Windeyer Institute of Medical Sciences,
University College London Medical School, UK.

The heat shock proteins (HSPs) are induced by stressful stimuli and have a
protective effect. Different HSPs protect with different efficiencies against
different stresses indicating that optimal protection would be obtained with a
non-stressful agent which induced a range of HSPs. We have prepared a herpesvirus
vector expressing a constitutively active mutant form of heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) which, unlike the wild-type form of this transcription factor, does not
require stress for its activation. Upon infection of neuronal cells, this virus
induced a more restricted range of HSPs than in non-neuronal cells. Infection
with the virus protected neuronal cells against subsequent thermal or ischaemic
stress in accordance with its ability to induce HSP70 expression but did not
protect them against apoptotic stimuli. The mechanisms of these effects and their
significance for the use of HSF to manipulate HSP gene expression is discussed.

PMID: 9824447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 27;273(48):31924-31.

Differential activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and extracellular
signal-regulated protein kinases confers cadmium-induced HSP70 expression in 9L
rat brain tumor cells.

Hung JJ(1), Cheng TJ, Lai YK, Chang MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
30043, Republic of China.

We have reported that treatment with CdCl2 at 40-100 microM induces the heat
shock proteins (HSPs) in 9L rat brain tumor cells, during which the activation of
heat shock factor (HSF) is essentially involved. By exploiting protein kinase
inhibitors, we further analyzed the possible participation of specific protein
kinases in the above processes. It was found that induction of HSP70 in cells
treated with a high concentration of cadmium (i.e. 100 microM) is preceded by the
phosphorylation and activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(p38(MAPK)), while that in cells treated with a low concentration (60 microM) is 
accompanied by the phosphorylation and activation of extracellular-regulated
protein kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2). In 100 microM cadmium-treated cells, both HSP70
induction and HSF1 activation are eliminated in the presence of SB203580, a
specific inhibitor of p38(MAPK). By contrast, in 60 microM cadmium-treated cells,
the processes are not affected by SB203580 but are significantly suppressed by
PD98059, which indirectly inhibits ERK1/2 by acting on MAPK-ERK kinase. Taken
together, we demonstrate that p38(MAPK) and ERK1/2 can be simultaneously or
independently activated under different concentrations of cadmium and that the
signaling pathways participate in the induction of HSP70 by acting on the
inducible phosphorylation of HSF1. We thus provide the first evidence that both
p38(MAPK) and ERK signaling pathways can differentially participate in the
activation of HSF1, which leads to the induction of HSP70 by cadmium.

PMID: 9822662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. FEBS Lett. 1998 Oct 9;436(3):318-22.

Interaction between the Arabidopsis thaliana heat shock transcription factor HSF1
and the TATA binding protein TBP.

Reindl A(1), Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Tübingen, Biologisches Institut, Lehrstuhl für Allgemeine Genetik,
Germany.

The heat shock factor (HSF1) is the central regulator of the heat stress (hs)
response and is required for stimulating the transcription of the hs genes and
consequently the expression of heat shock proteins. To promote the polymerase
II-dependent transcription of the hs genes, HSF has to communicate with the basal
transcription machinery. Here, we report that the Arabidopsis thaliana HSF1
interacts directly with TBP, the general TATA box binding transcription factor,
as shown by affinity chromatography and electrophoretic mobility shift analyses
in vitro. An in vivo interaction between AtHSF1 and AtTBP1 was suggested by
results employing the yeast two-hybrid system.

PMID: 9801140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Cell Sci. 1998 Nov;111 ( Pt 22):3357-65.

Conventional and novel PKC isoenzymes modify the heat-induced stress response but
are not activated by heat shock.

Holmberg CI(1), Roos PM, Lord JM, Eriksson JE, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
PO Box 123, FIN-20521 Turku, Finland.

In mammalian cells, the heat-induced stress response is mediated by the
constitutively expressed heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Upon exposure 
to elevated temperatures, HSF1 undergoes several post-translational
modifications, including inducible phosphorylation or hyperphosphorylation. To
date, neither the role of HSF1 hyperphosphorylation in regulation of the
transcriptional activity of HSF1 nor the signaling pathways involved have been
characterized. We have previously shown that the protein kinase C (PKC)
activator, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA), markedly enhances the
heat-induced stress response, and in the present study we elucidate the mechanism
by which PKC activation affects the heat shock response in human cells. Our
results show that several conventional and novel PKC isoenzymes are activated
during the TPA-mediated enhancement of the heat shock response and that the
enhancement can be inhibited by the specific PKC inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide I.
Furthermore, the potentiating effect of TPA on the heat-induced stress response
requires an intact heat shock element in the hsp70 promoter, indicating that
PKC-responsive pathways are able to modulate the activity of HSF1. We also
demonstrate that PKC is not activated by heat stress per se. These results reveal
that PKC exhibits a significant modulatory role of the heat-induced stress
response, but is not directly involved in regulation of the heat shock response.

PMID: 9788877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6340-52.

Heat shock element architecture is an important determinant in the temperature
and transactivation domain requirements for heat shock transcription factor.

Santoro N(1), Johansson N, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0606, USA.

The baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae possesses a single gene encoding heat 
shock transcription factor (HSF), which is required for the activation of genes
that participate in stress protection as well as normal growth and viability.
Yeast HSF (yHSF) contains two distinct transcriptional activation regions located
at the amino and carboxyl termini. Activation of the yeast metallothionein gene, 
CUP1, depends on a nonconsensus heat shock element (HSE), occurs at higher
temperatures than other heat shock-responsive genes, and is highly dependent on
the carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain (CTA) of yHSF. The results described
here show that the noncanonical (or gapped) spacing of GAA units in the CUP1 HSE 
(HSE1) functions to limit the magnitude of CUP1 transcriptional activation in
response to heat and oxidative stress. The spacing in HSE1 modulates the
dependence for transcriptional activation by both stresses on the yHSF CTA.
Furthermore, a previously uncharacterized HSE in the CUP1 promoter, HSE2,
modulates the magnitude of the transcriptional activation of CUP1, via HSE1, in
response to stress. In vitro DNase I footprinting experiments suggest that the
occupation of HSE2 by yHSF strongly influences the manner in which yHSF occupies 
HSE1. Limited proteolysis assays show that HSF adopts a distinct
protease-sensitive conformation when bound to the CUP1 HSE1, providing evidence
that the HSE influences DNA-bound HSF conformation. Together, these results
suggest that CUP1 regulation is distinct from that of other classic heat shock
genes through the interaction of yHSF with two nonconsensus HSEs. Consistent with
this view, we have identified other gene targets of yHSF containing HSEs with
sequence and spacing features similar to those of CUP1 HSE1 and show a
correlation between the spacing of the GAA units and the relative dependence on
the yHSF CTA.

PMCID: PMC109220
PMID: 9774650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 25;273(39):25466-71.

Heat shock factor 1 mediates hemin-induced hsp70 gene transcription in K562
erythroleukemia cells.

Yoshima T(1), Yura T, Yanagi H.

Author information: 
(1)HSP Research Institute, Kyoto Research Park, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto 600-8813,
Japan.

Transcriptional induction of the hsp70 gene is mediated by heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) rapidly activated upon heat and other stresses. HSF2 has been thought to
be responsible for accumulation of HSP70 during hemin-induced differentiation of 
human K562 erythroleukemia cells because of accompanying acquisition of HSF2 DNA 
binding activity. However, there has not been any direct evidence for such a
functional role of HSF2. The purpose of this study is to clarify the roles of
HSF1 and HSF2 in HSP70 induction in hemin-treated K562 cells. We show here that a
chimeric polypeptide of HSF2 and GAL4 DNA binding domain (GAL4-BD-HSF2) was
unable to induce a GAL4 binding site-containing luciferase reporter gene in
response to hemin and that exogenously overproduced HSF2 also failed to increase 
expression of a heat shock element-containing reporter. On the contrary,
expression of a GAL4-BD-HSF1 chimeric protein responded to hemin treatment as
well as to heat shock, and transiently overexpressed HSF1 caused hemin-responsive
induction of the reporter gene in a dose-dependent manner. These results indicate
that HSF1, rather than HSF2, primarily mediates the hemin-induced transcription
of the hsp70 gene.

PMID: 9738016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell. 1998 Aug 21;94(4):471-80.

Repression of heat shock transcription factor HSF1 activation by HSP90 (HSP90
complex) that forms a stress-sensitive complex with HSF1.

Zou J(1), Guo Y, Guettouche T, Smith DF, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Florida 33101, USA.

Heat shock and other proteotoxic stresses cause accumulation of nonnative
proteins that trigger activation of heat shock protein (Hsp) genes. A
chaperone/Hsp functioning as repressor of heat shock transcription factor (HSF)
could make activation of hsp genes dependent on protein unfolding. In a novel in 
vitro system, in which human HSF1 can be activated by nonnative protein, heat,
and geldanamycin, addition of Hsp90 inhibits activation. Reduction of the level
of Hsp90 but not of Hsp/c70, Hop, Hip, p23, CyP40, or Hsp40 dramatically
activates HSF1. In vivo, geldanamycin activates HSF1 under conditions in which it
is an Hsp90-specific reagent. Hsp90-containing HSF1 complex is present in the
unstressed cell and dissociates during stress. We conclude that Hsp90, by itself 
and/or associated with multichaperone complexes, is a major repressor of HSF1.

PMID: 9727490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Jul 15;255(2):356-62.

Proteasome inhibition leads to the activation of all members of the
heat-shock-factor family.

Kawazoe Y(1), Nakai A, Tanabe M, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Chest Disease Research Institute, Kyoto
University, Japan.

Heat-shock proteins and molecular chaperones are involved in various cellular
metabolic processes including protein synthesis and degradation. These
expressions are elevated at the level of transcription by the accumulation of
abnormal proteins when these metabolic processes are disturbed. Recent works
suggest the induction of heat-shock proteins by the inhibiton of proteasome. To
elucidate the mechanism of this induction, we examined the activation of
heat-shock transcription factors by proteasome inhibitors in avian cells.
Activation of the two heat-shock-inducible factors, HSF1 and HSF3, was produced
by the treatment of cells with proteasome inhibitors. This activation was not
produced by treatment with various other protease inhibitors. The HSF activation 
by proteasome inhibitors was completely blocked in the presence of the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. Unexpectedly, the development-related factor
HSF2 was also activated by proteasome inhibitors, with an increase in its protein
level. These results suggest that the ubiqutin-proteasome pathway may regulate
all of the three HSFs by controlling the level of some regulatory factor for HSF 
or HSF itself, as well as controlling abnormal proteins.

PMID: 9716376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5091-8.

Heat shock response and protein degradation: regulation of HSF2 by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Mathew A(1), Mathur SK, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Rice
Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208, USA.

Mammalian cells coexpress a family of heat shock factors (HSFs) whose activities 
are regulated by diverse stress conditions to coordinate the inducible expression
of heat shock genes. Distinct from HSF1, which is expressed ubiquitously and
activated by heat shock and other stresses that result in the appearance of
nonnative proteins, the stress signal for HSF2 has not been identified. HSF2
activity has been associated with development and differentiation, and the
activation properties of HSF2 have been characterized in hemin-treated human K562
erythroleukemia cells. Here, we demonstrate that a stress signal for HSF2
activation occurs when the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is inhibited. HSF2
DNA-binding activity is induced upon exposure of mammalian cells to the
proteasome inhibitors hemin, MG132, and lactacystin, and in the mouse ts85 cell
line, which carries a temperature sensitivity mutation in the
ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1) upon shift to the nonpermissive temperature.
HSF2 is labile, and its activation requires both continued protein synthesis and 
reduced degradation. The downstream effect of HSF2 activation by proteasome
inhibitors is the induction of the same set of heat shock genes that are induced 
during heat shock by HSF1, thus revealing that HSF2 affords the cell with a novel
heat shock gene-regulatory mechanism to respond to changes in the
protein-degradative machinery.

PMCID: PMC109094
PMID: 9710593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):4949-60.

HSP90 interacts with and regulates the activity of heat shock factor 1 in Xenopus
oocytes.

Ali A(1), Bharadwaj S, O'Carroll R, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada S7N 5E5.

Transcriptional activation of heat shock genes is a reversible and multistep
process involving conversion of inactive heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) monomers into
heat shock element (HSE)-binding homotrimers, hyperphosphorylation, and further
modifications that induce full transcriptional competence. HSF1 is controlled by 
multiple regulatory mechanisms, including suppression by additional cellular
factors, physical interactions with HSP70, and integration into different
cellular signaling cascades. However, the signaling mechanisms by which cells
respond to stress and control the HSF1 activation-deactivation pathway are not
known. Here we demonstrate that HSP90, a cellular chaperone known to regulate
several signal transduction molecules and transcription factors, functions in the
regulation of HSF1. The existence of HSF1-HSP90 heterocomplexes was shown by
coimmunoprecipitation of HSP90 with HSF1 from unshocked and heat-shocked nuclear 
extracts, recognition of HSF1-HSE complexes in vitro by using HSP90 antibodies
(Abs), and recognition of HSF1 in vivo by HSP90 Abs microinjected directly into
oocyte nuclei. The functional impact of HSP90-HSF1 interactions was analyzed by
using two strategies: direct nuclear injection of HSP90 Abs and treatment of
cells with geldanamycin (GA), an agent that specifically blocks the chaperoning
activity of HSP90. Both HSP90 Abs and GA delayed the disassembly of HSF1 trimers 
during recovery from heat shock and specifically inhibited heat-induced
transcription from a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter construct under
control of the hsp70 promoter. HSP90 Abs activated HSE binding in the absence of 
heat shock, an effect that could be reversed by subsequent injection of purified 
HSP90. GA did not activate HSE binding under nonshock conditions but increased
the quantity of HSE binding induced by heat shock. On the basis of these findings
and the known properties of HSP90, we propose a new regulatory model in which
HSP90 participates in modulating HSF1 at different points along the
activation-deactivation pathway, influencing the interconversion between
monomeric and trimeric conformations as well as transcriptional activation. We
also put forth the hypothesis that HSP90 links HSF1 to cellular signaling
molecules coordinating the stress response.

PMCID: PMC109079
PMID: 9710578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Aug;111(2):194-8.

Heat shock transcription factor-1 regulates heat shock protein-72 expression in
human keratinocytes exposed to ultraviolet B light.

Zhou X(1), Tron VA, Li G, Trotter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Canada.

In response to ultraviolet radiation (UVR), skin keratinocytes increase
expression of heat shock proteins that can protect cells from stress-induced
damage. This heat shock response is known to be transcriptionally regulated in
eukaryotic cells exposed to certain forms of environmental stress. In the skin,
absorption of ultraviolet B light occurs primarily in the epidermis, and
therefore, using primary cultures of normal human epidermal keratinocytes, we
have examined whether transcriptional activation of the hsp72 gene occurs
following UVB irradiation. Cultured keratinocytes were exposed to UVB (290-320
nm, 300 J per m2) and then incubated at 37 degrees C for various intervals before
harvesting. Immediately following UV exposure, the heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) dissociated from HSP72-HSF1 complexes, underwent trimerization
and phosphorylation, and demonstrated DNA binding activity to the heat shock
element in the promoter region of the hsp72 gene. UVB also increased hsp72 mRNA, 
with peak levels observed 1-3 h post-UVR. HSP72 protein was constitutively
expressed in keratinocytes, and its expression was increased by UVB, with maximum
levels at 6 h post-UVR. The stress response may be extremely important in the
protection of human skin from UVB radiation, and modulation of heat shock protein
expression and/or function offers a potential therapeutic target in the
prevention of photoaging and skin cancer.

PMID: 9699716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Exp Biol. 1998 Sep;201(Pt 17):2543-51.

Effects of heat shock and hypoxia on protein synthesis in rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) cells.

Airaksinen S(1), Råbergh CM, Sistonen L, Nikinmaa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Department of Biology, University of Turku,
FIN-20014 Turku, Finland. susair@utu.fi

We examined the effects of heat stress (from 18 degreesC to 26 degreesC) and low 
oxygen tension (1% O2=1 kPa) on protein synthesis in primary cultures of
hepatocytes, gill epithelial cells and fibroblast-like RTG-2 cells of rainbow
trout Oncorhynchus mykiss. All these cell types displayed elevated levels of 67, 
69 and 92 kDa proteins, whereas a 104 kDa protein was induced only in RTG-2
cells. Hypoxia induced a cell-type-specific response, increasing the synthesis of
36, 39 and 51 kDa proteins in the gill epithelial cells. The regulation of the
heat-shock response in fish hepatocytes showed that an HSF1-like factor is
involved in the transcriptional induction of the hsp70 gene. Consequently, there 
was a pronounced accumulation of hsp70 mRNA. Furthermore, the kinetics of
activation of DNA binding and the increase in hsp70 gene expression showed a
remarkable correlation, indicating that hsp70 expression is regulated at the
transcriptional level in these trout cells.

PMID: 9698588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 7;273(32):20463-72.

Evidence that partial unwrapping of DNA from nucleosomes facilitates the binding 
of heat shock factor following DNA replication in yeast.

Geraghty DS(1), Sucic HB, Chen J, Pederson DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and the Markey Center for
Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont 05405-0068, USA.

In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, heat shock transcription factor (HSF)
binds heat shock element (HSE) DNA shortly after DNA replication, independently
of its activation by heat shock. To determine if HSF binding occurs before newly 
replicated DNA is packaged into nucleosomes, we inserted an HSE into a DNA
segment that normally forms a positioned nucleosome in vivo. Transcription from
constructs designed to create steric competition between binding of HSF and
histone H2A-H2B dimers was generally poor, suggesting that nucleosome assembly
precedes and inhibits HSF binding. However, one such construct was as
transcriptionally active as a nucleosome-free control. Structural analyses
suggested that approximately 40 base pairs of DNA, including the HSE, had
unwrapped from the 3' edge of the histone octamer, allowing HSF to bind;
approximately 100 base pairs remained in association with the histone octamer,
with the same translational and rotational orientation as was seen for the poorly
transcribed constructs. Modeling studies suggest that the active and inactive
constructs differ from one another in the ease with which the HSE and flanking
sequences can adopt the curvature needed to form a stable nucleosome. These
differences may influence the probability of DNA unwrapping from already
assembled nucleosomes and the subsequent binding of HSF.

PMID: 9685401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Plant J. 1998 Feb;13(4):437-46.

Dual regulation of a heat shock promoter during embryogenesis: stage-dependent
role of heat shock elements.

Almoguera C(1), Prieto-Dapena P, Jordano J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiología, CSIC, Sevilla, Spain.

Transgenic tobacco expression was analysed of chimeric genes with point mutations
in the heat shock element (HSE) arrays of a small heat shock protein (sHSP) gene 
from sunflower: Ha hsp17.7 G4. The promoter was developmentally regulated during 
zygotic embryogenesis and responded to heat stress in vegetative tissues.
Mutations in the HSE affected nucleotides crucial for human heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) binding. They abolished the heat shock response of 
Ha hsp17.7 G4 and produced expression changes that demonstrated dual regulation
of this promoter during embryogenesis. Thus, whereas activation of the chimeric
genes during early maturation stages did not require intact HSE, expression at
later desiccation stages was reduced by mutations in both the proximal (-57 to
-89) and distal (-99 to -121) HSE. In contrast, two point mutations in the
proximal HSE that did not severely affect gene expression during zygotic
embryogenesis, eliminated the heat shock response of the same chimeric gene in
vegetative organs. Therefore, by site-directed mutagenesis, it was possible to
separate the heat shock response of Ha hsp17.7 G4 from its developmental
regulation. The results indicate the co-existence, in a single promoter, of
HSF-dependent and -independent regulation mechanisms that would control sHSP gene
expression at different stages during plant embryogenesis.

PMID: 9680992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Yeast. 1998 Jun 15;14(8):733-46.

The C-terminal hydrophobic repeat of Schizosaccharomyces pombe heat shock factor 
is not required for heat-induced DNA-binding.

Saltsman KA(1), Prentice HL, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA.

The C-terminal hydrophobic repeat (CTR) of heat shock transcription factor (HSF) 
has been proposed to regulate DNA binding by intramolecular interactions with the
leucine zipper motifs present in the HSF trimerization domain.
Schizosaccharomyces pombe provides a useful model organism for the study of the
regulation of HSF DNA binding because, unlike Saccharomyces cerevisiae, S. pombe 
hsf is highly heat shock inducible for DNA binding and contains a clear homology 
to the CTR. We examined the role that the CTR plays in the regulation of S. pombe
hsf by constructing isogenic strains bearing deletion and point mutations in the 
chromosomal copy of hsf. Surprisingly, we found that point mutation of key
hydrophobic amino acids within the CTR, as well as full deletion of it, yielded
factors that show normal binding at normal growth temperatures and full levels of
heat-induced binding. Deletion of the CTR did, however, slightly lower the
temperature required for maximal activation. In contrast, a large deletion of the
C-terminus, which removes close to a third of the coding sequence, was
deregulated and bound DNA at control temperature. Several of the deletion mutants
were significantly reduced in their level of expression, yet they showed
wild-type levels of DNA binding activity following heat shock. These experiments 
demonstrate that appropriate regulation of the DNA binding activity of S. pombe
hsf is not solely dependent upon the CTR, and imply that a feedback mechanism
exists that establishes proper levels of DNA binding following heat shock despite
mutations that significantly alter levels of total hsf.

PMID: 9675818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1998 Jun;3(2):130-41.

Correlation between glutathione oxidation and trimerization of heat shock factor 
1, an early step in stress induction of the Hsp response.

Zou J(1), Salminen WF, Roberts SM, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Miami School of 
Medicine, FL 33136, USA.

The heat shock protein (Hsp) response is induced by heat shock and a large
variety of different chemicals. Searching for a common denominator of these
different inducers, we and others developed the notion that all inducers may
generate abnormally folded, i.e. non-native, proteins, and that such non-native
proteins may trigger the Hsp response. Experimentation prompted by this notion
resulted, for example, in the demonstration that chemically denatured proteins,
introduced in cells by microinjection, can activate the response. Based on the
chemical nature of inducers and on results reported from several studies, we
hypothesized that inducers of the Hsp response may be generally capable of
triggering oxidation of non-protein thiols, particularly glutathione. Such
oxidation is known to lead to formation of glutathione-protein mixed disulfides
and protein-protein disulfides. Presumably, thiol adduction and cross-linking
would affect the structure of proteins involved, resulting in unfolding of a
fraction of these proteins, causing heat shock factor (Hsf) activation. To test
the feasibility of this hypothesis, thirteen different inducers were selected,
and it was shown that all chemical inducers as well as heat shock cause drastic
oxidation of glutathione under conditions under which they induce HSE DNA-binding
activity. Under the same conditions, all chemical inducers and heat shock also
cause trimerization of Hsf1. For several inducers, it was also shown that they
enhance thiol oxidation of proteins. Finally, in vitro experiments support the
notion that activation of Hsf1 does not require oxidation of the factor itself or
of its coregulators. These results are in complete agreement with the above
hypothesis.

PMCID: PMC312956
PMID: 9672248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1998 Jun 30;851:112-6.

Regulation of HSF1 activation and Hsp expression in mouse tissues under
physiological stress conditions.

Sarge KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Kentucky, Chander Medical Center, Department of Biochemistry,
Lexington 40536-0084, USA. kdsarge@pop.uky.edu

The studies described above illustrate several important points concerning the
study of the cellular stress response. First, they indicate that there are
important differences between the nature of the stress response observed in tumor
cell lines and that of primary cells of mouse tissues. Therefore, caution should 
be exercised to avoid overextending and overinterpreting the results of studies
using these cell lines until evidence can be obtained from in vivo studies on
intact animals or primary cells of tissues. Second, they reveal the existence of 
cell-type-dependent differences between cell types of the same organism, thus
potentially calling into question the supposed universal cytoprotective nature of
the cellular stress response. Future studies can address this question by
determining the underlying mechanisms that regulate these cell-type-dependent
differences in the stress response, and by determining whether there are
biological reasons that some cell types exhibit differences in either the
temperature set-point or magnitude of the stress response.

PMID: 9668612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Jul 10;242(1):285-93.

Evidence for a hsp25-specific mechanism involved in transcriptional activation by
heat shock.

Neininger A(1), Gaestel M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Transcriptional stimulation of heat shock genes is generally due to the
activation of heat shock transcription factor (HSF) 1. We demonstrate that in the
murine leucemic cell line, P388, trimerization of HSF1, transcriptional
activation of the hsp70 gene, and expression of Hsp70 are achieved as a result of
heat shock. In contrast, the small heat shock proteins Hsp25 and alpha
B-crystallin are not expressed in these cells and cannot be induced upon heat
shock. Furthermore, no hsp25 transcript can be detected, indicating that there is
a defect in the hsp25 gene or a block in its expression. Comparison of the hsp25 
gene structure between P388 and Hsp25-expressing Ehrlich ascites tumor (EAT)
cells by Southern blot analysis revealed no differences in the structural
organization of the gene and no changes in its localization in the genome.
However, sequence analysis of the hsp25 promoter region in P388 cells
demonstrates minor differences. Despite these differences, the hsp25 promoter
from P388 cells mediates heat shock-induced activation of a reporter gene when
transfected into human HeLa cells which is comparable to that of the hsp25
promoter from EAT cells. Furthermore, the hsp25 gene isolated from EAT or P388
cells can both be expressed in HeLa cells and lead to a similar heat
shock-stimulated accumulation of Hsp25. Silencing of the hsp25 and alpha
B-crystallin genes in P388 cells by DNA-methylation could also be excluded since 
5-azacytidine treatment does not influence expression of these genes.
Interestingly, when expressed in P388 cells the hsp25 promoter from EAT cells is 
not activated upon heat shock, whereas the human hsp70 promoter is activated.
Taken together, the data suggest cell line-specific differences in a mechanism of
regulation of hsp25 transcription, which interferes with the activation of the
promoter by HSF1 and which may also affect the alpha B-crystallin gene.

PMID: 9665826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Clin Invest. 1998 Jul 15;102(2):302-11.

Enhanced expression of heat shock protein 70 (hsp70) and heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) activation in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue. Differential
regulation of hsp70 expression and hsf1 activation in synovial fibroblasts by
proinflammatory cytokines, shear stress, and antiinflammatory drugs.

Schett G(1), Redlich K, Xu Q, Bizan P, Gröger M, Tohidast-Akrad M, Kiener H,
Smolen J, Steiner G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Heat shock proteins (hsp) have been repeatedly implicated to participate in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Herein, we investigated the regulation
of synovial hsp70 expression by analyzing the DNA-binding activity of heat shock 
transcription factor 1 (HSF1) as well as inducible hsp70 expression. Experiments 
were performed both on synovial tissue and on synovial fibroblast-like cells
(SFC). Gel mobility shift analysis revealed increased HSF1 activation, and
Western blotting and immunohistochemistry revealed increased hsp70 expression in 
RA synovial tissue, but not in synovial tissue derived from patients with
osteoarthritis. Proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-alpha, IL-1alpha, IL-6), but not
IFN-gamma or TGF-beta, induced activation of HSF1-DNA binding and hsp70
expression in cultivated SFC. Activation of HSF1 in SFC was accompanied by
hyperphosphorylation and nuclear translocation of HSF1. Furthermore, shear stress
also induced a complete heat shock response in cultivated synovial cells. In
contrast, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs triggered only an incomplete heat
shock response, with HSF1 activation but not hsp70 induction, whereas steroids
and immunosuppressive drugs did not affect the heat shock response at all. In
summary, these data suggest that induction of hsp70 expression in rheumatoid
synovial tissue is based on transcriptional activation of HSF1 due to the
presence of proinflammatory cytokines (and possibly also shear stress).

PMCID: PMC508888
PMID: 9664071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18640-6.

Transcriptional activity of heat shock factor 1 at 37 degrees C is repressed
through phosphorylation on two distinct serine residues by glycogen synthase
kinase 3 and protein kinases Calpha and Czeta.

Chu B(1), Zhong R, Soncin F, Stevenson MA, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Joint Center
for Radiation Therapy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the key transcriptional regulator of the heat shock
genes that protect cells from environmental stress. However, because heat shock
gene expression is deleterious to growth and development, we have examined
mechanisms for HSF1 repression at growth temperatures, focusing on the role of
phosphorylation. Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) of the ERK family
phosphorylate HSF1 and represses transcriptional function. The mechanism of
repression involves initial phosphorylation by MAP kinase on serine 307, which
primes HSF1 for secondary phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase 3 on a key 
residue in repression (serine 303). In vivo expression of glycogen synthase
kinase 3 alpha or beta thus represses HSF1 through phosphorylation of serine 303.
HSF1 is also phosphorylated by MAPK in vitro on a second residue (serine 363)
adjacent to activation domain 1, and this residue is additionally phosphorylated 
by protein kinase C. In vivo, HSF1 is repressed through phosphorylation of this
residue by protein kinase Calpha or -zeta but not MAPK. Regulation at 37 degrees 
C, therefore, involves the action of three protein kinase cascades that repress
HSF1 through phosphorylation of serine residues 303, 307, and 363 and may promote
growth by suppressing the heat shock response.

PMID: 9660838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Genes Dev. 1998 Jul 1;12(13):1962-74.

Negative regulation of the heat shock transcriptional response by HSBP1.

Satyal SH(1), Chen D, Fox SG, Kramer JM, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Rice Institute
for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208 USA.

In response to stress, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) acquires rapid DNA binding and 
transient transcriptional activity while undergoing conformational transition
from an inert non-DNA-binding monomer to active functional trimers. Attenuation
of the inducible transcriptional response occurs during heat shock or upon
recovery at non-stress conditions and involves dissociation of the HSF1 trimer
and loss of activity. We have used the hydrophobic repeats of the HSF1
trimerization domain in the yeast two-hybrid protein interaction assay to
identify heat shock factor binding protein 1 (HSBP1), a novel, conserved,
76-amino-acid protein that contains two extended arrays of hydrophobic repeats
that interact with the HSF1 heptad repeats. HSBP1 is nuclear-localized and
interacts in vivo with the active trimeric state of HSF1 that appears during heat
shock. During attenuation of HSF1 to the inert monomer, HSBP1 associates with
Hsp70. HSBP1 negatively affects HSF1 DNA-binding activity, and overexpression of 
HSBP1 in mammalian cells represses the transactivation activity of HSF1. To
establish a biological role for HSBP1, the homologous Caenorhabditis elegans
protein was overexpressed in body wall muscle cells and was shown to block
activation of the heat shock response from a heat shock promoter-reporter
construct. Alteration in the level of HSBP1 expression in C. elegans has severe
effects on survival of the animals after thermal and chemical stress, consistent 
with a role for HSBP1 as a negative regulator of the heat shock response.

PMCID: PMC316975
PMID: 9649501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. EMBO J. 1998 Jun 1;17(11):3146-54.

Transcriptional activation domains stimulate initiation and elongation at
different times and via different residues.

Brown SA(1), Weirich CS, Newton EM, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, and Department of Molecular
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Transcriptional activators can stimulate multiple steps in the transcription
process. We have used GAL4 fusion proteins to characterize the ability of
different transcriptional activation domains to stimulate transcriptional
elongation on the hsp70 gene in vitro. Stimulation of elongation apparently
occurs via a mechanistic pathway different from that of stimulation of
initiation: the herpes simplex virus VP16, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and
amphipathic helix (AH) activation domains all stimulate initiation, but only VP16
and HSF1 stimulate elongation; and mutations in hydrophobic residues of the HSF1 
activation domains impair stimulation of elongation but not of initiation, while 
mutations in adjacent acidic residues impair stimulation of initiation more than 
of elongation. Experiments in which activators were exchanged between initiation 
and elongation demonstrate that the elongation function of HSF1 will stimulate
RNA polymerase that has initiated and is transcriptionally engaged.
Transcriptional activators thus appear to have at least two distinct functions
that reside in the same domain, and that act at different times to stimulate
initiation and elongation.

PMCID: PMC1170653
PMID: 9606196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Jun 15;241(2):404-13.

The expression of heat shock protein 70 decreases with cellular senescence in
vitro and in cells derived from young and old human subjects.

Gutsmann-Conrad A(1), Heydari AR, You S, Richardson A.

Author information: 
(1)Audie L. Murphy Division, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San
Antonio, Texas, 78284, USA.

Because heat shock proteins have been shown to play a critical role in protecting
cells from hyperthermia and other types of stresses, it was of interest to
determine what effect cellular senescence in vitro and cells cultured in vitro
from young and old human donors have on the ability of cells to regulate the
expression of heat shock protein 70 (hsp70), the most prominent and most
evolutionary conserved of the heat shock proteins. The ability of early and late 
passage IMR-90 lung fibroblasts and epidermal melanocytes and skin fibroblasts
obtained from young and old human donors to express hsp70 was determined after a 
brief heat shock. We found that the levels of hsp70 protein and mRNA were lower
in late passage cells and cells from old donors than in early passage cells and
cells from young donors. The binding activity of the heat shock transcription
factor HSF1, as measured by a gel shift assay, was significantly higher in early 
passage cells and cells from young donors in comparison to late passage cells and
cells from old donors. In addition, the levels of HSF1 decreased significantly in
late passage cells and cells from old donors in comparison to early passage cells
and cells from young donors. Thus, our study demonstrates that the induction of
hsp70 by hyperthermia in fibroblasts is significantly lower in late passage
fibroblasts and in fibroblasts from old donors. In addition, our study shows that
the decline in hsp70 expression during cellular senescence in vitro and in cells 
derived from old human subjects is paralleled by a decrease in the levels of
HSF1.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9637782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 26;273(26):16446-52.

Activation of the heat shock factor 1 by serine protease inhibitors. An effect
associated with nuclear factor-kappaB inhibition.

Rossi A(1), Elia G, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via
del Fosso del Cavaliere, 00133 Rome, Italy.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) have a cytoprotective role in several human diseases, 
including ischemia and viral infection. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) is a
critical regulator of inflammation and virus replication. Here we report that a
class of serine protease inhibitors with NF-kappaB-inhibitory activity are potent
HSP inducers via activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in human 
cells. 3,4-Dichloroisocoumarin, the most effective compound, rapidly induces HSF1
DNA binding activity and phosphorylation, leading to transcription and
translation of heat shock genes for a period of several hours. HSF1 activation is
independent of de novo protein synthesis and is correlated in a concentration-
and time-dependent manner with NF-kappaB inhibition. Cysteine protease inhibitors
E64 and calpain inhibitor II, which do not block NF-kappaB activation, do not
induce HSF DNA binding activity. HSP induction by 3,4-dichloroisocoumarin is
associated with antiviral activity during rhabdovirus infection. These results
identify a new class of HSP inducers and indicate a link between the regulatory
pathways of HSF and NF-kappaB, suggesting novel strategies to simultaneously
switch on cytoprotective genes and down-regulate inflammatory and viral genes.

PMID: 9632711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Neurosci Res. 1998 Jun 1;52(5):538-48.

Effect of hyperthermia on the transcription rate of heat-shock genes in the
rabbit cerebellum and retina assayed by nuclear run-ons.

D'Souza CA(1), Rush SJ, Brown IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The induction of heat-shock protein 70 (hsp70) mRNA in the hyperthermic rabbit
brain has been examined previously by using Northern blotting and in situ
hybridization procedures that measure steady-state levels of mRNA, which may be
influenced by transcript stability and transcription rate. In the present
investigation, the in vivo transcription rate of hsp70 has been examined by using
run-on transcription assays on isolated brain nuclei. A major up-regulation in
the transcription rate of hsp70 was observed between 0.75 and 1.50 hours after
hyperthermia in the cerebellum and the retina. Gel-mobility shift assays revealed
that the time course of conversion of heat-shock transcription factor (HSF1) to a
DNA-binding form paralleled the transcriptional induction profile of hsp70. The
transcription rates of several nonheat-shock genes were also studied in the
hyperthermic brain, and little change was noted relative to the induction of
hsp70. Thus, a physiologically relevant increase in temperature of 2.5 degrees C 
induces a major up-regulation in the in vivo transcription rate of hsp70 in the
nervous system with little affect on the transcription rates of other genes.

PMID: 9632310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Apr 29;1397(2):223-30.

Enhancement of expression of stress proteins by agents that lower the levels of
glutathione in cells.

Ito H(1), Okamoto K, Kato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human 
Service Center, Kamiya, Kasugai, Aichi 480-03, Japan.

The effects of diethyl maleate and buthionine sulfoximine, agents that lower
cellular levels of glutathione, on expression of hsp27 and alphaB crystallin in
response to stress were studied. When C6 rat glioma cells were treated with 100
microM arsenite for 1 h, accumulation of the two proteins, estimated by specific 
immunoassays, was markedly enhanced by additional exposure to 1 mM diethyl
maleate or 2.5 mM buthionine sulfoximine. The latter also increased heat- and
CdCl2-induced accumulation of hsp27 and alphaB crystallin. Stress-induced
accumulation of hsp70, estimated by Western blotting analysis, was also enhanced 
by these agents. Northern blotting analysis revealed increase in levels of mRNAs 
for hsp27, alphaB crystallin and hsp70. The period of heat shock element
(HSE)-binding activity of heat shock factor (HSF) stimulated by arsenite was
extended by addition of diethyl maleate and buthionine sulfoximine. The induced
phosphorylated state of HSF1 was also prolonged by diethyl maleate. Although
exposure of cells to diethyl maleate alone for 1 h caused neither accumulation of
hsp27, alphaB crystallin and hsp70 nor expression of mRNAs for these proteins,
HSE-binding activity of HSF was stimulated. However, the activated HSF was not
phosphorylated. These results suggest that diethyl maleate induces an
intermediate state of HSF that binds to HSE but is transcriptionally inert. The
mechanism is unclear but the levels of glutathione in cells that were exposed to 
diethyl maleate or buthionine sulfoximine were markedly decreased.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9565690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jun 1;26(11):2580-5.

Function of the C-terminal transactivation domain of human heat shock factor 2 is
modulated by the adjacent negative regulatory segment.

Yoshima T(1), Yura T, Yanagi H.

Author information: 
(1)HSP Research Institute, Kyoto Research Park, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto 600-8813,
Japan.

DNA binding of heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) is induced during hemin-induced
differentiation of human erythroleukemia cell line K562. To identify the
transcriptional activation and the regulatory domains of HSF2, we constructed a
series of deletion derivatives fused to the yeast GAL4 DNA binding domain and
analyzed their transactivation activity. A minimal transactivation domain of HSF2
was localized to the C-terminus (residues 472-536), as in HSF1, although amino
acid sequence similarity for these regions was rather limited and the potential
transactivation ability was about 25% that of HSF1. The transactivation mediated 
by this region of HSF2 was found to be negatively regulated by the adjacent 18
amino acid segment (residues 428-445) under normal conditions. Furthermore, the
latter segment, when fused to the GAL4 activation domain, markedly inhibited GAL4
activity. Extract containing most derivatives of HSF2 retaining this segment
exhibited doublet or triplet bands in gel mobility shift assays with heat shock
element-containing DNA, suggesting possible involvement of some factors
interacting with that segment in the negative regulation. Another putative
transactivation domain and two negative regulatory regions were also localized
within the internal region.

PMCID: PMC147601
PMID: 9592140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):8749-55.

Transcriptional activation of heat shock factor HSF1 probed by phosphopeptide
analysis of factor 32P-labeled in vivo.

Xia W(1), Guo Y, Vilaboa N, Zuo J, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Mapping of tryptic phosphopeptides of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) from
non-stressed or moderately heat-stressed HeLa cells, labeled in vivo by
[32P]orthophosphate, revealed four major phosphopeptides A to D. Heat stress
drastically increased phosphopeptide signals. To identify target peptides and
amino acids and to correlate phosphorylation and transactivation function,
phosphopeptide maps were produced of LexA-human HSF1 chimeras and mutant
derivatives thereof, and transactivation activities of original and mutant
chimeras were compared. LexA-HSF1 chimeras were previously shown to be regulated 
identically to HSF1, except that they transactivate promoters with LexA-binding
sites instead of hsp promoters. The patterns of phosphopeptides of LexA-HSF1 and 
endogenous HSF1 were similar. Analysis of single residue substitutions suggested 
that phosphopeptide C is peptide VKEEPPSPPQSPR (297-309) phosphorylated on
Ser-307 but not Ser-303. Substitution of Ser-307 but not Ser-303 caused
deregulation of factor activity. Mapping of several constitutively active
chimeras associated unphosphorylated peptide C with the transcriptionally active 
HSF1 conformation, suggesting that dephosphorylation of this peptide (at Ser-307)
may either be an integral step in the activation process or serve to maintain the
active conformation of HSF1. Exploiting this correlation, indirect evidence was
obtained that activation domains of HSF1 interact with the distantly located
regulatory domain to maintain the factor in an inactive state.

PMID: 9535852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. RNA. 1998 May;4(5):551-65.

Conservation of functional domains involved in RNA binding and protein-protein
interactions in human and Saccharomyces cerevisiae pre-mRNA splicing factor SF1.

Rain JC(1), Rafi Z, Rhani Z, Legrain P, Krämer A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire du Métabolisme des ARN, URA CNRS 1300, Département des
Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The modular structure of splicing factor SF1 is conserved from yeast to man and
SF1 acts at early stages of spliceosome assembly in both organisms. The hnRNP K
homology (KH) domain of human (h) SF1 is the major determinant for RNA binding
and is essential for the activity of hSF1 in spliceosome assembly, supporting the
view that binding of SF1 to RNA is essential for its function. Sequences
N-terminal to the KH domain mediate the interaction between hSF1 and U2AF65,
which binds to the polypyrimidine tract upstream of the 3' splice site. Moreover,
yeast (y) SF1 interacts with Mud2p, the presumptive U2AF65 homologue in yeast,
and the interaction domain is conserved in ySF1. The C-terminal degenerate RRMs
in U2AF65 and Mud2p mediate the association with hSF1 and ySF1, respectively.
Analysis of chimeric constructs of hSF1 and ySF indicates that the KH domain may 
serve a similar function in both systems, whereas sequences C-terminal to the KH 
domain are not exchangeable. Thus, these results argue for hSF1 and ySF1, as well
as U2AF65 and Mud2p, being functional homologues.

PMCID: PMC1369639
PMID: 9582097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Apr;149(2):185-94.

Overexpression of HSP-70 attenuates increases in [Ca2+]i and protects human
epidermoid A-431 cells after chemical hypoxia.

Kiang JG(1), Ding XZ, McClain DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

This laboratory previously reported that thermotolerance diminishes the
NaCN-induced increase in intracellular free calcium concentrations ([Ca2+]i) in
human epidermoid A-431 cells and that blocking this increase protects the cells
from NaCN toxicity. In this study, we report that cell viability after exposure
to NaCN (10 mM, 1 h) is enhanced by the overexpression of HSP-70 resulting from
heat shock (45 degrees C, 10 min), treatment with a protein kinase C activator
phorbol 12 myristate 13-acetate (PMA; 1 microM, 4 h), or HSP-70 cDNA
transfection. Because the toxicity of NaCN is mediated by increases in [Ca2+]i,
we sought to determine whether the overexpression of HSP-70 might protect the
cells by altering the [Ca2+]i response induced by NaCN. Basal [Ca2+]i in vector-,
HSF1 cDNA-, and HSP-70 cDNA-transfected cells was 114 +/- 11 (n = 11), 95 +/- 5
(n = 6), and 151 +/- 11 (n = 15) nM, respectively, suggesting that HSP-70
metabolism is associated with maintenance of resting [Ca2+]i. Removal of external
Ca2+ reduced the resting [Ca2+]i in all of these cells. With external Ca2+
reduced the resting [Ca2+]i by 97 +/- 21% in vector-transfected cells and 111 +/-
5% in HSF1 vector-transfected cells but by only 27 +/- 8% in HSP-70
cDNA-transfected cells. Heat shock or PMA treatment of vector- or HSF1
cDNA-transfected cells to induce HSP-70 also attenuated the NaCN-induced increase
in [Ca2+]i, perhaps because of a decrease in Vmax for the uptake of external
Ca2+. Removal of external Ca2+ or treatment with inhibitors of Na+/Ca2+
exchangers eliminated the NaCN-induced increase in [Ca2+]i in HSP-70
cDNA-transfected cells, but ryanodine treatment did not. HSP-70 cDNA transfection
also reduced Ca2+ mobilization stimulated by various Ca(2+)-mobilizing agents.
The results suggest that HSP-70 overexpression protects cells from NaCN
cytotoxicity, perhaps by attenuating the [Ca2+]i response.

PMID: 9571987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Exp Cell Res. 1998 Apr 10;240(1):16-27.

Stage-specific expression and cellular localization of the heat shock factor 2
isoforms in the rat seminiferous epithelium.

Alastalo TP(1), Lönnström M, Leppä S, Kaarniranta K, Pelto-Huikko M, Sistonen L, 
Parvinen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Turku, Finland.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) are generally known as regulators of
cellular stress response. The mammalian HSF1 functions as a classical stress
factor, whereas HSF2 is active during certain developmental processes, including 
embryogenesis and spermatogenesis. In the present study, we examined HSF2
expression at specific stages of the rat seminiferous epithelial cycle. We found 
that expression of the alternatively spliced HSF2-alpha and HSF2-beta isoforms is
developmentally regulated in a stage-specific manner. Studies on cellular
localization demonstrated that HSF2 is present in the nuclei of early pachytene
spermatocytes at stages I-IV and in the nuclei of round spermatids at stages
V-VIIab. In contrast a strong HSF2 immunoreactivity was detected in small
distinct cytoplasmic regions from zygotene spermatocytes to maturation phase
spermatids. Immunoelectron microscopic analysis revealed that these structures
are mainly cytoplasmic bridges between germ cells. Our results on cellular
localization of HSF2 and stage-specific expression of the HSF2 isoforms indicate 
that HSF2, in addition to its function as a nuclear transcription factor, may be 
involved in other cellular processes during spermatogenesis, possibly in the
sharing process of gene products between the germ cells.

PMID: 9570917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. EMBO J. 1998 Mar 16;17(6):1750-8.

Disruption of the HSF3 gene results in the severe reduction of heat shock gene
expression and loss of thermotolerance.

Tanabe M(1), Kawazoe Y, Takeda S, Morimoto RI, Nagata K, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Chest Disease Research Institute, Faculty of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-01, Japan.

The vertebrate genome encodes a family of heat shock factors (HSFs 1-4) of which 
the DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of HSF1 and HSF3 are activated
upon heat shock. HSF1 has the properties of a classical HSF and exhibits rapid
activation of DNA-binding and transcriptional activity upon exposure to
conditions of heat shock and other stresses, whereas HSF3 typically is activated 
at higher temperatures and with distinct delayed kinetics. To address the role of
HSF3 in the heat shock response, null cells lacking the HSF3 gene were
constructed by disruption of the resident gene by somatic recombination in an
avian lymphoid cell line. Null cells lacking HSF3, yet expressing normal levels
of HSF1, exhibited a severe reduction in the heat shock response, as measured by 
inducible expression of heat shock genes, and did not exhibit thermotolerance. At
intermediate heat shock temperatures, where HSF1 oligomerizes to an active trimer
in wild-type cells, HSF1 remained as an inert monomer in the HSF3 null cell line.
HSF3 null cells were restored to a nearly normal heat shock-responsive state by
reintroduction of an exogenous HSF3 gene. These results reveal that HSF3 has a
dominant role in the regulation of the heat shock response and directly
influences HSF1 activity.

PMCID: PMC1170522
PMID: 9501096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Mar 12;1402(1):79-85.

Induction of the DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of heat shock factor 
1 is uncoupled in Xenopus oocytes.

Bharadwaj S(1), Hnatov A, Ali A, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Canada.

The DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of the heat shock transcription
factor 1 (HSF1) are repressed under normal conditions and rapidly upregulated by 
heat stress. Here, we tested for the ability of various stress agents to activate
HSF1 in the Xenopus oocyte model system. The HSE-binding activity of HSF1 was
induced by a number of chemical stresses including cadmium, aluminum, iron,
mercury, arsenite, ethanol, methanol, and salicylate. HSE-binding was not induced
by several stresses known to induce the synthesis of hsps in other cell types in 
different organisms including zinc, copper, cobalt, manganese, recovery from
anoxia, UV-irradiation, and increased pH. The inability of several known inducers
of the stress response to activate the HSE-binding ability of HSF1 suggests that 
certain stress activation pathways may be absent or inactive in oocytes. The
transcriptional activity of oocyte HSF1 was induced by heat, cadmium, and
arsenite, but many of the agents that induced HSE-binding failed to stimulate
HSF1-mediated transcription. The apparent uncoupling of inducible HSE-binding and
transcriptional activities of HSF1 under a variety of stress regimes indicates
that these events are regulated by independent mechanisms in the oocyte.

PMID: 9551088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 27;273(13):7523-8.

Targeted disruption of heat shock transcription factor 1 abolishes
thermotolerance and protection against heat-inducible apoptosis.

McMillan DR(1), Xiao X, Shao L, Graves K, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Laboratories,
The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235-8573,
USA.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is a member of the vertebrate HSF family
that regulates stress-inducible synthesis of heat shock proteins (HSPs). Although
the synthesis of the constitutively expressed and inducible members of the heat
shock family of stress proteins correlates with increased cellular protection,
their relative contributions in acquired cellular resistance or "thermotolerance"
in mammalian cells is presently unknown. We report here that constitutive
expression of multiple HSPs in cultured embryonic cells was unaffected by
disruption of the murine HSF1 gene. In contrast, thermotolerance was not
attainable in hsf1(-/-) cells, and this response was required for protection
against heat-induced apoptosis. We conclude that 1) constitutive and inducibly
expressed HSPs exhibit distinct physiological functions for cellular maintenance 
and adaptation, respectively, and 2) other mammalian HSFs or distinct
evolutionarily conserved stress response pathways do not compensate for HSF1 in
the physiological response to heat shock.

PMID: 9516453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Apr 1;1397(1):43-55.

Characterization of HSE sequences in human Hsp40 gene: structural and promoter
analysis.

Hata M(1), Ohtsuka K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Radiology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Nagoya, Japan.

We have recently cloned a gene of Hsp40, a human homologue of bacterial DnaJ.
Here we describe the structural and promoter analysis of human Hsp40 gene.
Analysis of Hsp40 transcripts by 5' and 3' RACE suggested that they have
different 3' ends, and primer extension studies revealed that the major
transcription initiation site was localized 47 bp upstream of the ATG translation
initiation codon. Promoter analysis using deletion derivatives defined a minimal 
region which was active in response to heat shock. The region contained the
consensus heat shock element (HSE) sequences. The factor bound to these sequences
was suggested to be a heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) by gel mobility supershift
assay. In vivo footprinting and promoter analysis revealed that the HSEs in 5'
upstream region of human Hsp40 gene were composed of eight contiguous (A/G)GAAN
motifs and were essential for heat shock response. These results indicate that
Hsp40 is a real heat shock protein. It is also shown that the HSE found in the
first intron might not be the essential element for heat shock response.

PMID: 9545528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. FASEB J. 1998 Apr;12(6):451-9.

Overexpression of HSP-70 inhibits the phosphorylation of HSF1 by activating
protein phosphatase and inhibiting protein kinase C activity.

Ding XZ(1), Tsokos GC, Kiang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

This laboratory reported previously that overexpressed heat shock protein 70 kDa 
(HSP-70) inhibited the activation of its transcriptional factor, HSF1. We had
conducted experiments to understand the mechanisms whereby HSP-70 down-regulated 
the activation of HSF1. Genetically overexpressed HSP-70 had no effects on the
HSF1 level in cytosol, but significantly inhibited phosphorylation of HSF1 in the
nucleus. Transfection of cells with HSF1 cDNA resulted in increases in the
unphosphorylated, but not phosphorylated, HSF1 levels in both the cytosol and
nucleus. Because serine phosphorylation of various proteins was reduced in HSP-70
cDNA-transfected cells, we measured the activity of enzymes involved in serine
phosphorylation. Overexpressed HSP-70 significantly inhibited the enzymatic
activities of protein kinase A (PKA by 73 and 62% in the cytosol and
membrane-bound fraction, respectively) and protein kinase C (PKC by 61% in
membrane-bound fraction), whereas it activated that of protein phosphatase (PP by
33 and 86% in the cytosol and the membrane-bound fraction, respectively).
Forskolin (a PKA stimulator), PMA (a PKC stimulator), and okadaic acid (an
inhibitor of PP) were used to investigate whether HSP-70-induced changes in PKA, 
PKC, and PP were responsible for the HSF1 dephosphorylation. Forskolin did not
change nuclear HSF1 phosphorylation, suggesting that decreases in PKA activity in
HSP-70 overexpressing cells is not associated with HSF1 phosphorylation. PMA and 
okadaic acid induced an increase in HSF1 phosphorylation in both vector- and
HSP-70 cDNA-transfected cells, although levels of phosphorylated HSF1 in HSP-70
cDNA-transfected cells were lower than those in vector-transfected cells. The
PMA-induced increase in HSF1 phosphorylation in HSP-70 cDNA-transfected cells was
blocked by pretreatment with staurosporine, a PKC inhibitor. These results
suggest that overexpression of HSP-70 inhibits phosphorylation of HSF1 at serine 
residues by activating PP and inhibiting PKC activity.

PMID: 9535217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Genes Dev. 1998 Mar 1;12(5):654-66.

Molecular chaperones as HSF1-specific transcriptional repressors.

Shi Y(1), Mosser DD, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Rice
Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208, USA.

The rapid yet transient transcriptional activation of heat shock genes is
mediated by the reversible conversion of HSF1 from an inert negatively regulated 
monomer to a transcriptionally active DNA-binding trimer. During attenuation of
the heat shock response, transcription of heat shock genes returns to basal
levels and HSF1 reverts to an inert monomer. These events coincide with elevated 
levels of Hsp70 and other heat shock proteins (molecular chaperones). Here, we
show that the molecular chaperone Hsp70 and the cochaperone Hdj1 interact
directly with the transactivation domain of HSF1 and repress heat shock gene
transcription. Overexpression of either chaperone represses the transcriptional
activity of a transfected GAL4-HSF1 activation domain fusion protein and
endogenous HSF1. As neither the activation of HSF1 DNA binding nor inducible
phosphorylation of HSF1 was affected, the primary autoregulatory role of Hsp70 is
to negatively regulate HSF1 transcriptional activity. These results reveal that
the repression of heat shock gene transcription, which occurs during attenuation,
is due to the association of Hsp70 with the HSF1 transactivation domain, thus
providing a plausible explanation for the role of molecular chaperones in at
least one key step in the autoregulation of the heat shock response.

PMCID: PMC316571
PMID: 9499401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 3;95(5):2319-24.

Hsp70 accumulation in chondrocytic cells exposed to high continuous hydrostatic
pressure coincides with mRNA stabilization rather than transcriptional
activation.

Kaarniranta K(1), Elo M, Sironen R, Lammi MJ, Goldring MB, Eriksson JE, Sistonen 
L, Helminen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Kuopio, P. O. Box 1627, 70211 Kuopio,
Finland.

In response to various stress stimuli, heat shock genes are induced to express
heat shock proteins (Hsps). Previous studies have revealed that expression of
heat shock genes is regulated both at transcriptional and posttranscriptional
level, and the rapid transcriptional induction of heat shock genes involves
activation of the specific transcription factor, heat shock factor 1 (HSF1).
Furthermore, the transcriptional induction can vary in intensity and kinetics in 
a signal- and cell-type-dependent manner. In this study, we demonstrate that
mechanical loading in the form of hydrostatic pressure increases heat shock gene 
expression in human chondrocyte-like cells. The response to continuous high
hydrostatic pressure was characterized by elevated mRNA and protein levels of
Hsp70, without activation of HSF1 and transcriptional induction of hsp70 gene.
The increased expression of Hsp70 was mediated through stabilization of hsp70
mRNA molecules. Interestingly, in contrast to static pressurization, cyclic
hydrostatic loading did not result in the induction of heat shock genes. Our
findings show that hsp70 gene expression is regulated posttranscriptionally
without transcriptional induction in chondrocyte-like cells upon exposure to high
continuous hydrostatic pressure. We suggest that the posttranscriptional
regulation in the form of hsp70 mRNA stabilization provides an additional mode of
heat shock gene regulation that is likely to be of significant importance in
certain forms of stress.

PMCID: PMC19331
PMID: 9482883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1997 Dec;2(4):263-75.

Expression of human heat shock transcription factors 1 and 2 in HeLa cells and
yeast.

Yuan CX(1), Czarnecka-Verner E, Gurley WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
Gainesville 32611-0700, USA.

We have examined reporter gene (beta-gal) expression directed by human heat shock
transcription factors 1 and 2 (HSF1 and HSF2) in HeLa cells and in yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Transcriptional activation domains of both HSFs were 
mapped to the C-termini using chimeric proteins containing the GAL4 DNA binding
domain (GAL4-DBD). Deletion analysis of HSF1 largely confirmed the mapping and
expression pattern of activation domain 2 (AD2) previously reported by Green et
al (1995) with the exception of the contribution of the oligomerization domain
(hydrophobic region A) to basal repression in yeast, but not in HeLa cells. In
addition, a C-terminal activation domain for HSF2 (amino acids 397 to 536) was
identified by analysis in yeast. In contrast to HSF1, full length HSF2 and the
isolated activation domain of HSF2 showed little activity in HeLa cells. Analysis
of point mutations generated by low fidelity PCR within AD2 of HSF1 indicated
that hydrophobic and charged amino acids in addition to proline, serine and
threonine make critical contributions to transcriptional activity. Co-expression 
of GAL4-DBD fusions with AD2 of HSF1 and the C-terminal activation domain of HSF2
showed no evidence of synergism in the activation of transcription. Wild-type
human HSF1 and HSF2 were both able to substitute for the endogenous yeast HSF
under normal growth conditions.

PMCID: PMC313005
PMID: 9495283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Histochem Cytochem. 1997 Dec;45(12):1585-92.

Optimization of nuclear transcript detection by FISH and combination with
fluorescence immunocytochemical detection of transcription factors.

Jolly C(1), Mongelard F, Robert-Nicoud M, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)DyOGen, INSERM U309, Institut Albert Bonniot, La Tronche, France.

Detection of specific nuclear transcripts by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) has constituted a major breakthrough in the study of the organization of
transcription in the cell nucleus. Using the model of heat shock genes, we
present an optimized procedure for nuclear transcripts that provides high
efficiency for RNA detection and good preservation of cell morphology and nuclear
texture. Using this procedure, we designed an original high-efficiency
methodology combining FISH and fluorescence immunocytochemistry (FICC), which is 
used here for the simultaneous detection of heat-shock protein (hsp) nuclear
transcripts and the specific heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). We show
that the nuclear accumulation sites of HSF1 in heat-shocked cells do not
correspond to the sites of transcription of the hsp70 gene.

PMID: 9389761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Genes Dev. 1997 Dec 1;11(23):3116-21.

Disruption of downstream chromatin directed by a transcriptional activator.

Brown SA(1), Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Promoter-proximal pausing during transcriptional elongation is an important way
of regulating many diverse loci, including the human hsp70 gene. Pausing of RNA
polymerase can be enhanced by chromatin structure. We demonstrate that activation
of hsp70 leads to disruption of transcribed chromatin in front of RNA polymerase.
In vivo, disruption of chromatin in the first 400 bp of the transcribed region of
hsp70 following heat shock is resistant to the transcriptional inhibitor
alpha-amanitin. Disruption of chromatin farther downstream also occurs following 
activation but is sensitive to alpha-amanitin, suggesting that polymerase
movement is needed to disrupt distal portions of the hsp70 gene. In vitro,
disruption of transcribed chromatin is dependent on the presence of the human
heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) activation domains. These experiments demonstrate that
HSF1 can direct disruption of chromatin in transcribed regions. We suggest that
this is one of the mechanisms used by HSF1 to facilitate transcriptional
elongation.

PMCID: PMC316745
PMID: 9389644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Cell Sci. 1997 Dec;110 ( Pt 23):2935-41.

HSF1 transcription factor concentrates in nuclear foci during heat shock:
relationship with transcription sites.

Jolly C(1), Morimoto R, Robert-Nicoud M, Vourc'h C.

Author information: 
(1)DyOGen, INSERM U309, Institut Albert Bonniot, Domaine de la Merci, 38706, La
Tronche cedex, France. caroline.jolly@ujf-grenoble.fr

In this paper, we show that upon heat shock, HSF1 concentrates in the nucleus of 
diploid human fibroblasts in two large foci. The relative distribution of HSF1
nuclear foci and active heat shock protein (hsp) genes was investigated by
combining fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the detection of hsp
nuclear transcripts and immunofluorescence for the detection of HSF1. We show
that the HSF1 foci are distinct from the sites of hsp70 and hsp90 genes
transcription. This is the second report of ploidy-dependent foci of
transcription factors that are independent of their specific transcription sites.
However, the correlation between the number of HSF1 foci and the ploidy of the
cells strongly supports the existence of a specific chromosomal target for HSF1
foci.

PMID: 9359877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Cell Sci. 1997 Dec;110 ( Pt 23):2925-34.

HSF1 granules: a novel stress-induced nuclear compartment of human cells.

Cotto J(1), Fox S, Morimoto R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rice Institute for Biomedical Research,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) is the ubiquitous stress-responsive transcriptional
activator which is essential for the inducible transcription of genes encoding
heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones. HSF1 localizes within the nucleus
of cells exposed to heat shock, heavy metals, and amino acid analogues, to form
large, irregularly shaped, brightly staining granules which are not detected
during attenuation of the heat shock response or when cells are returned to their
normal growth conditions. The kinetics of detection of HSF1 granules parallels
the transient induction of heat shock gene transcription. HSF1 granules are also 
detected using an HSF1-Flag epitope tagged protein or a chimeric HSF1-green
fluorescent protein which reveals that these nuclear structures are
stress-induced and can be detected in living cells. The spatial organization of
HSF1 granules in nuclei of stressed cells reveals that they are novel nuclear
structures which are stress-dependent and provides evidence that the nucleus
undergoes dynamic reorganization in response to stress.

PMID: 9359875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Feb;18(2):906-18.

Intramolecular repression of mouse heat shock factor 1.

Farkas T(1), Kutskova YA, Zimarino V.

Author information: 
(1)Biological and Technological Research Department (DIBIT), San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

The pathway leading to transcriptional activation of heat shock genes involves a 
step of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) trimerization required for high-affinity
binding of this activator protein to heat shock elements (HSEs) in the promoters.
Previous studies have shown that in vivo the trimerization is negatively
regulated at physiological temperatures by a mechanism that requires multiple
hydrophobic heptad repeats (HRs) which may form a coiled coil in the monomer. To 
investigate the minimal requirements for negative regulation, in this work we
have examined mouse HSF1 translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysate or extracted
from Escherichia coli after limited expression. We show that under these
conditions HSF1 behaves as a monomer which can be induced by increases in
temperature to form active HSE-binding trimers and that mutations of either HR
region cause activation in both systems. Furthermore, temperature elevations and 
acidic buffers activate purified HSF1, and mild proteolysis excises fragments
which form HSE-binding oligomers. These results suggest that oligomerization can 
be repressed in the monomer, as previously proposed, and that repression can be
relieved in the apparent absence of regulatory proteins. An intramolecular
mechanism may be central for the regulation of this transcription factor in
mammalian cells, although not necessarily sufficient.

PMCID: PMC108802
PMID: 9447987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biochem. 1997 Nov;122(5):904-10.

Reduced induction of HSP70 in PC12 cells during neuronal differentiation.

Hatayama T(1), Takahashi H, Yamagishi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University.
hatayama@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp

Rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells differentiate into nonreplicating neuronal cells 
with neurite extensions in response to nerve growth factor (NGF). To gain better 
understanding of the regulation of stress responses in neuronal cells, we
examined the induction of HSP70, HSP70 mRNA, and heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
DNA-binding activity following treatment by heat shock or with sodium arsenite or
amino acid analogue in PC12 cells treated with or without NGF. The induction of
HSP70 and HSP70 mRNA following these stresses was diminished in the
differentiated PC12 cells compared to the undifferentiated cells, whereas the
HSF1 DNA-binding activity was enhanced in the differentiated PC12 cells. This
phenomenon was characteristic of the differentiated neuronal cells rather than
growth-arrested cells. Thus, neuronal cells appear to show an altered stress
response depending on their differentiation state, and the diminished HSP70
expression in the differentiated neuronal cells may explain the sensitivity of
neuronal cells to pathophysiological stressors.

PMID: 9443804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biochem J. 1997 Nov 15;328 ( Pt 1):45-50.

Stress-induced transcription of the clusterin/apoJ gene.

Michel D(1), Chatelain G, North S, Brun G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, UMR49 CNRS-Ecole Normale Superieure de
Lyon, France.

Clusterin/apoJ is an intriguing gene frequently isolated by differential
screening in laboratories from different areas of molecular biology, since it is 
overexpressed in numerous cases of degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's
disease and scrapie. While the dramatic increase of clusterin expression in
injured tissues is well established, the molecular basis of the gene induction
remains unclear. In this study, we have focused our attention on the only DNA
region strictly conserved between clusterin gene proximal promoters from
different vertebrate classes. We show that this 14-bp DNA element is specifically
recognized by the HSF1 transcription factor and can mediate heat-shock-induced
transcription in transient expression assays. Conversely, the avian clusterin
proximal promoter, point-mutated at the level of this element, no longer
transmits heat-shock activation. These findings provide a possible explanation
for the high sensitivity of clusterin expression to environmental changes and
allow the classification of clusterin as an extracellular version of heat-shock
protein.

PMCID: PMC1218885
PMID: 9359832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 28;272(48):30400-4.

Thioredoxin is transcriptionally induced upon activation of heat shock factor 2.

Leppä S(1), Pirkkala L, Chow SC, Eriksson JE, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
FIN-20521 Turku, Finland. lea.sistonen@btk.utu.fi

Heat shock gene expression is differentially regulated in cells exposed to stress
stimuli and in cells undergoing processes of differentiation and development.
Regulation of the classical heat shock response is mediated by heat shock factor 
1 (HSF1), whereas heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) is activated in certain
differentiating cells, for example during hemin-mediated differentiation of human
K562 erythroleukemia cells. Hence, the signaling pathways leading to induction of
heat shock gene expression upon different stimuli are likely to be distinct. We
have used RNA arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction to identify genes that
are differentially regulated upon activation of HSF1 and HSF2. In this study, we 
report that thioredoxin (TRX) expression is induced in K562 cells in response to 
hemin in an HSF2-dependent manner. Increased TRX expression was primarily
detected on the transcriptional level, subsequently leading to elevated TRX mRNA 
and protein levels. Hemin treatment caused no reduction in cellular glutathione
concentrations, indicating that the increased TRX expression was not due to
oxidative stress. Studies using cell lines where overexpression of the HSF2-beta 
isoform represses HSF2 activation implied that active HSF2 is required for
transcriptional induction of TRX. Unlike HSF2, activation of HSF1 did not induce 
TRX expression. Taken together, our results suggest that HSF1 and HSF2 may
regulate distinct target genes, and activation of HSF2 could be involved in the
regulation of TRX expression during hemin-mediated differentiation of K562 cells.

PMID: 9374530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Chemotherapy. 1997 Nov-Dec;43(6):406-14.

Endogenous tumor necrosis factor functions as a resistant factor against
hyperthermic cytotoxicity in pancreatic carcinoma cells via enhancement of the
heart shock element-binding activity of heart shock factor 1.

Watanabe N(1), Tsuji N, Kobayashi D, Yamauchi N, Akiyama S, Sasaki H, Sato T,
Okamoto T, Niitsu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Diagnosis, Sapporo Medical University, School of
Medicine, Japan. watanabn@sapmed.ac.jp

To elucidate the relationship between two distinct resistant factors, endogenous 
tumor necrosis factor (enTNF) and heat shock proteins (HSPs), against
hyperthermia, we assessed whether enTNF enhances HSP72 expression. Although there
was a variability in the sensitivity of pancreatic carcinoma cell lines to heat, 
enTNF and HSP72 expression as well as MnSOD activity correlated positively with
heat resistance. When MIAPaCa-2 pancreatic carcinoma cells, which had the lowest 
enTNF expression and highest heat sensitivity, were transfected with a
nonsecretory-human TNF gene (pTNF delta pro), intracellular manganous superoxide 
dismutase (MnSOD) activity, HSP72 expression, and heat resistance were
significantly increased. Furthermore, in these cells, enTNF expression correlated
with the binding activity of heat shock factor 1 (HSF 1) to an oligonucleotide
containing the human heat shock element. These results indicate that enTNF
participates in the intrinsic resistance against heat via induction of MnSOD,
enhances HSF1-binding activity, and augments of HSP72 expression. Therefore,
inhibition of enTNF expression in pancreatic carcinoma cells would improve the
efficacy of hyperthermia for pancreatic carcinoma.

PMID: 9395854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Nov 7;240(1):228-33.

The trimerization domain of human heat shock factor 2 is able to interact with
nucleoporin p62.

Yoshima T(1), Yura T, Yanagi H.

Author information: 
(1)HSP Research Institute, Kyoto, Japan.

Heat shock factor 2 (HSF2) acquires DNA binding activity during hemin-induced
differentiation of human K562 erythroleukemia cells. To investigate the
mechanisms responsible for the regulation of HSF2 activity, we searched for
proteins that can associate with HSF2 by the yeast two-hybrid system. Nucleoporin
p62, a major component of the nuclear pore complex, was cloned from cDNA
libraries of K562 cells. We demonstrated physical interaction between HSF2 and
p62 both by a glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay in vitro and by a
two-hybrid assay in K562 cells. HSF1 is also able to interact with p62 on a GST
pull-down assay, but not on a mammalian two-hybrid system. Furthermore, it was
shown that this interaction occurred between the trimerization domain of HSF2 and
the C-terminal alpha-helical coiled-coil domain of p62. These data suggest the
possibility that p62 is involved in the activation or regulation of HSF2.

PMID: 9367915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Oct 29;239(3):851-6.

Quercetin inhibits heat shock protein induction but not heat shock factor
DNA-binding in human breast carcinoma cells.

Hansen RK(1), Oesterreich S, Lemieux P, Sarge KD, Fuqua SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Division of Oncology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio 78284-7884, USA.

The flavonoid quercetin inhibits the heat-induced synthesis of heat shock
proteins (hsps) in a variety of cell lines. To determine whether quercetin could 
inhibit hsp expression in breast cancer cells, we used the human breast cancer
cell line, MDA-MB-231. Treatment of these cells with quercetin decreased the
heat-induced synthesis of hsp27 and hsp70. However, inhibition of hsp expression 
did not correspond with the reduced ability of heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs) to bind DNA. Furthermore, while quercetin treatment inhibited HSF2
expression, it only slightly affected HSF1 expression in breast cancer cells. In 
contrast, quercetin inhibited both HSF DNA-binding activity and HSF expression in
HeLa cells. Our studies suggest that quercetin's action is cell-type specific,
and in breast cancer cells may involve regulation of HSF transcriptional
activity, rather than regulation of its DNA-binding activity.

PMID: 9367858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biochem J. 1997 Oct 15;327 ( Pt 2):341-7.

The heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 is rapidly activated by either hyper- or
hypo-osmotic stress in mammalian cells.

Caruccio L(1), Bae S, Liu AY, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biochemistry, Rutgers-The State University of New Jersey, 
Piscataway, NJ 08855-0939, USA.

Osmoregulation, the cellular response to environmental changes of osmolarity and 
ionic strength, is important for the survival of living organisms. We have
demonstrated previously that an exposure of mammalian cells to hypo-osmotic
stress, either in growth medium (30% growth medium and 70% water) or in binary
solution containing sorbitol and water, prominently induced the DNA-binding
activity of the heat-shock transcription factor (HSF1) [Huang, Caruccio, Liu and 
Chen (1995) Biochem. J. 307, 347-352]. Since hyperosmotic and hypo-osmotic stress
usually elicit opposite biological responses, we wondered what would be the
effect of hyperosmotic stress on HSF activation. In this study we have examined
the HSF DNA-binding activity in HeLa cells maintained in the sorbitol/water
binary solution over a wide concentration range (0.1-0.9 M) and in Dulbecco's
medium supplemented with sorbitol or NaCl. We found that HSF-binding activity
could be induced prominently under both hypo-osmotic (0.1-0.25 M) and
hyperosmotic conditions (0.50-0.90 M). In both cases, HSF activation was observed
within 5 min after changing the osmotic pressure. The activation was accompanied 
by both HSF trimerization and nuclear translocation, and appeared to be
independent of protein synthesis. The effects of hypo- or hyper-osmotic stress on
HSF activation could be reversed once the cells were returned to iso-osmotic
conditions (0.30M) with a half-life (t12) of 25 min or less. This rapid turnover 
of the osmotic-stress-induced HSF-binding activity was inhibited by
cycloheximide, a potent inhibitor of protein synthesis. Unlike heat shock,
activation of HSF by either hypo- or hyper-osmotic stress did not lead to an
accumulation of heat-shock protein 70 (HSP70) mRNA in HeLa cells. We propose that
HSF activation during osmotic stress may serve physiological functions
independent of the synthesis of heat-shock proteins.

PMCID: PMC1218799
PMID: 9359399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. EMBO J. 1997 Nov 3;16(21):6466-77.

Conservation of a stress response: human heat shock transcription factors
functionally substitute for yeast HSF.

Liu XD(1), Liu PC, Santoro N, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor 48109-0606, USA.

Heat shock factors (HSF) are important eukaryotic stress responsive transcription
factors which are highly structurally conserved from yeast to mammals. HSFs bind 
as homotrimers to conserved promoter DNA recognition sites called HSEs. The
baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae possesses a single essential HSF gene,
while distinct HSF isoforms have been identified in humans. To ascertain the
degree of functional similarity between the yeast and human HSF proteins, human
HSF1 and HSF2 were expressed in yeast cells lacking the endogenous HSF gene. We
demonstrate that human HSF2, but not HSF1, homotrimerizes and functionally
complements the viability defect associated with a deletion of the yeast HSF
gene. However, derivatives of hHSF1 that give rise to a trimerized protein,
through disruption of a carboxyl- or aminoterminal coiled-coil domain thought to 
engage in intramolecular interactions that maintain the protein in a monomeric
state, functionally substitute for yeast HSF. Surprisingly, hHSF2 expressed in
yeast activates target gene transcription in response to thermal stress.
Moreover, hHSF1 and hHSF2 exhibit selectivity for transcriptional activation of
two distinct yeast heat shock responsive genes, which correlate with previously
established mammalian HSF DNA binding preferences in vitro. These results provide
new insight into the function of human HSF isoforms, and demonstrate the
remarkable functional conservation between yeast and human HSFs, critical
transcription factors required for responses to physiological, pharmacological
and environmental stresses.

PMCID: PMC1170252
PMID: 9351828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 10;272(41):26009-16.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 binds selectively in vitro to Ku protein and
the catalytic subunit of the DNA-dependent protein kinase.

Huang J(1), Nueda A, Yoo S, Dynan WS.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Program, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) functions as the master regulator of the
heat shock response in eukaryotes. We have previously shown that, in addition to 
its role as a transcription factor, HSF1 stimulates the activity of the
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). DNA-PK is composed of two components: a
460-kDa catalytic subunit and a 70- and 86-kDa heterodimeric regulatory
component, also known as the Ku protein. We report here that HSF1 binds
specifically to each of the two components of DNA-PK. Binding occurs in the
absence of DNA. The complex with the Ku protein is stable and forms at a
stoichiometry close to unity between the Ku protein heterodimer and the active
HSF1 trimer. The binding is blocked by antibodies against HSF1. Our results show 
that HSF1 also binds directly, but more weakly, to the catalytic subunit of
DNA-PK. Both interactions are dependent on a specific region within the HSF1
regulatory domain. This sequence is necessary but not sufficient for HSF1
stimulation of DNA-PK activity. The ability of HSF1 to interact with both
components of DNA-PK provides a potential mechanism for the activation of DNA-PK 
in response to heat and other forms of stress.

PMID: 9325337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Plant Physiol. 1997 Sep;115(1):93-100.

Phosphorylation by a cyclin-dependent kinase modulates DNA binding of the
Arabidopsis heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 in vitro.

Reindl A(1), Schöffl F, Schell J, Koncz C, Bakó L.

Author information: 
(1)Universität Tübingen, Biologisches Institut, Germany.

Phosphorylation is one of the mechanisms controlling the activity of heat-shock
transcription factors in yeast and mammalian cells. Here we describe partial
purification, identification, and characterization of a protein kinase that
phosphorylates the Arabidopsis heat-shock factor AtHSF1 at multiple serine
residues. The HSF1 kinase forms a stable complex with AtHSF1, which can be
detected by kinase pull-down assays using a histidine-tagged AtHSF1 substrate.
The HSF1 kinase interacts with the cell-cycle control protein Suc1p and is
immunoprecipitated by an antibody specific for the Arabidopsis cyclin-dependent
CDC2a kinase. Phosphorylation by CDC2a in vitro inhibits DNA binding of AtHSF1 to
the cognate heat-shock elements, suggesting a possible regulatory interaction
between heat-shock response and cell-cycle control in plants.

PMCID: PMC158464
PMID: 9306693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1997 Sep;2(3):199-209.

Modulation of the arsenite-induced expression of stress proteins by reducing
agents.

Kato K(1), Ito H, Okamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Aichi Human Service Center, Japan.

We examined the effects of reducing agents on the expression of heat shock
protein 27 (hsp27), alpha B crystallin, and hsp70 in C6 rat glioma cells in
response to stress. Cells were exposed to arsenite (100 microM for 1 h) in the
presence of dithiothreitol at various concentrations (0.03-2 mM), and the
accumulation of all three proteins was markedly stimulated in cells that had been
exposed to arsenite in the presence of a low concentration (0.03-0.1 mM) of
dithiothreitol. Stimulation of these arsenite-induced responses was also observed
in the presence of 0.1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol or 0.05 mM dithioerythritol. The
enhanced expression of mRNAs for hsp27, alpha B crystallin and hsp70, as well as 
the prolonged activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), were also
observed in cells that had been treated with arsenite in the presence of 0.05 mM 
dithiothreitol. The arsenite-inducible expression of the three proteins was
completely suppressed when dithiothreitol was present at concentrations above 1
mM during the stress period, although delayed activation of the binding to a heat
shock element (HSE) by phosphorylated HSF was observed in these cells. Exposure
of cells first to arsenite for 1 h and then to dithiothreitol resulted in a very 
effective suppression of the arsenite-inducible responses, and the responses were
inhibited even by a low concentration of dithiothreitol. These results suggest
that the signal transduction pathway for the arsenite-induced expression of hsps 
involves at least two redox-sensitive steps: (i) a process that is stimulated by 
mild reducing power during the stress period; and (ii) a process that is followed
by the activation of HSF and is very sensitive to suppression by a reducing
agent.

PMCID: PMC312998
PMID: 9314608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Cell Physiol. 1997 Sep;172(3):314-22.

Ultraviolet light attenuates heat-inducible gene expression.

Qiu L(1), Welk JF, Jurivich DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veteran Affairs, VA Chicago Health Care System, Illinois, USA.

Ultraviolet light (UV) induces a stress response mediated through transcription
factors such as NF-kB and AP-1, yet little is known about its effect on other
transactivators of stress gene expression such as heat shock factor (HSF1).
Analysis of UV-treated HeLa cells unexpectedly revealed uncoupling of the heat
shock response. UV weakly induced HSF1 into its DNA bound state and markedly
attenuated heat-inducible gene expression. HSF1 was further analyzed as a
potential target for the uncharacteristic uncoupling of the thermal stress
response by another type of stress. Heat-inducible multimerization and nuclear
translocation of HSF1 were found to be intact in UV-treated cells; however, the
monomeric rather than the multimeric form of HSF1 become hyperphosphorylated by
UV. This effect could be partially abolished by the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine
with partial reconstitution of hs gene expression. The reported role of a MAP
kinase blockade of HSF1 transactivating properties could not be confirmed by an
inhibitor of the MAP kinase pathway. Fibroblasts defective in SAP kinase activity
also did not exhibit resistance to UV-inducible phosphorylation of HSF1.
Two-dimensional phosphopeptide mapping of HSF1 revealed a single tryptic peptide 
to be affected by UV, but no new pattern of phosphorylation was evident relative 
to tryptic phosphopeptide profile observed in control cells. These data suggest
that UV uncoupling of the hs response possibly involves steps in addition to
those associated with phosphorylation the monomeric form of HSF1.

PMID: 9284951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Clin Invest. 1997 Sep 1;100(5):1089-97.

Nitric oxide induces heat-shock protein 70 expression in vascular smooth muscle
cells via activation of heat shock factor 1.

Xu Q(1), Hu Y, Kleindienst R, Wick G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, Austrian Academy of Sciences, A-6020 
Innsbruck, Austria. qingbo.xu@oeaw.ac.at

Current data suggest that nitric oxide (NO) is a double-edged sword that could
result in relaxation and/or cytotoxicity of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs)
via cGMP- dependent or -independent signal pathways. Stress or heat shock
proteins (hsps) have been shown to be augmented in arterial SMCs during acute
hypertension and atherosclerosis, both conditions that are believed to correlate 
with disturbed NO production. In the present study, we demonstrate that NO
generated from sodium nitroprusside (SNP), S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine, and
spermine/nitric oxide complex leads to hsp70 induction in cultured SMCs. Western 
blot analysis demonstrated that hsp70 protein expression peaked between 6 and 12 
h after treatment with SNP, and elevated protein levels were preceded by
induction of hsp70 mRNA within 3 h. Induction of hsp70 mRNA was associated with
the activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1), suggesting that the
response was regulated at the transcriptional level. HSF1 activation was
completely blocked by hemoglobin, dithiothreitol, and cycloheximide, suggesting
that the protein damage and nascent polypeptide formation induced by NO may
initiate this activation. Furthermore, SMCs pretreated with heat shock (42
degrees C) for 30 min were significantly protected from death induced by NO.
Thus, we provide evidence that NO induces hsp70 expression in SMCs via HSF1
activation. Induction of hsp70 could be important in protecting SMCs from injury 
resulting from NO stimulation.

PMCID: PMC508283
PMID: 9276725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Cell Sci. 1997 Aug;110 ( Pt 16):1879-91.

A yeast heat shock transcription factor (Hsf1) mutant is defective in both
Hsc82/Hsp82 synthesis and spindle pole body duplication.

Zarzov P(1), Boucherie H, Mann C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biochemie et de Génétique Moléculaire, CEA/Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, 
France.

Cdc28 is a cyclin-dependent protein kinase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that is
required for the G1/S and G2/M transitions of the cell division cycle. All
previously described cdc28 mutants aside from cdc28-1N arrest division
specifically in the G1 phase. cdc28-1N arrests division in G2/mitosis. We show
here that the cdc28-109 mutant exhibits a mixed cell division arrest at 37
degrees C with cells in both the G1 and G2 phases. In order to identify proteins 
that functionally interact with Cdc28, we isolated mutants that are colethal with
cdc28-109 at its permissive temperature. We describe here our phenotypic analysis
of two such mutants, hsf1-82 and ydj1-10, that affect the heat shock
transcription factor and a yeast dnaj-like protein chaperone, respectively.
hsf1-82 and ydj1-10 temperature-sensitive mutants arrest the cell division cycle 
at several stages. However, one predominant class of cells in both mutants was
arrested with a large bud and a single vertex of microtubules. Electron
microscopic analysis of such hsf1-82 cells showed that they contained an
unduplicated spindle pole body with an enlarged half-bridge. Two-dimensional gel 
electrophoresis of total cell proteins revealed that the hsf1-82 cells were
specifically defective in the expression of the Hsc82 and Hsp82 proteins.
Furthermore, the hsf1-82 mutation was suppressed by the HSC82 gene on a multicopy
plasmid that restored Hsc82 protein to high levels in these cells. These results 
show that Hsf1 is required for spindle pole body duplication at 37 degrees C.

PMID: 9296388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Mol Gen Genet. 1997 Jul;255(3):322-31.

Heat stress transcription factors from tomato can functionally replace HSF1 in
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Boscheinen O(1), Lyck R, Queitsch C, Treuter E, Zimarino V, Scharf KD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology, Biocenter of the J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt,
Germany.

The fact that yeast HSF1 is essential for survival under nonstress conditions can
be used to test heterologous Hsfs for the ability to substitute for the
endogenous protein. Our results demonstrate that like Hsf of Drosophila, tomato
Hsfs A1 and A2 can functionally replace the corresponding yeast protein, but Hsf 
B1 cannot. In addition to survival at 28 degrees C, we checked the transformed
yeast strains for temperature sensitivity of growth, induced thermotolerance and 
activator function using two different lacZ reporter constructs. Tests with
full-length Hsfs were supplemented by assays using mutant Hsfs lacking parts of
their C-terminal activator region or oligomerization domain, or containing amino 
acid substitutions in the DNA-binding domain. Remarkably, results with the yeast 
system are basically similar to those obtained by the analysis of the same Hsfs
as transcriptional activators in a tobacco protoplast assay. Most surprising is
the failure of HsfB1 to substitute for the yeast Hsf. The defect can be overcome 
by addition to HsfB1 of a short C-terminal peptide motif from HsfA2 (34 amino
acid residues), which represents a type of minimal activator necessary for
interaction with the yeast transcription apparatus. Deletion of the
oligomerization domain (HR-A/B) does not interfere with Hsf function for survival
or growth at higher temperatures. But monomeric Hsf has a markedly reduced
affinity for DNA, as shown by lacZ reporter and band-shift assays.

PMID: 9268023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 13;272(24):15389-95.

Different thresholds in the responses of two heat shock transcription factors,
HSF1 and HSF3.

Tanabe M(1), Nakai A, Kawazoe Y, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Chest Disease Research Institute, Kyoto
University, Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto 606-01, Japan.

Avian cells express three HSF genes encoding a unique factor, HSF3, as well as
homologues of mammalian HSF1 and HSF2. HSF1 is the major factor that mediates the
heat shock signal in mammalian cells. We reported previously that cHSF3, as well 
as cHSF1, is activated by heat shock in chicken cells. In this study, we examined
the functional differences between cHSF1 and cHSF3. Comparison of the
heat-inducible DNA binding activity of cHSF1 with cHSF3 at various temperatures
revealed that the latter was activated at higher temperatures than the former. At
a mild heat shock, such as 41 degrees C, only cHSF1 was activated, whereas both
cHSF1 and cHSF3 were activated following a severe heat shock at 45 degrees C.
Heat-inducible nuclear translocation and trimerization were accompanied by DNA
binding activity. We also observed that cHSF3 was activated by treating cells
with higher concentrations of sodium arsenite compared to cHSF1. The DNA binding 
activity of cHSF3 by severe heat shock lasted for a longer period than that of
cHSF1. Interestingly, the total amount of cHSF3 increased only upon severe heat
shock, whereas that of HSF1 decreased. Substantial amounts of cHSF3 remained in
the soluble fraction under severe heat shock, whereas cHSF1 rapidly moved to the 
insoluble fractions in that conditions. Comparison of transcriptional activity of
the activation domains of cHSF1 and cHSF3 revealed that the activity of cHSF3 was
as strong as that of cHSF1. These findings indicate that there are different
thresholds for cHSF1 and cHSF3 and that cHSF3 is involved in the persistent and
burst activation of stress genes upon severe stress in chicken cells.
Pretreatment of cycloheximide elevated the threshold concentrations of arsenite
of both factors. This suggests that denaturation of nascent polypeptides could be
the first trigger for the activation of both factors, and the pathways for
activation of cHSF1 and cHSF3 may be identical, or at least share some common
mechanisms.

PMID: 9182569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1997 Jun;2(2):104-9.

Potentiation of heat stress-induced hsp70 expression in vivo by aspirin.

Fawcett TW(1), Xu Q, Holbrook NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Gene Expression and Aging, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, 
MD 21224, USA.

Studies in cultured cells have demonstrated that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents can potentiate heat-induced hsp70 expression through activation of HSF1 to
a DNA binding state. We investigated the influence of aspirin on hsp70 expression
in intact rats subjected to heat stress. Rats were injected intraperitoneally
either with aspirin (100 mg/kg) or vehicle alone, 60 min prior to their placement
at 37 degrees C or room temperature for 30 min. hsp70 mRNA expression was
analyzed in lung, liver and kidney isolated from animals assigned to one of four 
different treatment paradigms; untreated controls, heat, aspirin, and
aspirin-plus-heat. Comparison of hsp70 expression in the treatment groups
revealed that in all tissues examined, aspirin-plus-heat treatment resulted in
3-4 fold higher levels of hsp70 mRNA relative to those seen with heat treatment
alone. Little or no hsp70 mRNA expression was detected in the unheated groups,
regardless of aspirin treatment. In keeping with the mRNA expression, Hsp70
protein levels were also elevated in aspirin-plus-heat treated animals. Aspirin
treatment did not alter hsp70 protein expression in the absence of heat. In
contrast to in vitro observations, aspirin treatment in vivo did not alter HSF1
DNA binding properties. Core body temperature measurements revealed that aspirin 
pretreatment enhanced the rise in body temperature seen in response to heat
treatment. This increased hyperthermic response to heat stress probably accounts 
for the potentiation of hsp70 expression observed in aspirin-plus-heat treated
rats. Given the widespread use of aspirin in humans within a dose range
comparable to that used here, our findings are likely to have important
physiological consequences.

PMCID: PMC312987
PMID: 9250401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Jun;82(6):1799-806.

Steroidogenic factor 1 messenger ribonucleic acid expression in steroidogenic and
nonsteroidogenic human tissues: Northern blot and in situ hybridization studies.

Ramayya MS(1), Zhou J, Kino T, Segars JH, Bondy CA, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), a tissue-specific orphan nuclear receptor,
regulates the genes of several steroidogenic enzymes, Mullerian inhibiting
substance, and the gonadotrophins. Also, this transcription factor is crucial for
hypothalamic, adrenal, and gonadal organogenesis in the mouse. We recently cloned
the human SF-1 (hSF-1) complementary DNA (cDNA) and now report the distribution
of this factor's messenger RNA (mRNA) in human tissues. Northern blot analyses of
peripheral tissues revealed high hSF-1 mRNA expression in the adrenal cortex and 
the gonads, but no hSF-1 mRNA was detected in the placenta. High hSF-1 mRNA
expression also was seen in the spleen. In this tissue, in addition to the main
transcript of 3.5-4 kb seen in the adrenal and gonads, two additional transcripts
of 4.4 kb and 8 kb were noted. The additional 4.4-kb transcript also was seen in 
several peripheral tissues and various components of the brain. However, adult
liver and heart showed only the 4.4-kb transcript. In the human brain, hSF-1 mRNA
expression was widespread, including several components of the limbic system. In 
situ hybridization studies confirmed the strong expression of hSF-1 mRNA in
adrenal cortex, ovary, testis, and the spleen, primarily within
reticuloendothelial cells. Thus, in the human, the hSF1 mRNA is present in both
steroidogenic and nonsteroidogenic tissues, albeit not in the placenta. In the
central nervous system, the expression of hSF-1 mRNA is widespread. It is
composed of several different mRNA species distributed in a tissue-specific
fashion. These findings suggest that hSF-1 may play a role in
reticuloendothelial/immune cell maturation and/or function, as well as nervous
system development and/or neurosteroid biosynthesis.

PMID: 9177385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 30;272(22):14147-51.

Xenopus heat shock factor 1 is a nuclear protein before heat stress.

Mercier PA(1), Foksa J, Ovsenek N, Westwood JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Erindale College, University of Toronto, Mississauga,
Ontario L5L 1C6, Canada.

Stress-induced expression of the heat shock (hs) genes in eukaryotes is mediated 
by a transcription factor known as heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 is present in
a latent, monomeric form in unstressed metazoan cells and upon exposure to heat
or other forms of stress is converted to an "active" trimeric form, which binds
the promoters of hs genes and induces their transcription. The conversion of HSF1
to its active form is hypothesized to be a multistep process involving (i)
oligomerization of HSF1, plus (ii) additional changes in its physical
conformation, (iii) changes in its phosphorylation state, and for some species
(iv) translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Oligomerization of HSF
appears to be essential for high affinity DNA binding, but it remains unclear
whether the other steps occur in all organisms or what their mechanistic roles
are. In this study we have examined if heat-induced cytoplasmic-nuclear
translocation of HSF1 occurs in Xenopus oocytes. We observed that germinal
vesicles (nuclei) that were physically dissected from unshocked Xenopus laevis
oocytes contain no HSF1 binding activity. Interestingly, in vitro heat shock
treatments of isolated nuclei from unshocked oocytes activated HSF1 binding,
indicating that HSF1 must have been present in the unshocked nuclei prior to
isolation. Induction of HSF1 binding was not observed in enucleated oocytes.
Western blot analysis using an affinity-purified polyclonal antibody made against
X. laevis HSF1 showed that HSF1 is present in equal amounts in unshocked and
shocked oocytes and isolated nuclei. HSF1 was not detected in enucleated oocytes.
These results clearly demonstrate that HSF1 is a nuclear protein in oocytes prior
to exposure to stress. In Xenopus oocytes, therefore, HSF1 translocation from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus is not part of the multistep process of HSF1 activation.
These results also imply that the signals and/or factors involved in HSF1
activation must have their effect in the nuclear compartment.

PMID: 9162043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):2107-15.

Repression of the heat shock factor 1 transcriptional activation domain is
modulated by constitutive phosphorylation.

Kline MP(1), Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is constitutively expressed in mammalian
cells and negatively regulated for DNA binding and transcriptional activity. Upon
exposure to heat shock and other forms of chemical and physiological stress,
these activities of HSF1 are rapidly induced. In this report, we demonstrate that
constitutive phosphorylation of HSF1 at serine residues distal to the
transcriptional activation domain functions to repress transactivation. Tryptic
phosphopeptide analysis of a collection of chimeric GAL4-HSF1 deletion and point 
mutants identified a region of constitutive phosphorylation encompassing serine
residues 303 and 307. The significance of phosphorylation at serines 303 and 307 
in the regulation of HSF1 transcriptional activity was demonstrated by transient 
transfection and assay of a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter construct.
Whereas the transfected wild-type GAL4-HSF1 chimera is repressed for
transcriptional activity and derepressed by heat shock, mutation of serines 303
and 307 to alanine results in derepression to a high level of constitutive
activity. Similar results were obtained with mutation of these serine residues in
the context of full-length HSF1. These data reveal that constitutive
phosphorylation of serines 303 and 307 has an important role in the negative
regulation of HSF1 transcriptional activity at control temperatures.

PMCID: PMC232058
PMID: 9121459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Apr 1;25(7):1333-8.

Developmental activation of an episomic hsp70 gene promoter in two-cell mouse
embryos by transcription factor Sp1.

Bevilacqua A(1), Fiorenza MT, Mangia F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Department of Histology and Medical Embryology,
La Sapienza University of Rome, Via Borelli 50, 00161 Rome, Italy.

To investigate the control of zygotic genome expression in two-cell mouse
embryos, we studied transcription factors required for transient expression of
microinjected DNA constructs driven by the promoter of one of the earliest genes 
activated after fertilization in this system, the heat shock gene hsp70.
Cis-acting elements required for hsp70 activation were first investigated by
mutational analysis. Mutation of the TATA box and a proximal GC box strongly
inhibited construct expression, while that of a CCAAT box had no effect.
Transcription factors binding the wild-type hsp70 promoter were then titrated in 
vivo by coinjecting the construct with double-stranded oligodeoxyribonucleotides 
containing definite consensus sequences. Wild-type GC box oligonucleotides
strongly inhibited construct expression, while those containing mutated GC boxes,
wild-type CCAAT boxes, and heat shock elements had no effects. Finally, construct
expression was challenged by coinjecting antibodies to specific transcription
factors. Antibodies to factor Sp1 depressed construct expression in a
dose-dependent manner, while those to Sp2, HSF1 and HSF2 were ineffective. These 
results pinpoint the Sp1 transcription factor as an absolute requirement for
activation of the hsp70 gene promoter in two-cell mouse embryos, and make this
factor a candidate for a major regulator of the onset of murine zygotic genome
expression.

PMCID: PMC146604
PMID: 9060426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 18;94(6):2392-7.

Function and regulation of heat shock factor 2 during mouse embryogenesis.

Rallu M(1), Loones M, Lallemand Y, Morimoto R, Morange M, Mezger V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire du Stress, Ecole Normale Superieure,
Paris, France. rallu@wotan.ens.fr

The spontaneous expression of heat shock genes during development is well
documented in many animal species, but the mechanisms responsible for this
developmental regulation are only poorly understood. In vertebrates, additional
heat shock transcription factors, distinct from the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
involved in the stress response, were suggested to be involved in this
developmental control. In particular, the mouse HSF2 has been found to be active 
in testis and during preimplantation development. However, the role of HSF2 and
its mechanism of activation have remained elusive due to the paucity of data on
its expression during development. In this study, we have examined HSF2
expression during the postimplantation phase of mouse development. Our data show 
a developmental regulation of HSF2, which is expressed at least until 15.5 days
of embryogenesis. It becomes restricted to the central nervous system during the 
second half of gestation. It is expressed in the ventricular layer of the neural 
tube which contains mitotically active cells but not in postmitotic neurons.
Parallel results were obtained for mRNA, protein, and activity levels,
demonstrating that the main level of control was transcriptional. The detailed
analysis of the activity of a luciferase reporter gene under the control of the
hsp70.1 promoter, as well as the description of the protein expression patterns
of the major heat shock proteins in the central nervous system, show that HSF2
and heat shock protein expression domains do not coincide. This result suggests
that HFS2 might be involved in other regulatory developmental pathways and paves 
the way to new functional approaches.

PMCID: PMC20098
PMID: 9122205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 7;272(10):6792-8.

The phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate enhances the heat-induced 
stress response.

Holmberg CI(1), Leppä S, Eriksson JE, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Abo Akademi University,
FIN-20521 Turku, Finland.

Induction of heat shock gene expression is mediated by specific heat shock
transcription factors (HSFs), but the signaling pathways leading to activation of
HSFs are poorly understood. To elucidate whether protein kinase C-responsive
signaling pathways could be involved in the regulation of heat shock gene
expression, we have examined the effects of the protein kinase C activator
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) on the heat-induced stress response in
K562 cells. We demonstrate that TPA treatment markedly enhances heat shock gene
expression during heat stress, although TPA alone does not induce the heat shock 
response. This TPA-mediated enhancement can initially be detected as an
accelerated acquisition of DNA binding and transcriptional activity of HSF1
resulting in elevated Hsp70 protein concentrations. In the presence of TPA, the
attenuation of HSF1 DNA binding activity during continuous exposure to heat shock
occurs more rapidly and in concert with the appearance of newly synthesized
Hsp70, which supports earlier studies on the autoregulatory role of Hsp70 in
deactivation of HSF1. During heat stress, a correlation between the
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 and its transcriptional activity was observed, in
both the presence and the absence of TPA. Our results show that the heat-induced 
stress response can be significantly modulated by activation of protein kinase
C-responsive signaling pathways.

PMID: 9045713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mech Ageing Dev. 1997 Mar;94(1-3):233-49.

Attenuated stress responses in young and old human lymphocytes.

Jurivich DA(1), Qiu L, Welk JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA. jurivich@uic.edu

Aging generally is understood to be a period defined by altered responses to
physiological stress. At the molecular level, several stress responses involving 
specific gene expression have been revealed, and thermal stress has been tightly 
linked to induction of the heat shock gene family (D.A. Jurivich. In E. Bittar
(ed.), Principles of Medical Biology, Vol. 4, JAI press, San Diego, 1996, pp.
411-462). Perturbations in heat shock gene transcription consistently have been
noted in senescent cells from all species examined thus far. Because heat shock
proteins serve several vital functions in the immune system, changes in the
thermal stress response could potentially contribute to immunosenescence.
Inadequate promoter priming by the transactivator or heat shock genes, heat shock
factor 1 (HSF1), is thought to account for age-dependent diminution in expression
of these genes, although the exact mechanism for this loss is not clearly
understood. We have found that human lymphocytes exhibit an age-dependent loss in
HSF1-DNA binding, although a range of binding has been observed in both young and
old donor cells. This report characterizes a subset of young and old human donor 
lymphocytes that are non-responders to thermal stress defined by the absence of
HSF1-DNA binding after a 42 degrees C heat shock. Whole cell extracts from these 
donor cells have the capacity to inhibit HSF1-DNA binding when mixed with
pre-activated HSF1 from HeLa cells. This inhibitory activity is lost upon heat
denaturation and does not appear to be protease mediated. Serial passage of
lymphoblasts recapitulates loss of heat inducible HSF1-DNA observed in old donor 
lymphocytes, thus suggesting that loss of replicative potential and aging lead to
altered stress responses. Uncoupling of the thermal response and its potential
relevance to apoptosis and aging are discussed.

PMID: 9147375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Cell Physiol. 1997 Mar;170(3):255-62.

Prostaglandins stimulate the stress-induced synthesis of hsp27 and alpha B
crystallin.

Ito H(1), Okamoto K, Kato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Aichi Human Service Center, Japan.

The effects were examined of various prostaglandins (prostaglandin A1, A2, J2,
E2, and D2) on the stress-induced accumulation of hsp27 and alpha B crystallin in
C6 rat glioma cells. The levels of hsp27 and alpha B crystallin, which were
determined by specific immunoassays, were low in cells in confluent cultures. The
levels of the two proteins increased after exposure of cells to heat (42 degrees 
C for 30 min) or arsenite (50 microM for 1 h). Cells exposed to 10 microM each of
prostaglandin A1, A2, or J2 for 1 h resulted in stimulation of the binding to the
heat shock element (HSE) of heat shock transcription factor (HSF). However, there
was no phosphorylation-dependent mobility shift of HSF1 and no subsequent
increase in the transcription and translation for hsp27, alpha B crystallin, and 
hsp70. When cells were exposed to arsenite in the presence of 10-40 microM
prostaglandin, the accumulation of hsp27 and alpha B crystallin in cells was
enhanced markedly. The levels of hsp70 also increased in cells that had been
treated with arsenite in the presence of a prostaglandin, as estimated by Western
blot analysis. Northern blot analysis revealed that the expression of messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) for hsp27, alpha B crystallin, and hsp70 was enhanced in cells that 
had been exposed to arsenite in the presence of each prostaglandin. Similar
stimulatory effects of prostaglandins also were observed in the case of the
heat-induced responses of hsp27, alpha B crystallin, and hsp70. Gel mobility
shift assays revealed that each prostaglandin prolonged the arsenite-induced
binding of HSF to HSE. These results suggest that the pharmacological dose of
prostaglandins stimulates the stress-induced synthesis of stress proteins via
activation of the HSF.

PMID: 9066782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 1997 Feb 14;272(7):4094-102.

Hyperphosphorylation of heat shock transcription factor 1 is correlated with
transcriptional competence and slow dissociation of active factor trimers.

Xia W(1), Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

In the course of its activation by heat and other stresses, the inactive monomer 
of human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is converted to a DNA-binding
homotrimer and is hyperphosphorylated. At least four Ser/Thr residues in HSF1
appeared to be inducibly phosphorylated during heat shock. Ser/Thr protein kinase
inhibitors inhibited, and protein phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A and phorbol
ester enhanced, hsp70-CAT reporter gene expression but not heat shock element DNA
binding activity in HeLa cells undergoing a moderate heat shock. Calyculin A
(5-20 nM) caused hyperphosphorylation of HSF1, the extent of which was comparable
to that produced by moderate to severe heat shock. Upon recovery from a 42
degrees C/30 min-heat shock, HSF1 trimers disassembled quantitatively within 2 h.
Calyculin A interfered with the dissociation of HSF1 trimers. Thus,
hyperphosphorylation increases the effective half-life of the HSF1 trimer, which 
may prolong factor activity subsequent to heat shock. Hyperphosphorylation also
dramatically stimulated the transactivation function of HSF1: exposure to
calyculin A of cells induced to form inactive HSF1 trimers resulted in the
conversion of the inactive to active trimers. Given that deletion of certain
sequences renders HSF1 constitutively active, these results suggested that the
activation of HSF1 trimers by calyculin A was a consequence of
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 rather than of a downstream factor.

PMID: 9020119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1997 Feb;53(2):198-211.

Heat shock and the role of the HSPs during neural plate induction in early
mammalian CNS and brain development.

Walsh D(1), Li Z, Wu Y, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, University of Sydney, N.S.W.,
Australia. daw@doolittle.vetsci.su.oz.au

We have investigated the early development expressional of the heat shock protein
genes (hsps) and HSP synthesis and their role during neuroectoderm induction,
differentiation and early CNS formation. The expression and kinetics of 90,
73/71, 47 and 27 HSPs on neuroectoderm differentiation was compared under normal 
and stressed conditions. The role of HSPs on neuroctoderm cell fate including
thermotolerance and apoptosis using a whole in vitro embryo culture system was
studied. Hsp expression appears closely linked in early mammalian development to 
critical differentiation and proliferation stages in early brain and heart
formation. The hsps are developmentally activated around blastula stage and HSPs 
are constitutively expressed at high levels during neural tube closure and are
heat shock responsive. Using both Northern analysis, confocal microscopy and
whole mount in situ hybridisation we have identified the mRNA hsp transcripts and
HSPs during organogenesis. HSPs were detected during neuroectoderm cell induction
and differentiation with the hsp mRNA being tightly regulated during the cell
cycle of neuroectoderm especially at early fore-, mid-, hindbrain and heart
formation. The 'chaperone' functions of the HSPs are well known, recently during 
gastrulation the HSP47 and 27 have been shown to specifically bind and fold to
nascent collagen and actin molecules respectively. This role is essential for the
formation of the basement membrane, extra cellular matrix and neural crest
migration during neural plate development. HSP function was observed by using
anti-sense strategy, short '5 anti-sense cDNA' hsp oligonucleotides inhibited hsp
expression during gastrulation in the whole embryo cultures. The developmental
activation of the heat shock element (HSE) is essential to our understanding of
the HSPs role in neuronal cell fate. Using specific polyclonal antibodies to HSF1
and 2 (Dr Nakai, Kyoto University) the expression of heat shock factors (HSFs)
during neuroectoderm differentiation was examined. Using Western analysis,
confocal microscopy and flow cytometry HSF1 and 2 were identified and studied
under both normal and heat shocked conditions. During gastrulation higher levels 
of HSF1 and 2 were identified in the neuroectoderm layer especially in regions of
the fore-, mid- and hindbrain. The heat shock response and activation of the HSPs
90, 70, 47 and 27 families have been correlated with HSF1 and 2. The HSF1 appears
to be present in all early embryonic cells but appears not to bind to the HSE
until early head fold stage at gastrulation when the presence of HSF2 is
observed. During neuroectoderm differentiation the activation of HSF1 and 2
appears to correlate with high constitutive expression of many of the hsps
specifically hsp90, 73, 71, 47 and 27 being tightly regulated by the cell cycle
at neurulation.

PMID: 9118008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1997 Feb;53(2):191-7.

Regulation of hsp expression during rodent spermatogenesis.

Sarge KD(1), Cullen KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky,
Lexington 40536-0084, USA. kdsarge@pop.uky.edu

Spermatogenesis is the process by which immature male germ cells, through a
complex series of events involving mitosis, meiosis, and cellular
differentiation, eventually become mature spermatozoa capable of fertilizing an
ovum. This process involves the developmental progression of male germ cells
through a number of spermatogenetic cell types, each of which is characterized by
unique features of morphology, cellular associations, and specialized functions. 
The unique features of each germ cell type are dictated, to a large degree, by
the patterns of protein expression characteristic of each cell type. This review 
will examine two different aspects of the regulated expression of heat shock
proteins in spermatogenic cells. First, we will review studies showing that the
expression of several different members of both the hsp70 as well as hsp90
families of heat shock proteins is regulated during the differentiation of these 
cells. Second, we will review studies which have examined the induction of hsp
expression in spermatogenic cells following exposure to elevated temperatures.
Next, we will review the role of the transcription factors, heat shock factor 1
(HSF1) and HSF2 in the regulation of expression of hsps in the testis. One
interesting and unique function of the male reproductive system in many species
is the maintenance of the testes at a temperature below that of the other tissues
of the animal. The importance of precise thermoregulation of the testis is
evidenced by the fact that even slight elevations of scrotal temperature are
associated with infertility. The results of recent studies have suggested a
potential involvement of the cellular stress response in the mechanism
responsible for these inhibitory effects of elevated testis temperature on
spermatogenesis. Possible mechanisms are discussed.

PMID: 9118007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Protein Expr Purif. 1997 Feb;9(1):27-32.

Expression and purification of human heat-shock transcription factor 1.

Soncin F(1), Prevelige R, Calderwood SK.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Center for Radiation Therapy, Harvard Medical School, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Heat-shock factor 1 (HSF1) is a 57-kDa cytoplasmic protein which binds to the
promoters of heat-shock genes and activates transcription during heat shock. We
describe here the expression and purification of the 529 amino acids form of
human HSF1. We designed a new and complete purification protocol involving
ammonium sulfate precipitation, heparin-Sepharose affinity, and ion-exchange
chromatography, which allows the purification of large amounts of pure and active
recombinant protein. HSF1 isolated by this method is pure as that assessed by
SDS-PAGE and reverse-phase HPLC. The purified protein is recognized by specific
anti-HSF1 antibodies, binds to heat-shock elements, and activates the promoter of
the heat-shock protein 70A gene in vitro.

PMID: 9116498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Cell Biochem. 1997 Feb;167(1-2):145-52.

Heat shock gene-expression in HSP-70 and HSF1 gene-transfected human epidermoid
A-431 cells.

Ding XZ(1), Tsokos GC, Smallridge RC, Kiang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

Thermotolerant cells display attenuated heat shock protein 70 kD (HSP-70) gene
expression and signal transduction such as intracellular Ca2+ concentration and
inositol trisphosphate in response to sublethal heat. To further investigate the 
regulation of heat shock gene expression, we developed constructs containing
human HSP-70 and HSF1 genes and transfected human epidermoid A-431 cells. These
cells were chosen because skin cells are especially vulnerable to heat shock and 
other environmental stressors. We report that A431 cells can be successfully
transfected with HSP-70 and HSF1 genes as shown by the elevated levels of
respective message and protein. Overexpression of HSP-70 in cells transfected
with HSP-70 gene led to a down-regulation of the HSF1 gene expression.
Interestingly, transfection of cells with the HSF1 gene was not associated with
increased expression of HSP-70. Exposure of HSF1 gene-transfected cells to heat
resulted in a transient but significant increase in HSP-70 gene expression as
compared to that found in vector-transfected cells, which was completely
inhibited by treatment with staurosporine. In conclusion, we have demonstrated
successful transfection of human A-431 cells with HSF1 and HSP-70 genes, where
the regulation of their expression can be studied.

PMID: 9059991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):778-88.

Evidence for the involvement of mouse heat shock factor 1 in the atypical
expression of the HSP70.1 heat shock gene during mouse zygotic genome activation.

Christians E(1), Michel E, Adenot P, Mezger V, Rallu M, Morange M, Renard JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie du Développement, INRA, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
Elisabeth.Christians@ulg.ac.be

The mouse HSP70.1 gene, which codes for a heat shock protein (hsp70), is highly
transcribed at the onset of zygotic genome activation (ZGA). This expression,
which occurs in the absence of stress, is then repressed. It has been claimed
that this gene does not exhibit a stress response until the blastocyst stage. The
promoter of HSP70.1 contains four heat shock element (HSE) boxes which are the
binding sites of heat shock transcription factors (HSF). We have been studying
the presence and localization of the mouse HSFs, mHSF1 and mHSF2, at different
stages of embryo development. We show that mHSF1 is already present at the
one-cell stage and concentrated in the nucleus. Moreover, by mutagenizing HSE
sequences and performing competition experiments (in transgenic embryos with the 
HSP70.1 promoter inserted before a reporter gene), we show that, in contrast with
previous findings, HSE boxes are involved in this spontaneous activation.
Therefore, we suggest that HSF1 and HSE are important in this transient
expression at the two-cell stage and that the absence of typical inducibility at 
this early stage of development results mainly from the high level of spontaneous
transcription of this gene during the ZGA.

PMCID: PMC231804
PMID: 9001232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 17;272(3):1742-6.

Characterization of hypothermia-induced cellular stress response in mouse
tissues.

Cullen KE(1), Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0084, USA.

Cells respond to adverse environmental conditions by expressing heat shock
proteins, which serve to protect cells from harmful effects of the stress
conditions. In this study we demonstrated that mice subjected to whole body
hypothermia induced the cellular stress response, resulting in the increased
expression of hsp72 mRNA in brain, heart, kidney, liver, and lung. We performed a
detailed analysis of the major parameters of the stress response and found that
cold induction of hsp expression is mediated by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), which
is also responsible for heat induction of the cellular stress response. However, 
there are differences in the mechanisms of HSF1 activation by hypothermia versus 
hyperthermia, as hypothermia does not cause the hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 that
is characteristic of heat-activated HSF1.

PMID: 8999855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Dev Biol. 1997 Jan 1;181(1):47-63.

Distinct stress-inducible and developmentally regulated heat shock transcription 
factors in Xenopus oocytes.

Gordon S(1), Bharadwaj S, Hnatov A, Ali A, Ovsenek N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

The presence of a maternal pool of heat shock factor (HSF) in Xenopus oocytes has
been suggested by two lines of evidence from previous studies. First, heat shock 
response element (HSE)-binding activity is induced in heat-shocked eggs and
embryos prior to expression of zygotic HSF. Second, expression from microinjected
heat shock protein promoters in oocytes is induced upon heat shock. To date,
however, endogenous oocyte HSF molecules have not been detected, nor has
induction of HSE-binding activity been directly demonstrated. Here we report the 
detection of distinct stress-inducible and developmentally regulated HSE-binding 
activities of endogenous oocyte factors. Exposure of defolliculated oocytes to
heat, cadmium, and arsenite resulted in the formation of an HSE-specific complex 
detectable by gel mobility shift assay. Induction of HSE-binding activity by each
of these stressors corresponded to increased expression from a microinjected
hsp70 promoter. The stress-inducible HSE-binding complex was recognized by
antiserum against mammalian HSF1, but not by HSF2 antiserum, suggesting that a
Xenopus homologue of HSF1 is the major component of this activity. The
HSE-binding activity of HSF1 was induced by stress treatments of stage I through 
VI oocytes, an indication that it is responsive to stress throughout oogenesis.
During recovery from heat shock, the HSF1-HSE complex rapidly declined to control
levels, but was induced for prolonged periods in oocytes exposed to continuous
stress, a pattern unlike the transient activation previously observed in
fertilized eggs or embryos. The kinetics of HSF1 activation in oocytes suggests
that a key protein(s) regulating attenuation of the stress response is present at
exceedingly low levels or is somehow modified during preembryonic development. We
also detected an unusual constitutive HSE-binding complex in unstressed stage I
and II oocytes, but not in later stage oocytes, eggs, developing embryos, or A6
cells. This constitutive complex was unaffected by heat or chemical treatments
and was not recognized by either HSF1 or HSF2 antiserum. Appearance of the
constitutive HSE-binding activity during oogenesis corresponded closely with peak
levels of hsp70 mRNA detected by Northern blot analysis of RNA from staged
oocytes. We suggest that the constitutive HSE-binding activity in early oocytes
is formed by a unique developmentally regulated heat shock factor that may play a
role in the expression of heat shock proteins during early stages of oogenesis.

PMID: 9015264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Clin Invest. 1997 Jan 1;99(1):136-43.

Heat shock factor-1 protein in heat shock factor-1 gene-transfected human
epidermoid A431 cells requires phosphorylation before inducing heat shock
protein-70 production.

Ding XZ(1), Tsokos GC, Kiang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, Division of Medicine, Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research, Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

Heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) is a transcriptional factor that binds to heat shock
elements located on the promoter region of heat shock protein genes. The purpose 
of this study was to further investigate the regulation of the expression of the 
heat shock protein-70 (HSP-70) gene. The HSF1 gene was inserted into pCDNA3
plasmid and then transfected into human epidermoid A431 cells using the CaOP3
method. Control cells were transfected with vector alone. Expression of HSP-70,
HSF1, and HSF2 genes and protein were determined. We found a significant increase
in the expression of the HSF1 gene, but not HSP-70 and HSF2 genes, in the HSF1
gene-transfected cells. The amount of HSF1-heat shock element complex was
significantly increased in both the nucleus and cytosol in HSF1 gene-transfected 
cells, indicating increased synthesis of HSF1. The amount of HSP-72 in these
cells did not change. Therefore, overexpression of HSF1 protein failed to
initiate transcription of the HSP-70 gene. Subsequently, we treated the cells
with 1 microM PMA (a protein kinase C stimulator), and HSP-70 mRNA and protein
were measured at 1 or 4 h of the treatment, respectively. The levels of both
HSP-70 mRNA and HSP-72 protein were significantly increased in nontransfected and
transfected cells; the levels of HSP-72 in HSF1 gene-transfected cells were
greater than that found in the vector-transfected cells. The PMA-induced increase
in HSP-72 protein peaked 8 h after treatment with PMA and returned to baseline
levels at 72 h. This increase was blocked by a PKC inhibitor, staurosporine.
After treatment with PMA, HSF1 translocated quickly from cytosol to nucleus. The 
results suggest that phosphorylation of newly synthesized HSF1 and possibly of
other factors are necessary for the induction of HSP-72. Activation of PKC can
cause phosphorylation of HSF1, which leads to an enhanced but transient increase 
in HSP-70 production.

PMCID: PMC507777
PMID: 9011567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):469-81.

HSF4, a new member of the human heat shock factor family which lacks properties
of a transcriptional activator.

Nakai A(1), Tanabe M, Kawazoe Y, Inazawa J, Morimoto RI, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Kyoto University, Japan. nakai@chest.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) mediate the inducible transcriptional
response of genes that encode heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones. In
vertebrates, three related HSF genes (HSF1 to -3) and the respective gene
products (HSFs) have been characterized. We report the cloning and
characterization of human HSF4 (hHSF4), a novel member of the hHSF family that
shares properties with other members of the HSF family yet appears to be
functionally distinct. hHSF4 lacks the carboxyl-terminal hydrophobic repeat which
is shared among all vertebrate HSFs and has been suggested to be involved in the 
negative regulation of DNA binding activity. hHSF4 is preferentially expressed in
the human heart, brain, skeletal muscle, and pancreas. Transient transfection of 
hHSF4 in HeLa cells, which do not express hHSF4, results in a constitutively
active DNA binding trimer which, unlike other members of the HSF family, lacks
the properties of a transcriptional activator. Constitutive overexpression of
hHSF4 in HeLa cells results in reduced expression of the endogenous hsp70, hsp90,
and hsp27 genes. hHSF4 represents a novel hHSF that exhibits tissue-specific
expression and functions to repress the expression of genes encoding heat shock
proteins and molecular chaperones.

PMCID: PMC231772
PMID: 8972228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. FEBS Lett. 1996 Dec 16;399(3):259-63.

The heat shock factor and mitochondrial Hsp70 are necessary for survival of heat 
shock in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Nwaka S(1), Mechler B, von Ahsen O, Holzer H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

A heat shock recovery assay on solid medium (Nwaka et al. (1995) J. Biol. Chem.
270, 10193-10198) as well as the classical cell counting method were used to
investigate the function of some heat shock proteins in thermotolerance. We show 
that expression of intact heat shock factor protein (HSF), which regulates the
stress induced expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs), is necessary for
recovery from heat shock. A HSF1 mutant (hsf1-m3) which does not induce the
expression of some heat shock proteins at heat stress (37-40 degrees C) is
defective in recovery after heat shock at 50-52 degrees C compared to a
corresponding wild-type strain in both stationary and exponentially growing
cells. Using two temperature sensitive mutants of the mitochondrial Hsp70 (ssc1-2
and ssc1-3) encoded by the SSC1 gene, we show that the ssc1-3 mutant, which has a
mutation in the ATPase domain, is defective in recovery after heat shock in
contrast to the ssc1-2 mutant, which has a mutation in the peptide binding
domain. Different binding capacities for unfolded proteins are shown to be the
molecular reason for the observed phenotypes. The thermotolerance defect of the
hsf1-m3 and ssc1-3 mutants is demonstrated for both glucose and glycerol media.

PMID: 8985158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32192-6.

2-Cyclopenten-1-one, a new inducer of heat shock protein 70 with antiviral
activity.

Rossi A(1), Elia G, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine CNR, Viale K. Marx, 43, 00137 Rome, Italy. 
santoro@biocell.irmkant.rm.cnr.it

The cytoprotective role of heat shock proteins (HSP) described in variety of
human diseases, including ischemia, inflammation, and infection, suggests new
therapeutic strategies relying upon the development of drugs that selectively
turn on heat shock genes. Cyclopentenone prostaglandins, which contain an alpha, 
beta-unsaturated carbonyl group in the cyclopentane ring and possess antiviral
activity against several RNA and DNA viruses, were shown to function as signal
for HSP synthesis in a nonstressful situation in a variety of mammalian cells. We
now report that 2-cyclopenten-1-one selectively induces the expression of the
70-kDa HSP (HSP70) in human cells, through cycloheximide-sensitive activation of 
heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). The alpha, beta-unsaturated carbonyl
group is the key structure triggering HSF1 activation. Induction is associated
with antiviral activity during infection with vesicular stomatitis virus. These
results identify the molecular structure of natural prostaglandins responsible
for HSF1 activation and open new perspectives in the search for novel antiviral
and cytoprotective drugs.

PMID: 8943275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):32168-73.

Environment-sensitive labels in multiplex fluorescence analyses of protein-DNA
complexes.

Drees BL(1), Rye HS, Glazer AN, Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3206, USA. nelson@garnet.berkeley.edu

Fluorescein is widely used for protein labeling because of its high extinction
coefficient and fluorescence emission quantum yield. However, its emission is
readily quenched by various pathways. We exploit these properties of fluorescein 
to examine the self-association of a DNA binding protein and determine the amount
of the protein in gel-shifted complexes with specific DNA. A construct
(HSFDT385SH) of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF) was expressed that
contains the DNA-binding and trimerization domains, residues 192-385 of HSF, with
four additional COOH-terminal residues, GMLC, and then labeled at the
COOH-terminal cysteine with fluorescein 5-maleimide to form HSFDT385-Fl. The
fluorescence increase accompanying the formation of heterotrimers on titration of
HSFDT385-Fl with HSFDT385SH) led to an estimate of 3 x 10(-16) M2 for the
equilibrium constant for trimerization of HSFDT385SH. HSFDT385-Fl fluorescence
also increased 1.7-fold on binding to specific DNA, but not to nonspecific DNA.
The protein and DNA content of the several gel-shifted complexes of HSFDT385-Fl
(lambdamaxem 532 nm) with specific DNA labeled noncovalently with the energy
transfer heterodimer TOTAB (lambdamaxem 658 nm) were accurately determined by a
two-color fluorescence emission assay with 488 nm excitation.

PMID: 8943271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1996 Dec;1(4):251-60.

Diminished heat shock response in the aged myocardium.

Locke M(1), Tanguay RM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physical and Health Education, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Locke@PHE.utoronto.ca

Induction of heat shock proteins (Hsps), Hsp72 in particular, has been associated
with myocardial protection. Since a decreased Hsp response has been reported to
occur with aging, it was of interest to determine if hearts from aged animals
also demonstrate an altered heat shock response and subsequent myocardial
protection. Adult (6 months old) and aged (22 months old) Fischer 344 rats were
heat stressed by raising their rectal temperatures to 41 degrees C for 10 min. At
selected times following heat stress (0-24 h) hearts were examined for heat shock
transcription factor trimerization and DNA-binding activity (Hsf1 activation),
Hsp72 mRNA accumulation, Hsp72 and Hsf1 protein content, as well as, protection
from ischemia using the Langendorff isolated heart model. Following heat stress, 
hearts from aged animals demonstrated a 47% reduction in Hsf1 activation, a
reduction in Hsp72 mRNA and a 35% reduction in Hsp72 protein content, compared to
hearts from adults. Interestingly, myocardial Hsf1 protein content was similar
between aged and adult animals. Hearts from heat stressed adult animals (24-h
prior) demonstrated an enhanced postischemic recovery as indicated by a greater
recovery of left ventricular pressure and rate of contraction (P < 0.05), while
hearts from heat stressed aged animals failed to demonstrate an enhanced
postischemic recovery. These results suggest that hearts from aged animals
exhibit an impaired ability to produce the protective Hsps and thus, may explain,
at least in part, the increased susceptibility of aged hearts to stress.

PMCID: PMC376462
PMID: 9222610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1996 Dec;1(4):237-50.

A pathway of multi-chaperone interactions common to diverse regulatory proteins: 
estrogen receptor, Fes tyrosine kinase, heat shock transcription factor Hsf1, and
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor.

Nair SC(1), Toran EJ, Rimerman RA, Hjermstad S, Smithgall TE, Smith DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha
68198, USA.

A variety of regulatory proteins, including different classes of transcription
factors and protein kinases, have been identified in complexes with Hsp90. On
careful examination of unactivated progesterone receptor complexes, eight
different protein participants have been identified, and each can be considered a
component of the cytoplasmic molecular chaperone machinery. These proteins are
Hsp90, Hsp70, Hip, p60, p23, FKBP51, FKBP52 and Cyp40. Studies in a cell-free
assembly system have helped to define a highly ordered, dynamic pathway for
assembly of progesterone receptor complexes. In the present study, target
proteins other than progesterone receptor were used in this cell-free system to
assemble complexes in vitro and to compare the composition of resulting
complexes. Targets used were human estrogen receptor, human Fes protein-tyrosine 
kinase, human heat shock transcription factor Hsf1, and human aryl hydrocarbon
receptor. The striking similarity of resulting target complexes with previously
characterized progesterone receptor complexes suggest that each of these targets 
undergoes a common assembly pathway involving multiple chaperone components in
addition to Hsp90.

PMCID: PMC376461
PMID: 9222609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Genes Dev. 1996 Nov 1;10(21):2782-93.

Repression of human heat shock factor 1 activity at control temperature by
phosphorylation.

Knauf U(1), Newton EM, Kyriakis J, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

Human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is responsible for stress-induced 
transcription of heat shock protein genes. The activity of the HSF1
transcriptional activation domains is modulated by a separate regulatory domain, 
which confers repression at control temperature and heat inducibility. We show
here that two specific proline-directed serine motifs are important for function 
of the regulatory domain: Mutation of these serines to alanine derepresses HSF1
activity at control temperature, and mutation to glutamic acid, mimicking a
phosphorylated serine, results in normal repression at control temperature and
normal heat shock inducibility. Tryptic mapping shows that these serines are the 
major phosphorylation sites of HSF1 at control temperature in vivo. Stimulation
of the Raf/ERK pathway in vivo results in an increased level of phosphorylation
of these major sites and the regulatory domain is an excellent substrate in vitro
for the mitogen-activated MAPK/ERK. We conclude that phosphorylation of the
regulatory domain of HSF1 decreases the activity of HSF1 at control temperature, 
and propose a mechanism for modification of HSF1 activity by growth control
signals.

PMID: 8946918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Circulation. 1996 Nov 1;94(9):2185-92.

Reperfusion causes significant activation of heat shock transcription factor 1 in
ischemic rat heart.

Nishizawa J(1), Nakai A, Higashi T, Tanabe M, Nomoto S, Matsuda K, Ban T, Nagata 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The myocardial protective role of heat shock protein (HSP) has been
demonstrated, and there has been increasing interest in stress response in the
heart. We examined the DNA-binding activity of heat shock transcription factor
(HSF), by which the transcription of heat shock genes is mainly regulated, during
heat shock or ischemia/reperfusion in isolated rat heart.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat hearts were isolated and perfused with Krebs-Henseleit
buffer by the Langendorff method. Whole-cell extracts were prepared for gel
mobility shift assay using oligonucleotides containing the heat shock element,
which is present upstream of all heat shock genes. Induction of mRNAs for HSP70, 
HSP90, and GRP78 (glucose-regulated protein) was examined by Northern blot
analysis. Although the activation of HSF during global ischemia was weak and
rapidly attenuated, postischemic reperfusion induced a significant activation of 
HSF. In addition, although HSP70 mRNA was hardly induced during ischemia, its
burst induction was detected during postischemic reperfusion. Supershift assays
using specific antisera for HSF1 and HSF2 revealed that ischemia/reperfusion as
well as heat shock induced the activation of HSF1 in hearts. Although the
expression of HSP70 mRNA during heat shock was more vigorous than the expression 
during ischemia/reperfusion, the induction of HSP90 mRNA in postischemic
reperfusion was significantly greater than that in heat shock.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated that reperfusion causes a significant
activation of HSF1 in ischemia-reperfused heart. The striking contrast between
the induction of HSP70 mRNA and that of HSP90 mRNA suggests the presence of
regulatory mechanisms other than HSF.

PMID: 8901670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochem J. 1996 Oct 15;319 ( Pt 2):601-6.

Activation of heat-shock transcription factor 1 by hypertonic shock in 3T3 cells.

Alfieri R(1), Petronini PG, Urbani S, Borghetti AF.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Generale, Università degli Studi di Parma, Italy.

The exposure of 3T3 cells to a medium made hypertonic by the addition of NaCl
induced activation of a heat-shock transcription factor (HSF). This activation,
as monitored by gel-mobility-shift assays, occurred within 10 min of hypertonic
shock and was dose-dependent in relation to the osmotic strength of the medium up
to 0.7 osM. Competition analysis indicated that the effect of hypertonic shock on
HSF binding activity was specific. The magnitude of the heat-shock element
(HSE)-HSF binding induced by incubating the cells in a 0.7 osM medium was
comparable in intensity and time course with that induced by a 44 degrees C heat 
shock. Following removal of the stressors, the decrease in HSF-HSE binding was
more rapid in hypertonicity-shocked than in heat-shocked cells. Treatment of the 
cells with cycloheximide did not inhibit HSF-HSE binding, indicating that the
activation was independent of new protein synthesis. By using a specifically
directed polyclonal serum, HSF1 was identified as the transcription factor
involved in the hypertonicity-induced activation. HSF was also activated when a
membrane-impermeable osmolyte such as sucrose was used to increase the osmolarity
of the medium. However, no HSF-HSE binding was observed after addition of
glycerol (a freely membrane-permeable osmolyte) in excess. There was a temporal
relationship between the hypertonicity-induced volume decrease, the increase in
the intracellular K+ concentration and the induction of HSF-HSE binding. In
contrast, an increase in the intracellular Na+ concentration was not required to 
induce HSF-HSE binding. However, unlike the heat-shock response, the activation
of HSF by hypertonic shock did not lead to elongation of the RNA transcript of
heat-shock protein 70.

PMCID: PMC1217809
PMID: 8912700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 4;271(40):24769-75.

Evidence that a rapidly turning over protein, normally degraded by proteasomes,
regulates hsp72 gene transcription in HepG2 cells.

Zhou M(1), Wu X, Ginsberg HN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Heat shock protein 72/73 (Hsp70) is a cytosolic molecular chaperone that carries 
out fundamental roles under both normal and stress situations. There is great
interest in delineating the mechanisms whereby Hsp70 levels are regulated. We
observed that N-acetyl-leucyl-leucyl-norleucinal (ALLN), a synthetic aldehydic
tripeptide that inhibits proteasomes, markedly induced Hsp70 levels (up to
30-fold above base line in HepG2 cells and human endothelial cells). Induction of
Hsp70 by ALLN was dose-dependent and not related to cell toxicity. ALLN
selectively increased Hsp70 levels without affecting Hsp25, Hsp27, Hsp60, Hsp86, 
Hsp90, Hsp104, or Bip (immunoglobulin heavy chain binding protein) in HepG2
cells. ALLN induced Hsp70 not only by stabilizing the protein but also by
dramatically increasing its synthesis. The modulation of Hsp70 synthesis by ALLN 
resulted from a rapid and marked increase in transcription of the hsp72 gene,
since the induction of hsp72 mRNA was blocked in cells co-treated with
actinomycin D. hsp72 mRNA levels were affected in a time-dependent manner by
exposure to ALLN; significant elevations occurred within 60 min of treatment, and
a decline to background levels was observed by 7 h of recovery. The ALLN-induced 
increase in hsp72 gene expression was associated with trimerization of the heat
shock transcriptional factor (HSF1). ALLN did not affect the steady-state level
of HSF1 protein. The effects of ALLN appeared to require de novo protein
synthesis, since the induction of both HSF1 trimerization and hsp72 transcription
was blocked by co-treatment with cycloheximide. When we tested a series of
protease inhibitors, only the related aldehydic tripeptides,
N-acetyl-leucyl-leucyl-methioninal and the proteasome inhibitor,
Cbz-leucyl-leucyl-leucinal, induced Hsp70 levels. The specific proteasome
inhibitor, lactacystin, which has a different structure, also induced Hsp70
levels. Overall, our results suggest that a rapidly turning over protein that is 
normally degraded by proteasomes may be involved in the regulation of Hsp70
synthesis via effects on the hsp70 transcriptional factor, HSF1.

PMID: 8798747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;15(10):897-905.

Identification and characterization of promoter elements responsible for the
induction of the albumin gene by heat shock in early embryonic rat liver.

Swamynathan SK(1), Revathi CJ, Srinivas UK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India.

We had reported earlier that the expression of albumin increases upon heat shock 
in embryonic rat liver cells at about 12-13 days of gestation. Here, we report on
the identification of heat shock elements (HSEs) within -450 bp of the rat
albumin promoter using chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) assays done with 
the extracts from H4II-E-C3 cells transfected with plasmids carrying the CAT
reporter gene under the control of different deletion fragments of the rat
albumin promoter. Gel retardation assays done with synthetic oligonucleotides
representing putative HSEs in the rat albumin promoter and H4II-E-C3 cell
extracts show that the heat shock factors bind this region in a sequence-specific
and reversible manner. Super-shift assays demonstrated that the HSEs present in
the rat albumin promoter are bound by HSF1 and not by HSF2. This effect of heat
shock on the expression of rat serum albumin is seen only in the liver and is not
observed in other tissues, suggesting that HSF-mediated activation of albumin
gene cannot overcome the negative regulatory factors present in other tissues. In
addition to the HSEs, we have identified a putative GAGA factor binding site in
the rat albumin promoter at -228 bp to -252 bp position. These GAGA repeats are
bound in a sequence-specific and reversible manner by two factors in a
nonstressed cell, whereas only one of these two factors continues to bind the
GAGA repeats under heat shock conditions. The physiological significance of these
results is discussed.

PMID: 8892761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1996 Sep;1(3):189-96.

Increased HSF activation in muscles with a high constitutive Hsp70 expression.

Locke M(1), Tanguay RM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Physical and Health Education, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. Locke@PHE.utoronto.ca

Stress-induced transcriptional regulation of the Hsps is mediated by
trimerization and binding of a pre-existing heat shock transcription factor
(HSF1) to a specific DNA sequence located in the 5' region of hsp genes, known as
the heat shock element. Hsp70 has been implicated in regulating the activation of
the HSF and, according to cell culture models, high steady-state levels of Hsp70 
are inversely correlated with HSF activation. To determine if this applies in an 
intact animal, muscles of the rat hindlimb which differ in the constitutive
expression of Hsp70, were assessed for HSF activation following heat shock.
Mobility shift gel analyses demonstrated that HSF activation was detectable in
extracts from all muscles following heat shock regardless of Hsp70 content.
However, muscles comprised predominantly of slow/Type I fibers (soleus)
demonstrated a greater HSF activation, as well as a faster HSF activation and
inactivation, than muscles comprised predominantly of fast/Type II fibers (white 
gastrocnemius). In addition, muscles pretreated by two heat shocks (24 h apart)
demonstrated a stronger HSF activation than muscles subjected to only one heat
shock. Thus, results from cell culture models demonstrating that tissue levels of
Hsp70 are inversely correlated with HSF activation, may not apply to the muscles 
of an intact animal.

PMCID: PMC248479
PMID: 9222604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Immunol. 1996 Aug 15;157(4):1669-77.

Phospholipase A2 triggers the first phase of the thermal stress response and
exhibits cell-type specificity.

Jurivich DA(1), Pangas S, Qiu L, Welk JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

To understand the relationship of inflammatory and cellular stress responses,
phospholipase A2 (PLA2) was examined for its role in the first phase of the
transcriptional response to cellular stress. Electromobility shift analysis
revealed heat shock transcription factor (HSF1)-DNA binding when HeLa S3 and
Jurkat cells were exposed to exogenous PLA2. Although PLA2-inducible HSF1-DNA
binding was comparable to thermal stress, it did not induce maximal heat shock
gene expression. PLA2-induced HSF1 was not hyperphosphorylated relative to the
heat-inducible form, thus suggesting that exogenous PLA2 affects the signal for
HSF1 multimerization but not its phosphorylation. Because inflammation often
involves elevated temperatures, the effect of PLA2 on thermal regulation of
HSF1-DNA binding activity was examined. PLA2 exposure altered the thermal
threshold for HSF1 activation, and pore-gradient gel analysis indicated that
either conformational changes or other modifications of HSF1 are being induced
when cells are treated by PLA2, thus creating a synergistic environment for HSF1 
activation into its DNA-bound state. Surprisingly, the monocyte-like cell line,
U-937, was insensitive to the action of exogenous PLA2. Neither HSF1-DNA binding 
or lowering of the temperature threshold for HSF1 activation was observed in
PLA2-treated U-937 cells. These data suggest that inflammatory mediators such as 
PLA2 partially affect transcriptional switches mediating thermal stress in some
cell types but not others. The purpose of HSF1 activation during inflammation and
its differential induction are discussed relative to these observations.

PMID: 8759754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 5;271(27):16111-8.

Inhibition of HSP70 expression by calcium ionophore A23187 in human cells. An
effect independent of the acquisition of DNA-binding activity by the heat shock
transcription factor.

Elia G(1), De Marco A, Rossi A, Santoro MG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Viale 
K. Marx, 15/43, 00137 Rome, Italy.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are induced in mammalian cells in a variety of
pathophysiological states and have an important role in cytoprotection in vitro
and in vivo. In this study, we report that the calcium ionophore A23187, a
glucose-regulated protein (GRP) inducer, dramatically inhibits HSP70 synthesis
and HSP70 mRNA transcription after induction by heat shock, sodium arsenite, or
prostaglandin A1 treatment in human K562 cells. A23187 does not suppress, and it 
actually prolongs, the DNA-binding activity of the human heat shock transcription
factor (HSF), while it alters HSF1 phosphorylation in heat shock-treated cells.
To inhibit HSP70 expression, A23187 needs to be present during heat shock, while 
treatment before or after heat shock does not affect HSP70 mRNA transcription.
The GRP inducer thapsigargin, which specifically inhibits the endoplasmic
reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, has no effect on heat-induced HSP70 synthesis, indicating 
that A23187 inhibitory activity is not due to depletion of intracellular calcium 
stores and is independent of the concomitant induction of GRP genes. Inhibition
of HSP70 expression is correlated with alterations in HSF1 phosphorylation in
heat-shocked cells, but not in sodium arsenite-treated cells, indicating that
different mechanisms may be involved in mediating A23187 inhibitory activity.

PMID: 8663271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3799-806.

Modulation of thermal induction of hsp70 expression by Ku autoantigen or its
individual subunits.

Yang SH(1), Nussenzweig A, Li L, Kim D, Ouyang H, Burgman P, Li GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Previously, we proposed a dual control mechanism for the regulation of the heat
shock response in mammalian cells: a positive control mediated by the heat shock 
transcription factor HSF1 and a negative control mediated by the constitutive
heat shock element-binding factor (CHBF). To study the physiological role of CHBF
in the regulation of heat shock response, we purified CHBF to apparent
homogeneity and showed it to be identical to the Ku autoantigen, a heterodimer
consisting of 70-kDa (Ku-70) and 86-kDa (Ku-80) polypeptides. To study further
the functional significance of Ku/CHBF in the cellular response to heat shock, we
established rodent cell lines that stably and constitutively overexpressed one or
both subunits of the human Ku protein, and examined the thermal induction of
hsp70 and other heat shock proteins in these Ku-overexpressing ing cells. We show
that expression of the human Ku-70 and Ku-80 subunits jointly or of the Ku-70
subunit alone specifically inhibits heat-induced hsp70 expression. Conversely,
expression of human Ku-80 alone does not have this effect. Thermal induction of
other heat shock proteins in all of the Ku-overexpressing cell lines appears not 
to be significantly affected, nor is the state of phosphorylation or the
DNA-binding ability of HSF1 affected. These findings support a model in which
hsp70 expression is controlled by a second regulatory factor in addition to the
positive activation of HSF1. The Ku protein, specifically the Ku-70 subunit, is
involved in the regulation of hsp70 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231376
PMID: 8668197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Genes Dev. 1996 Jun 15;10(12):1479-90.

Activator-dependent regulation of transcriptional pausing on nucleosomal
templates.

Brown SA(1), Imbalzano AN, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114,
USA.

Promoter-proximal pausing during transcriptional elongation is an important way
of regulating many diverse genes, including human c-myc and c-fos, some HIV
genes, and the Drosophila heat shock loci. To characterize the mechanisms that
regulate pausing, we have established an in vitro system using the human hsp7O
gene. We demonstrate that nucleosome formation increases by >100-fold the
duration of a transcriptional pause on the human hsp7O gene in vitro at the same 
location as pausing is observed in vivo. Readthrough of this pause is increased
by an activator that contains the human heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
transcriptional activation domains. Maximal effect of the activator requires that
the system be supplemented with fractions that have hSWI/SNF activity, which has 
been shown previously to alter nucleosome structure. No significant readthrough
is observed in the absence of activator, and neither the activator nor the
hSWI/SNF fraction affected elongation on naked DNA; therefore, these results
suggest that an activator can cause increased readthrough of promoter-proximal
pausing by decreasing the inhibitory effect of nucleosomes on transcriptional
elongation.

PMID: 8666232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 May 28;93(11):5301-6.

Heat-shock protein 104 expression is sufficient for thermotolerance in yeast.

Lindquist S(1), Kim G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA.

In all organisms, mild heat pretreatments induce tolerance to high temperatures. 
In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, such pretreatments strongly induce
heat-shock protein (Hsp) 104, and hsp104 mutations greatly reduce
high-temperature survival, indicating Hsp1O4 plays a critical role in induced
thermotolerance. Surprisingly, however, a heat-shock transcription factor
mutation (hsf1-m3) that blocks the induction of Hsps does not block induced
thermotolerance. To resolve these apparent contradictions, we reexamined Hsp
expression in hsf1-m3 cells. HsplO4 was expressed at a higher basal level in this
strain than in other S. cerevisiae strains. Moreover, whereas the hsf1-m3
mutation completely blocked the induction of Hsp26 by heat, it did not block the 
induction of Hsp1O4. HSP104 could not be deleted in hsf1-m3 cells because the
expression of heat-shock factor (and the viability of the strain) requires
nonsense suppression mediated by the yeast prion [PSI+], which in turn depends
upon Hsp1O4. To determine whether the level of Hsp1O4 expressed in hsf1-m3 cells 
is sufficient for thermotolerance, we used heterologous promoters to regulate
Hsp1O4 expression in other strains. In the presence of other inducible factors
(with a conditioning pretreatment), low levels of Hsp1O4 are sufficient to
provide full thermotolerance. More remarkably, in the absence of other inducible 
factors (without a pretreatment), high levels of Hsp1O4 are sufficient. We
conclude that Hsp1O4 plays a central role in ameliorating heat toxicity. Because 
Hsp1O4 is nontoxic and highly conserved, manipulating the expression of Hsp1OO
proteins provides an excellent prospect for manipulating thermotolerance in other
species.

PMCID: PMC39240
PMID: 8643570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell Biochem. 1996 May 24;158(2):189-92.

Rapid assay of HSF1 and HSF2 gene expression by RT-PCR.

Ding XZ(1), Smallridge RC, Galloway RJ, Kiang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

Primers were developed to allow the rapid and reliable assay of heat shock
transcriptional factors 1 and 2 in human epidermoid A431 cells by following the
protocol described in this study. Using the primers, the heat-induced increase in
heat shock transcriptional factor 1 but not 2 was observed. This is the first
report to show that heat shock increases the mRNA amount of HSF1 with no changes 
in HSF2 mRNA.

PMID: 8817481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Clin Invest. 1996 May 15;97(10):2242-50.

Glutathione depletion impairs transcriptional activation of heat shock genes in
primary cultures of guinea pig gastric mucosal cells.

Rokutan K(1), Hirakawa T, Teshima S, Honda S, Kishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, Japan.

When primary cultures of guinea pig gastric mucosal cells were exposed to heat
(43 degree C), ethanol, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), or diamide, heat shock proteins
(HSP90, HSP70, HSP60, and HSC73) were rapidly synthesized. The extent of each HSP
induction varied with the type of stress. Ethanol, H2O2, and diamide increased
the syntheses of several other undefined proteins besides the HSPs. However, none
of these proteins were induced by exposure to heat or the reagents, when
intracellular glutathione was depleted to <10% of the control level by
pretreatment with DL-buthionine-[S,R]-sulfoximine. Gel mobility shift assay using
a synthetic oligonucleotide coding HSP70 heat shock element showed that
glutathione depletion inhibited the heat- and the reagent-initiated activation of
the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and did not promote the expression of HSP70 mRNA. 
Immunoblot analysis with antiserum against HSF1 demonstrated that the
steady-state level of HSF1 was not changed in glutathione-depleted cells, but
glutathione depletion inhibited the nuclear translocation of HSF1 after exposure 
to heat stress. These results suggest that intracellular glutathione may support 
early and important biochemical events in the acquisition by gastric mucosal
cells of an adaptive response to irritants.

PMCID: PMC507303
PMID: 8636403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biol Signals. 1996 May-Jun;5(3):180-91.

Heat shock response, heat shock transcription factor and cell aging.

Lee YK(1), Manalo D, Liu AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers-The State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway 08855-1059, USA.

A characteristic feature of aging is a progressive impairment in the ability to
adapt to environmental challenges. The purpose of this article is to review the
evidence of an attenuated response to heat and physiological stresses in a number
of mammalian aging model systems, including the human diploid fibroblasts in
culture, whole animals and animal-derived cells and cell cultures, as well as
peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from human donors. Analyses of the
regulation and function of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a transcription factor
that mediates the response to heat shock, showed that while the relative
abundance of both the hsf1 transcript and the HSF1 protein did not change as a
function of age, the responsiveness of HSF1 to heat-induced activation, as
measured by its trimerization and ability to bind to the heat shock element
consensus sequence, was inversely related to the age of the cells used. Given the
fundamentally important role of heat shock proteins (HSPs) in many aspects of
protein homeostasis and signal transduction it seems likely that the inability,
or compromised ability, of aging cells and organisms to activate HSF1 and produce
HSPs in response to stress would contribute to the well-known increase in
morbidity and mortality of the aged when challenged.

PMID: 8864063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1996 Apr;1(1):33-9.

Evidence for a role of Hsp70 in the regulation of the heat shock response in
mammalian cells.

Baler R(1), Zou J, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20592, USA.

Heat and other environmental insults (stress) cause unfolding of proteins,
triggering the activation of heat shock transcription factor HSF (HSF1 in
vertebrates) that, in higher eukaryotes, involves trimerization of the factor and
acquisition of heat shock element (HSE) DNA-binding ability. Interaction of
activated HSF1 with HSEs in promoters of genes encoding heat shock proteins
(Hsps) enhances their expression. It was suggested that Hsp70 may function as the
negative regulator of HSF1. In the simplest model, stress-unfolded proteins would
compete with monomeric HSF1 for Hsp70 binding. This competition would result in
dissociation of an HSF1-Hsp70 complex, allowing trimerization of released HSF1
monomers. In support of this model, we present evidence herein that 1)
non-activated HSF1 forms a 1:1 complex with Hsp70, 2) both rates of heat-induced 
appearance of HSF1 oligomers and rates of disappearance of HSF1 heterodimers and 
monomers decrease when concentrations of unengaged Hsps are increased, and 3)
transient overexpression of Hsp70 inhibits heat activation of HSF1.

PMCID: PMC313015
PMID: 9222587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Neurosci Res. 1996 Apr 1;44(1):52-7.

In vivo activation of neural heat shock transcription factor HSF1 by a
physiologically relevant increase in body temperature.

Brown IR(1), Rush SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, West Hill, Ontario, Canada.

Molecular mechanisms which underlie the heat shock response have commonly been
analyzed using tissue culture systems, with less investigation of the intact
mammal. In tissue culture, a temperature elevation of 5 degrees C is required to 
activate mammalian heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) to the DNA-binding
form. We demonstrate that a physiologically relevant increase in body temperature
of 2.5 +/- 0.2 degrees C, similar to that attained during fever reactions, is
sufficient to activate HSF1 in the rabbit nervous system. Maximal HSF activation,
as measured by gel mobility shift assay, was attained at 1 hr with the cerebellum
showing the strongest signal. Supershift experiments with antibodies specific to 
HSF1 and HSF2 demonstrated that the signal reflected activation of HSF1. Western 
blot analysis showed that cerebellum exhibited high levels of HSF1 protein.

PMID: 8926630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Investig Med. 1996 Apr;44(4):144-53.

Increases in HSF1 translocation and synthesis in human epidermoid A-431 cells:
role of protein kinase C and [Ca2+]i.

Ding XZ(1), Smallridge RC, Galloway RJ, Kiang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

BACKGROUND: It is known that heat shock increases both heat shock protein 70 kd
(HSP-70) mRNA synthesis, and intracellular cytosolic free calcium concentration
([Ca2+]i). The latter enhances the heat inducible form of HSP-70 production by
increasing the complex formation between heat shock transcriptional factor (HSF) 
and heat shock elements (HSE). In this study, we investigated the effect of
agonists (PMA; ionomycin) and antagonists (BAPTA; staurosporine) of protein
kinase C (PKC), and calcium channel on translocation and synthesis of HSF1, and
activation of HSP-70 gene in human epidermoid A-431 cells.
METHODS: Cells were incubated with poly 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) or
ionomycin at different concentrations for various periods of time. Messenger RNAs
of HSF and HSP-70 were measured with RT-PCR. The HSP-70 protein was determined
with Western blots, and HSF protein was measured by gel mobility retardation
assay.
RESULTS: Significant increases in HSF binding to [32P]labeled HSE were found at
30 minutes in nuclear extract and at 4 hours in both nuclear and cytosol
extracts. The PMA- and ionomycin-induced increases in HSF were in a
concentration-dependent manner with a maximal increase at 10(-6) mol/L of each
drug. Meanwhile, the mRNAs encoded for HSF1 and HSP-70, but not HSF2, were
significantly increased and reached the maximum at 1 hour after the treatment.
The PMA increased [Ca2+]i by 92% because of Ca2+ influx. The increases in mRNA of
HSF1 and HSP-70 induced by treatment with 1 mumol/L PMA were completely blocked
by preincubating cells with either 2 mumol/L staurosporine in the presence of
extracellular Ca2+ or 100 mumol/L BAPTA-am in absence of extracellular Ca2+. Like
PMA, the increases induced by ionomycin were also inhibited by 100 mumol/L
BAPTA-am in absence of extracellular Ca2+. Furthermore, Western blots show that 1
mumol/L PMA or ionomycin induced maximal increase in HSP-70 after 7 hours of
continuous incubation with either agent. When cells were simultaneously treated
with 1 mumol/L PMA and ionomycin together for 1 hour, the increase in HSP-70 and 
HSF1 mRNAs reached a greater level than the level stimulated by either drug
alone.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that both PMA and ionomycin stimulate HSF1,
but not HSF2, translocation and synthesis leading to the HSP-70 expression and
that their effects are Ca(2+)-dependent.

PMID: 8689410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):839-46.

The regulatory domain of human heat shock factor 1 is sufficient to sense heat
stress.

Newton EM(1), Knauf U, Green M, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA.

Heat shock factor (HSF) activates transcription in response to cellular stress.
Human HSF1 has a central regulatory domain which can repress the activity of its 
activation domains at the control temperature and render them heat shock
inducible. To determine whether the regulatory domain works in tandem with
specific features of the HSF1 transcriptional activation domains, we first used
deletion and point mutagenesis to define these activation domains. One of the
activation domains can be reduced to just 20 amino acids. A GAL4 fusion protein
containing the HSF 1 regulatory domain and this 20-amino-acid activation domain
is repressed at the control temperature but potently activates transcription in
response to heat shock. No specific amino acids in this activation domain are
required for response to the regulatory domain; in particular, none of the
potentially phosphorylated serine and threonine residues are required for heat
induction, implying that heat-induced phosphorylation of the transcriptional
activation domains is not required for induction. The regulatory domain is able
to confer heat responsiveness to an otherwise completely heterologous chimeric
activator that contains a portion of the VP16 activation domain, suggesting that 
the regulatory domain can sense heat in the absence of other portions of HSF1.

PMCID: PMC231064
PMID: 8622685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 1;271(9):4805-12.

Activation of heat shock factor by alkylating agents is triggered by glutathione 
depletion and oxidation of protein thiols.

Liu H(1), Lightfoot R, Stevens JL.

Author information: 
(1)W. Alton Jones Cell Science Center, Lake Placid, New York 12946, USA.

Transcriptional activation of heat shock protein genes is a common response to
proteotoxic stress. Many drugs and chemicals that form reactive electrophiles
modify protein structure by binding covalently to nucleophilic functional groups.
Although many of these agents also activate transcription of the inducible member
of the hsp70 gene family, it is not clear if covalent modification of cellular
proteins per se is sufficient. Iodoacetamide (IDAM) is a prototypical alkylating 
toxicant that induces hsp70 transcription. However, IDAM-induced cell death is
indirectly linked to protein alkylation through depletion of glutathione,
induction of oxidative stress, and increased lipid peroxidation. Therefore, we
determined if any of these secondary cytotoxic events might lead to activation of
hsp70 transcription. IDAM treatment increased hsp70 transcription by activating
heat shock transcription factor-1 (HSF1). The addition of antioxidants and iron
or calcium chelators prevented cell death but did not prevent hsp70 transcription
or HSF1 activation. However, the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide
blocked activation of hsp70 by low concentrations of IDAM. Furthermore, the
addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) after IDAM removal blocked hsp70 transcription
and HSF1 activation without altering IDAM binding. DTT had no effect on
activation of HSF1 by hyperthermia. After IDAM treatment, cellular nonprotein and
protein thiols had decreased to less than 20 and 70%, respectively, of the value 
in control cells. DTT treatment in situ prevented the loss of cellular protein
thiols and blocked the formation of high molecular weight protein aggregates.
Thus, alkylation of proteins is insufficient to activate hsp70 transcription and 
DNA binding of HSF1. However, cellular thiol-disulfide redox status and formation
of disulfide linked aggregates of cellular proteins are linked to HSF1 activation
and hsp70 transcriptional activation.

PMID: 8617749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3355-8.

Activation of heat shock factor 1 DNA binding precedes stress-induced serine
phosphorylation. Evidence for a multistep pathway of regulation.

Cotto JJ(1), Kline M, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Exposure of mammalian cells in culture to the anti-inflammatory drugs sodium
salicylate or indomethacin results in activation of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)
DNA binding activity. We have previously shown that the drug-induced HSF1 becomes
associated with the heat shock elements of the hsp70 promoter, yet transcription 
of the hsp70 gene is not induced (Jurivich, D. A., Sistonen, L., Kroes, R. A.,
and Morimoto, R. I. (1992) Science 255, 1243-1245). In this study, we have
examined the basis for uncoupling the heat shock transcriptional response.
Comparison of heat shock and drug-induced forms of HSF1 has revealed that the
transcriptionally inert drug-induced HSF1 is constitutively but not inducibly
serine-phosphorylated, whereas heat shock-induced HSF1 is both constitutively and
inducibly serine-phosphorylated. The transcriptionally inert intermediate
represented by drug-induced HSF1 can be converted to the transcriptionally active
state by a subsequent exposure to heat shock. The only detectable change in HSF1 
is the acquisition of inducible serine phosphorylation. These data reveal that
acquisition of the trimeric DNA binding state of HSF1 is independent of and
precedes inducible phosphorylation and furthermore that inducible phosphorylation
correlates with transcriptional activation.

PMID: 8631933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jan 15;24(2):367-74.

The C-terminal region of Drosophila heat shock factor (HSF) contains a
constitutively functional transactivation domain.

Wisniewski J(1), Orosz A, Allada R, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is constitutively expressed in
Drosophila cells as an inactive monomer. Upon heat shock HSF undergoes
trimerization and acquires high affinity DNA binding ability leading to specific 
interaction with its cognate elements in heat shock promoters. Here we show that 
the transactivation function of HSF is conferred by the extreme C-terminal region
of the protein. Deletion analysis of HSF fragments fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding 
domain demonstrates that transactivation is dependent on HSF residues 610-691.
This domain is located beyond the C-terminal heptad repeat (leucine zipper 4)
whose presence or integrity is dispensable for transactivation. The
transactivation domain is functional in the absence of heat shock and can be
replaced by the extreme C-terminal region of human HSF1. The Drosophila and human
HSF transactivation domains are both rich in hydrophobic and acidic residues and 
may be structurally conserved, despite limited sequence identity.

PMCID: PMC145630
PMID: 8628664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Neurosci. 1996 Jan 15;16(2):478-85.

Regulatory differences in the stress response of hippocampal neurons and glial
cells after heat shock.

Marcuccilli CJ(1), Mathur SK, Morimoto RI, Miller RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Physiological Sciences, University of
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

During periods of stress, cells depend on a transient, highly conserved, and
regulated response to maintain homeostasis. This "heat shock response" is
mediated transcriptionally by a multigene family of heat shock factors (HSF). The
presence of multiple HSF suggests that activation of a given HSF is
stress-specific. Using Western blot analysis, we have demonstrated the inability 
of primary cultured rat hippocampal neurons to induce a heat shock response after
hyperthermia. In contrast, secondary cultured rat glial cells demonstrated a
robust response. Examination of whole-cell extracts from the two cell types with 
gel shift mobility analysis and Western blot analysis revealed that although
glial cells express HSF1 and HSF2, hippocampal neurons only express HSF2.
Incubation of whole-cell extracts with monoclonal antisera raised against HSF1
and HSF2 before gel shift mobility analysis demonstrated HSF1 DNA-binding
activity in glial cells and HSF2 DNA-binding activity in neurons. HSF1 has been
shown to be the principal mediator of heat-induced heat shock gene expression.
These results suggest that the deficient heat shock response of hippocampal
neurons at this developmental stage is attributable to a lack of HSF1 expression.
Furthermore, these results suggest that considerations of selective neuronal
vulnerability to environmental stress should include the principal mediators of
the stress response, the HSF.

PMID: 8551332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Dev Genet. 1996;18(2):114-24.

Effect of caloric restriction on the expression of heat shock protein 70 and the 
activation of heat shock transcription factor 1.

Heydari AR(1), You S, Takahashi R, Gutsmann A, Sarge KD, Richardson A.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Audie L. Murphy Memorial
Veterans Hospital, San Antonio, TX 78284, USA.

The regulation of heat shock protein 70 (hsp70) expression is an excellent
example of a cellular mechanism that has evolved to protect all living organisms 
from various types of physiological stresses; therefore, the reported age-related
alterations in the ability of cells to express hsp70 in response to stress could 
seriously compromise the ability of a senescent organism in respond to changes in
its environment. Because caloric restriction (CR) is the only experimental
manipulation known to retard aging and increase the survival of rodents, it was
of interest to analyze the effect of CR on the age-related alteration in the
induction of hsp70 expression in rat hepatocytes. The effect of CR on the nuclear
transcription of hsp70 gene in rat hepatocytes in response to various levels of
heat shock was determined, and it was found that the age-related decline in the
transcription of hsp70 at all temperatures studied was reversed by CR. Because
the heat shock transcription factor (HSF) mediates the heat-induced transcription
of hsp70, the effect of CR on the induction of HSF binding activity by heat shock
was studied and found to arise from HSF1, which has been shown to be involved in 
the induction of HSF binding activity in other cell types. The age-related
decrease in the induction of HSF1 binding activity in rat hepatocytes was
reversed by CR, and did not appear to be due to an accumulation of inhibitory
molecules with age. Interestingly, the level of HSF1 protein was significantly
higher in hepatocytes isolated from old rats fed ad libitum compared to
hepatocytes obtained from rats fed the CR diet even though the levels of HSF1
binding activity were lower for hepatocytes isolated from the old rats fed ad
libitum. The levels of the mRNA transcript for HSF1 was not significantly altered
by age or CR. Thus, the changes in HSF1 binding activity with age and CR do not
arise from changes in the level of HSF1 protein available for activation.

PMID: 8934873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. EXS. 1996;77:393-408.

Attenuated heat shock transcriptional response in aging: molecular mechanism and 
implication in the biology of aging.

Liu AY(1), Lee YK, Manalo D, Huang LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway 08855-1059, USA.

A characteristic feature of aging is a progressive impairment in the ability to
adapt to environmental challenges. The purpose of this review is to present the
experimental evidence of an attenuated heat shock transcriptional response to
heat and physiological stresses in a number of aging mammalian model systems.
These include the human diploid fibroblasts in culture, whole animals and animal 
derived cells and cell cultures, as well as peripheral blood mononuclear cells
obtained from human donors. The possibility that age-dependent changes in
cellular redox status, as exemplified by the increased production of reactive
oxygen inter-mediates and accumulation of oxidatively-modified proteins, affects 
the regulation and function of the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) and contributes to 
the attenuated heat shock transcriptional response in aging cells and organisms
is discussed. Given the fundamentally important role of HSPs in many aspects of
protein homeostasis and signal transduction, it seems likely that the inability, 
or compromised ability, of aging cells and organisms to produce HSPs in response 
to stress would contribute to the well known increase in morbidity and mortality 
of the aged when challenged.

PMID: 8856987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. EXS. 1996;77:121-37.

Sensing stress and responding to stress.

Voellmy R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, FL 33101, USA.

Heat shock protein gene expression is enhanced by proteotoxic stress, i.e., by
conditions favoring protein unfolding. This upregulation of heat shock protein
genes is mediated by heat shock transcription factor HSF1. A mechanism, the
details of which are still elusive, senses adverse conditions and causes HSF1 to 
oligomerize and to acquire DNA-binding ability. The DNA-binding form of HSF1 then
undergoes further conformational changes that render it transcriptionally
competent. The current model in which heat shock protein 70 acts both as sensor
of stress and as negative regulator of HSF1 oligomerization as well as
alternative models involving additional protein factors are discussed.

PMID: 8856972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Lab Invest. 1996 Jan;74(1):178-87.

Vasopressin-induced heat shock protein expression in renal tubular cells.

Xu Q(1), Ganju L, Fawcett TW, Holbrook NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Gene Expression and Aging, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs), which have been shown to be induced in the kidney by 
a variety of stress conditions, including ischemia, inflammation, oxidative
stress, and toxin exposure, are believed to protect the cells from injury. In the
present study, we demonstrated that administration of vasopressin i.v. to Wistar 
rats leads to HSP70 induction in the kidney. The effect was specific to the
kidney (i.e., absent in brain, heart, lung, muscle, etc.) and selective for the
HSP70 gene family (HSP27, HSP60, and HSP90 were not induced). Western blot
analysis demonstrated that HSP70 protein expression peaked between 6 and 12 hours
after vasopressin administration. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that
induction was localized to renal tubule lining cells, with no expression seen in 
glomerular or interstitial regions. The elevated protein levels were preceded by 
the induction of HSP70 mRNA within 30 minutes after vasopression injection. The
induction of HSP70 mRNA was associated with the activation of heat shock
transcription factor 1 (HSF1), suggesting that the response was regulated at the 
level of transcription. This HSP70 expression was completely blocked in the
presence of both a general vasopressin receptor antagonist (V1 and V2 receptors) 
and an antidiuretic antagonist (V2), but not in the presence of a vasopressor
antagonist (V1). These observations could be significant for understanding the
possible involvement of HSP70 in physiological processes of the kidney, as well
as pathophysiologic conditions associated with either elevated or deficient
levels of vasopressin.

PMID: 8569180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1995 Dec 28;34(2):262-70.

Activation of heat shock factor 1 in rat brain during cerebral ischemia or after 
heat shock.

Higashi T(1), Nakai A, Uemura Y, Kikuchi H, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University, Japan.

Recently, many studies have demonstrated the induction of stress proteins in the 
mammalian nervous system under various pathological conditions. These altered
genetic programs may function to protect individual cells against stressful
conditions. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms regulating
these stress responses in animals. We report here the activation of a heat shock 
factor (HSF) in the rat brain during cerebral ischemia or after heat shock. Gel
mobility shift assays revealed an increase in DNA binding activity to the heat
shock element (HSE) during the early phases of ischemia. Supershift experiments
using specific antisera against HSF1 and HSF2 showed that the ischemia-induced
HSE-binding activity was mainly due to HSF1. In the heat-shocked brain, HSF1 was 
also activated, and the HSE-binding activity was higher in the cerebellum than in
the cerebral cortex or hippocampus; Western blot analysis also showed that HSF1
was more abundant in the cerebellum than in the other two brain regions. Our
results indicate that heat shock gene transcription is regulated by the
activation of HSF1 in both cerebral ischemia and heat shock, and that different
brain regions display differential sensitivities in their stress response. The
cellular signals for heat shock gene transcription under in vivo pathological
conditions will also be discussed.

PMID: 8750829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Mol Biol. 1995 Dec 8;254(4):704-19.

Refined solution structure and dynamics of the DNA-binding domain of the heat
shock factor from Kluyveromyces lactis.

Damberger FF(1), Pelton JG, Liu C, Cho H, Harrison CJ, Nelson HC, Wemmer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Graduate Group University of California Berkeley 94720, USA.

The solution structure of the 92 residue (11 kDa) winged helix-turn-helix
DNA-binding domain from the kluyveromyces lactis heat shock factor was refined
using a total of 932 NOE, 35 phi, 25 chi 1, 5 chi 2 and 44 hydrogen bond
restraints. The overall root-mean-square deviation for structured regions was
0.75(+/- 0.15) A. The three-helix bundle and four-stranded beta-sheet are well
defined with rmsd of 0.53(+/- 0.10) A and 0.60(+/- 0.17) A, respectively. Helix
H2 is underwound and bent near Pro45. The angle between helix H2 and the proposed
recognition helix H3 is 96(+/- 6) degrees. Detailed comparisons are made with the
X-ray structure of this protein as well as other structural studies on HSF.
Overall, the results are consistent with the earlier studies. Differences are
related to protein-protein interactions in the crystal and dynamics in solution. 
Backbone dynamics was investigated via 15N relaxation. The average R1, R2 and NOE
values for residues in segments of secondary structure were 1.9(+/- 0.9) s-1,
7.8(+/- 0.9) s-1 and 0.81(+/- 0.05), respectively. The correlation time based on 
these data was 5.6(+/- 0.4) ns. Motional order parameters were calculated by
fitting the relaxation data to one of three models. Low-order parameters were
found for residues that comprise the turn between helices H2 and H3 (residues
Lys49 to Phe53), and most strikingly, the 16 residue wing (residues Val68 to
Arg83). These data are consistent with the lack of long-range NOEs identified in 
these regions. The data provide a basis for comparison with results of the
protein-DNA complex. The relationship between structure and function is
discussed.

PMID: 7500344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 8;270(49):29614-20.

A novel heat shock response in prolactin-dependent Nb2 node lymphoma cells.

Blake MJ(1), Buckley AR, Zhang M, Buckley DJ, Lavoi KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of North Dakota School
of Medicine, Grand Forks 58202, USA.

Virtually all cells respond to heat stress by increased expression or induction
of one or more of the highly conserved cellular stress response proteins, heat
shock proteins (HSPs). Here, we report the unusual property of rat Nb2-11 cells, 
a prolactin-dependent pre-T-cell line, to display reduced HSP expression
following exposure to elevated temperature. After heat stress (41 degrees C, 1
h), there was no evidence of inducible members of the 70 kDa HSP family, a
response common to other cell culture and tissue systems. Moreover, expression of
constitutive members of the HSP70 and HSP90 families decreased during the heat
stress, apparently reflecting a decrease in mRNA stability. Gel shift assays
revealed that heat shock factor (HSF) was activated in spite of the lack of
expression of inducible HSP70 transcripts, although its DNA binding rapidly
deteriorated. Immunoblotting, using an antibody specific to HSF1, indicated that 
proteolysis of HSF1 may be responsible for this rapid termination of heat shock
element binding. CCAAT binding, a component of constitutive HSP70 expression, was
also reduced by heat stress in Nb2-11 cells and may account for the decline in
constitutive HSP70 expression. Prolactin pretreatment prevented the fragmentation
of HSF1, protected heat shock element and CCAAT binding, prevented the decline in
constitutive HSP70 and HSP90 expression, and restored a modest expression of
inducible HSP70 following heat treatment. Results of this study describe a unique
regulatory defect in HSP expression in Nb2-11 cells, possibly a common
characteristic of other hormone-dependent tumors.

PMID: 7494006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biochem. 1995 Nov;118(5):1021-9.

Dominant role of the second heat shock element in expression of the HSP70-1 gene 
in rat liver after whole body hyperthermia.

Konishi T(1), Nomoto M, Shimizu K, Abe T, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu.

We investigated the regulatory expression of the HSP70-1 gene in rat liver after 
whole body hyperthermia (rectal temperature of 42 degrees C for 30 min). After
heat treatment, HSP70-1 mRNA showed a peak at 1 h, and its protein product began 
to increase at 3 h. Under these conditions, we identified cis-acting elements
involved in the regulatory expression of the HSP70-1 gene by in vivo genomic
footprinting. We observed that the second heat shock element (HSE-2; -201 to
-178) was clearly protected from methylation by dimethyl sulfate in parallel with
the increase in HSP70-1 mRNA. On the contrary, the most proximal HSE-1 (-120 to
-101) was protected only slightly. Furthermore, the flanking regions of HSE-2,
that is, an NF-kappa B-like element on the upstream side and a GC box on the
down-stream side were also protected simultaneously in accordance with the
induced expression of the HSP70-1 gene. Gel mobility shift assays with nuclear
extracts from rat liver at 30 min after heat treatment showed maximal DNA binding
activity equally with oligonucleotides containing HSE-1 and HSE-2, respectively, 
and also demonstrated the participation of heat shock factor-1 (HSF1) in both
cases. These results suggest that, in addition to HSF1, other regulatory factors 
might be involved in the dominant protection of HSE-2 in the promoter of the
HSP70-1 gene in rat liver after whole body hyperthermia.

PMID: 8749322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Nov;221(1):103-10.

Activation of multiple transcription factors and fos and jun gene family
expression in cells exposed to a single electric pulse.

Pazmany T(1), Murphy SP, Gollnick SO, Brooks SP, Tomasi TB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New 
York 14263, USA.

We report that exposure of cells to a single electric pulse (250-1250 V/cm)
results in the rapid and persistent activation of the DNA binding activities of a
number of transcription factors, including AP-1, SP1, AP-2, and NF-kappa B, and
the transient expression of select members of the fos and jun gene families.
Induction of gene expression occurs primarily at the level of transcription,
although c-jun expression also appears to be regulated posttranscriptionally.
Interestingly, maximal induction of gene expression is detected at electrical
field strengths that do not result in pore formation in the plasma membrane and
that do not significantly affect cell viability. Exposure of cells to electric
pulses does not result in the activation of HSF1 DNA binding activity, or the
induction of hsp70 or p53 protein synthesis, indicating that the induction of fos
and jun gene expression is not coincident with protein or DNA damage. The results
of these studies suggest that electrical pulses may represent a novel mechanism
for inducing the activities of multiple transcription factors and the expression 
of select members of the fos and jun gene families.

PMID: 7589234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 20;270(42):25079-86.

Mutated yeast heat shock transcription factor exhibits elevated basal
transcriptional activation and confers metal resistance.

Sewell AK(1), Yokoya F, Yu W, Miyagawa T, Murayama T, Winge DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake
City 84132, USA.

Cadmium-resistant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain 301N exhibits high basal as
well as cadmium-induced expression of the CUP1 metallothionein gene. Since
regulation of CUP1 is usually restricted to copper ions, our goal was to identify
the factor responsible for the high metallothionein levels in strain 301N. The
gene responsible for the observed phenotype is a spontaneously mutated heat shock
transcription factor gene (HSF1). A double, semidominant HSF1 mutant with
substitutions at codons 206 and 256 within the DNA-binding domain of the heat
shock factor (HSF) confers two phenotypes. The first phenotype is elevated
transcriptional activity of the HSF mutant (HSF301), which results in
constitutive thermotolerance. A second HSF301 phenotype is enhanced binding
affinity for the heat shock element (HSE) within the CUP1 5'-sequences, resulting
in high basal transcription of metallothionein. The CUP1 HSE is a minimal heat
shock element containing only two perfectly spaced inverted repeats of the basic 
nGAAn block. Cells containing HSF301 are resistant to cadmium salts. The single
R206S mutation is responsible for the high affinity binding to the CUP1 HSE. In
addition, the R206S HSF substitution exhibits constitutive transcriptional
activation from a consensus HSE (HSE2). The F256Y substitution in HSF attenuates 
the effects of R206S on the consensus HSE2, but not on the CUP1 HSE.

PMID: 7559639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 13;270(41):24489-95.

Salicylate triggers heat shock factor differently than heat.

Jurivich DA(1), Pachetti C, Qiu L, Welk JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Sodium salicylate has the unusual property of partially inducing the human heat
shock response (Jurivich, D. A., Sistonen, L., Kroes, R., and Morimoto, R. I.
(1992) Science 255, 1243-1245). Salicylate induces the DNA binding state of the
human heat shock transcription factor (HSF), but this is insufficient to elevate 
heat shock gene expression. Because it is not known how HSF enhances heat shock
gene expression, further analysis of the transcriptionally inert,
salicylate-induced HSF was undertaken to potentially identify components of the
heat shock response that are necessary for full transcriptional induction. Like
thermal stress, exposure of HeLa cells to salicylate led to the induction of HSF1
into a DNA-bound state. Despite continued exposure of cells to salicylate,
HSF1.DNA binding attenuated much more rapidly than a continuous heat shock.
Western blot analysis revealed that the salicylate-induced form of HSF1 was not
hyperphosphorylated like the heat-induced form. Furthermore, supershifts of the
HSF1 bound to an heat shock element (HSE) oligonucleotide by monoclonal
antibodies to phosphoamino acids revealed that salicylate induced threonine
phosphorylation of HSF1, whereas heat led to a predominance of HSF1 serine
phosphorylation. These data suggest that salicylate-independent signals are
necessary to convert HSF1 into a transactivator of heat shock gene expression and
that brief acquisition of DNA binding by this factor is insufficient to maximally
enhance transcription.

PMID: 7592665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cell. 1995 Oct 6;83(1):29-38.

Displacement of sequence-specific transcription factors from mitotic chromatin.

Martínez-Balbás MA(1), Dey A, Rabindran SK, Ozato K, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The general inhibition in transcriptional activity during mitosis abolishes the
stress-inducible expression of the human hsp70 gene. Among the four transcription
factors that bind to the human hsp70 promoter, the DNA-binding activities of
three (C/EBP, GBP, and HSF1) were normal, while Sp1 showed reduced binding
activity in mitotic cell extracts. In vivo footprinting and immunocytochemical
analyses revealed that all of the sequence-specific transcription factors were
displaced from promoter sequences as well as from bulk chromatin during mitosis. 
The correlation of transcription factor displacement with chromatin condensation 
suggests an involvement of chromatin structure in mitotic repression. However,
retention of DNase I hypersensitivity suggests that the hsp70 promoter was not
organized in a canonical nucleosome structure in mitotic chromatin. Displacement 
of transcription factors from mitotic chromosomes could present another window in
the cell cycle for resetting transcriptional programs.

PMID: 7553870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;15(10):5268-78.

The DNA-binding properties of two heat shock factors, HSF1 and HSF3, are induced 
in the avian erythroblast cell line HD6.

Nakai A(1), Kawazoe Y, Tanabe M, Nagata K, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Avian cells express three heat shock transcription factor (HSF) genes
corresponding to a novel factor, HSF3, and homologs of mouse and human HSF1 and
HSF2. Analysis of the biochemical and cell biological properties of these HSFs
reveals that HSF3 has properties in common with both HSF1 and HSF2 and yet has
features which are distinct from both. HSF3 is constitutively expressed in the
erythroblast cell line HD6, the lymphoblast cell line MSB, and embryo
fibroblasts, and yet its DNA-binding activity is induced only upon exposure of
HD6 cells to heat shock. Acquisition of HSF3 DNA-binding activity in HD6 cells is
accompanied by oligomerization from a non-DNA-binding dimer to a DNA-binding
trimer, whereas the effect of heat shock on HSF1 is oligomerization of an inert
monomer to a DNA-binding trimer. Induction of HSF3 DNA-binding activity is
delayed compared with that of HSF1. As occurs for HSF1, heat shock leads to the
translocation of HSF3 to the nucleus. HSF exhibits the properties of a
transcriptional activator, as judged from the stimulatory activity of transiently
overexpressed HSF3 measured by using a heat shock element-containing reporter
construct and as independently assayed by the activity of a chimeric GAL4-HSF3
protein on a GAL4 reporter construct. These results reveal that HSF3 is
negatively regulated in avian cells and acquires DNA-binding activity in certain 
cells upon heat shock.

PMCID: PMC230774
PMID: 7565675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):5063-70.

Genetic identification of the site of DNA contact in the yeast heat shock
transcription factor.

Torres FA(1), Bonner JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405, USA.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF), a trimeric transcription factor,
activates the expression of heat shock genes in eukaryotes. We have isolated
mutations in the HSF1 gene from Saccharomyces cerevisiae that severely compromise
the ability of HSF to bind to its normal binding site, repeats of the module
nGAAn. One of these mutations, Q229R, shows a "new specificity" phenotype, in
which the protein prefers the mutant sequence nGACn. These results identify the
region of HSF that contacts DNA, in complete agreement with the crystal structure
of HSF of Kluyveromyces lactis and the nuclear magnetic resonance data from HSF
of Drosophila melanogaster. To determine the orientation of the DNA-binding
domain on the nGAAn motif, we performed site-specific cross-linking between
cysteine residues of single-cysteine substitutions. Cysteines placed at the N
terminus of the DNA contact helix formed cross-links readily, while cysteines
placed at the C terminus of the helix did not.

PMCID: PMC230753
PMID: 7651423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):4890-7.

A heat shock transcription factor with reduced activity suppresses a yeast HSP70 
mutant.

Halladay JT(1), Craig EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, 
USA.

Strains carrying deletions in both the SSA1 and SSA2 HSP70 genes of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae exhibit pleiotropic phenotypes, including the inability to grow at 37 
degrees C or higher, reduced growth rate at permissive temperatures, increased
HSP gene expression, and constitutive thermotolerance. A screen for extragenic
suppressors of the ssa1 ssa2 slow-growth phenotype identified a spontaneous
dominant suppressor mutation, EXA3-1 (R.J. Nelson, M. Heschl, and E.A. Craig,
Genetics 131:277-285, 1992). Here we report that EXA3-1 is an allele of HSF1,
which encodes the heat shock transcription factor (HSF). Strains containing the
EXA3-1 allele in a wild-type background exhibit a 10- to 15-fold reduction in HSF
activity during steady-state growth conditions as well as a delay in the
accumulation of the SSA4, HSP26, and HSP104 mRNAs after a heat shock.
EXA3-1-mediated suppression is the result of a single amino acid substitution of 
a highly conserved residue in the HSF DNA-binding domain which drastically
reduces the ability of HSF to bind to heat shock elements as evaluated by band
shift analysis. Together, these results indicate that the poor growth of ssa1
ssa2 strains is the result, at least in part, of the overproduction of a
deleterious heat shock protein(s). This conclusion is supported by the fact that 
the levels of at least some heat shock proteins are reduced in ssa1 ssa2 cells
containing the EXA3-1 allele. Surprisingly, strains containing the EXA3-1 allele 
in a wild-type HSP70 background grow early as well as the wild-type strain over a
wide temperature range, displaying only a slight reduction in growth rate at 37
degrees Celsius, indicating that cells contain significantly more HSF activity
than is require for growth under steady-state conditions.

PMCID: PMC230735
PMID: 7651408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 11;270(32):18745-8.

Male germ cell-specific alteration in temperature set point of the cellular
stress response.

Sarge KD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky,
Lexington 40536-0084, USA.

Heat shock factor (HSF), a transcriptional regulator with heat-activatable DNA
binding ability, mediates the stress-induced expression of eukaryotic heat shock 
protein genes. Previous results from this laboratory demonstrated that a
preparation of mixed male germ cell types from mouse testis exhibited a lower
temperature threshold for activation of HSF1 DNA binding relative to other mouse 
cell types (Sarge, K.D., Bray, A.E., and Goodson, M.L. (1995) Nature 374, 126).
The purpose of the present study was to determine whether the phenomenon of
reduced HSF1 activation temperature is common to all testis cell types, both
somatic and germ cell types, or whether it is a special property of male germ
cells. The results show that a purified population of pachytene spermatocytes,
one of the male germ cell types, exhibits a profile of reduced HSF1 activation
temperature identical to that observed for the mixed germ cell preparation, with 
a threshold HSF1 activation temperature of 35 degrees C. Activation of HSF1 DNA
binding in male germ cells by incubation at 38 degrees C is accompanied by the
classic cellular stress response parameters of heat-induced HSF1 phosphorylation 
and increased expression of the hsp72 stress protein. In contrast, a preparation 
of somatic testis cell types exhibits HSF1 activation only at temperatures of 42 
degrees C and above, a profile identical to that observed for mouse liver cells
and mammalian cell lines. These results demonstrate that the phenomenon of
reduced HSF1 activation temperature is a unique property of male germ cell types 
within the mammalian testis and demonstrate that HSF1 activated at this lower
temperature threshold is fully capable of mediating a productive cellular stress 
response in these cell types.

PMID: 7642523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Aug 1;92(16):7207-11.

Pharmacological modulation of heat shock factor 1 by antiinflammatory drugs
results in protection against stress-induced cellular damage.

Lee BS(1), Chen J, Angelidis C, Jurivich DA, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

The activation of heat shock genes by diverse forms of environmental and
physiological stress has been implicated in a number of human diseases, including
ischemic damage, reperfusion injury, infection, neurodegeneration, and
inflammation. The enhanced levels of heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones
have broad cytoprotective effects against acute lethal exposures to stress. Here,
we show that the potent antiinflammatory drug indomethacin activates the
DNA-binding activity of human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). Perhaps
relevant to its pharmacological use, indomethacin pretreatment lowers the
temperature threshold of HSF1 activation, such that a complete heat shock
response can be attained at temperatures that are by themselves insufficient. The
synergistic effect of indomethacin and elevated temperature is biologically
relevant and results in the protection of cells against exposure to cytotoxic
conditions.

PMCID: PMC41308
PMID: 7638169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4309-18.

The carboxyl-terminal transactivation domain of heat shock factor 1 is negatively
regulated and stress responsive.

Shi Y(1), Kroeger PE, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

We have characterized a stress-responsive transcriptional activation domain of
mouse heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) by using chimeric GAL4-HSF1 fusion proteins.
Fusion of the GAL4 DNA-binding domain to residues 124 to 503 of HSF1 results in a
chimeric factor that binds DNA yet lacks any transcriptional activity.
Transactivation is acquired upon exposure to heat shock or by deletion of a
negative regulatory domain including part of the DNA-binding-domain-proximal
leucine zippers. Analysis of a collection of GAL4-HSF1 deletion mutants revealed 
the minimal region for the constitutive transcriptional activator to map within
the extreme carboxyl-terminal 108 amino acids, corresponding to a region rich in 
acidic and hydrophobic residues. Loss of residues 395 to 425 or 451 to 503, which
are located at either end of this activation domain, severely diminished
activity, indicating that the entire domain is required for transactivation. The 
minimal activation domain of HSF1 also confers enhanced transcriptional response 
to heat shock or cadmium treatment. These results demonstrate that the
transcriptional activation domain of HSF1 is negatively regulated and that the
signal for stress induction is mediated by interactions between the
amino-terminal negative regulator and the carboxyl-terminal transcriptional
activation domain.

PMCID: PMC230670
PMID: 7623825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jun 26;211(3):943-9.

Regulated expression of heat shock factor 1 isoforms with distinct leucine zipper
arrays via tissue-dependent alternative splicing.

Goodson ML(1), Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky,
Lexington 405036-0084, USA.

HSF1 mediates the stress induced expression of heat shock proteins, referred to
as the cellular stress response. Previous results indicated that mammalian cells 
express two distinct HSF1 protein isoforms, with molecular sizes of 69 kDa
(HSF1-beta) and 71 kDa (HSF1-alpha). The purpose of this study was to determine
the mechanism by which these two HSF1 protein isoforms are generated. Our results
show that mammalian cells express two distinct HSF1 mRNA isoforms which arise via
alternative splicing of the HSF1 pre-mRNA. The two HSF1 mRNA isoforms differ by a
single 66 bp exon of the HSF1 gene which is spliced into the HSF1-alpha mRNA
isoform but skipped in the HSF1-beta mRNA isoform. This 66 bp exon encodes a 22
amino acid sequence, whose molecular weight (2.3 kDa) matches the difference in
size between the HSF1-beta and HSF1-alpha protein isoforms (69 and 71 kDa).
Further analysis reveals that this extra 22 amino acid sequence, whose insertion 
site in the HSF1-alpha isoform is located immediately adjacent to a C-terminal
leucine zipper motif (leucine zipper 4) previously shown to be involved in
maintenance of HSF1 in the non-DNA-binding control form, contains an additional, 
previously unidentified leucine zipper motif (leucine zipper 5). Our results also
show that the levels of the two HSF1 isoforms are regulated in a tissue dependent
manner, with testis expressing higher levels of the HSF1-beta isoform while heart
and brain express higher levels of the HSF1-alpha isoform. These results
demonstrate a new mechanism by which HSF1 expression is regulated in mammalian
cells and suggest a potential role for the HSF1 isoforms in mediating
tissue-dependent regulation of the cellular stress response.

PMID: 7598726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 23;270(25):15277-84.

A constitutive heat shock element-binding factor is immunologically identical to 
the Ku autoantigen.

Kim D(1), Ouyang H, Yang SH, Nussenzweig A, Burgman P, Li GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Analysis of the heat shock element (HSE)-binding proteins in extracts of rodent
cells, during heat shock and their post-heat shock recovery, indicates that the
regulation of heat shock response involves a constitutive HSE-binding factor
(CHBF), in addition to the heat-inducible heat shock factor HSF1. We purified the
CHBF to apparent homogeneity from HeLa cells using column chromatographic
techniques including an HSE oligonucleotide affinity column. The purified CHBF
consists of two polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 70 and 86 kDa.
Immunoblot and gel mobility shift analysis verify that CHBF is identical or
closely related to the Ku autoantigen. The DNA binding characteristics of CHBF to
double-stranded or single-stranded DNA are similar to that of Ku autoantigen. In 
gel mobility shift analysis using purified CHBF and recombinant human HSF1, CHBF 
competes with HSF1 for the binding of DNA sequences containing HSEs in vitro.
Furthermore, when Rat-1 cells were co-transfected with human Ku expression
vectors and the hsp70-promoter-driven luciferase reporter gene, thermal induction
of luciferase is significantly suppressed relative to cells transfected with only
the hsp70-luciferase construct. These data suggest a role of CHBF (or Ku protein)
in the regulation of heat response in vivo.

PMID: 7797514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jun;15(6):3354-62.

A heat shock-responsive domain of human HSF1 that regulates transcription
activation domain function.

Green M(1), Schuetz TJ, Sullivan EK, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114,
USA.

Human heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) stimulates transcription from heat shock protein
genes following stress. We have used chimeric proteins containing the GAL4 DNA
binding domain to identify the transcriptional activation domains of HSF1 and a
separate domain that is capable of regulating activation domain function. This
regulatory domain conferred heat shock inducibility to chimeric proteins
containing the activation domains. The regulatory domain is located between the
transcriptional activation domains and the DNA binding domain of HSF1 and is
conserved between mammalian and chicken HSF1 but is not found in HSF2 or HSF3.
The regulatory domain was found to be functionally homologous between chicken and
human HSF1. This domain does not affect DNA binding by the chimeric proteins and 
does not contain any of the sequences previously postulated to regulate DNA
binding of HSF1. Thus, we suggest that activation of HSF1 by stress in humans is 
controlled by two regulatory mechanisms that separately confer heat shock-induced
DNA binding and transcriptional stimulation.

PMCID: PMC230569
PMID: 7760831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4512-6.

Suppression of heat-induced hsp70 expression by the 70-kDa subunit of the human
Ku autoantigen.

Li GC(1), Yang SH, Kim D, Nussenzweig A, Ouyang H, Wei J, Burgman P, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021, USA.

Expression of the 70-kDa polypeptide of human Ku autoantigen in rat cells is
shown to suppress specifically the induction of hsp70 upon heat shock. Thermal
induction of other heat shock proteins is not significantly affected, nor is the 
state of phosphorylation or the DNA-binding ability of the heat shock
transcription factor HSF1. These findings support a model in which hsp70 gene
expression is controlled by a second regulatory factor in addition to the
positive activator HSF1. The Ku autoantigen, or a protein closely related to it, 
is likely to be involved in the regulation of hsp70 expression.

PMCID: PMC41974
PMID: 7753835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 5;270(18):10369-72.

Sodium salicylate and yeast heat shock gene transcription.

Giardina C(1), Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The anti-inflammatory drug sodium salicylate modulates the activity of specific
transcription factors in humans. Here we show that salicylate and sorbate,
another organic acid, stimulate DNA binding by yeast heat shock transcription
factor (HSF) in vivo. Surprisingly, salicylate inhibits heat shock gene
transcription even in cells induced by a prior heat shock. This inhibition of
transcription occurs at a step after HSF and transcription factor IID binding but
before promoter melting by RNA polymerase. Salicylate appears to generate a tight
binding but activation-impotent HSF by cytoplasmic acidification, since
inhibiting proton efflux from cells triggers this same DNA binding and inhibition
of heat shock gene expression.

PMID: 7737966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2737-44.

Dynamic protein-DNA architecture of a yeast heat shock promoter.

Giardina C(1), Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Here we present an in vivo footprinting analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
HSP82 promoter. Consistent with current models, we find that yeast heat shock
factor (HSF) binds to strong heat shock elements (HSEs) in non-heat-shocked
cells. Upon heat shock, however, additional binding of HSF becomes apparent at
weak HSEs of the promoter as well. Recovery from heat shock results in a dramatic
reduction in HSF binding at both strong and weak HSEs, consistent with a model in
which HSF binding is subject to a negative feedback regulation by heat shock
proteins. In vivo KMnO4 footprinting reveals that the interaction of the
TATA-binding protein (TBP) with this promoter is also modulated: heat shock
slightly increases TBP binding to the promoter and this binding is reduced upon
recovery from heat shock. KMnO4 footprinting does not reveal a high density of
polymerase at the promoter prior to heat shock, but a large open complex between 
the transcriptional start site and the TATA box is formed rapidly upon
activation, similar to that observed in other yeast genes.

PMCID: PMC230504
PMID: 7739554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochem J. 1995 Apr 15;307 ( Pt 2):347-52.

Rapid activation of the heat shock transcription factor, HSF1, by hypo-osmotic
stress in mammalian cells.

Huang LE(1), Caruccio L, Liu AY, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers State University of New Jersey,
Piscataway 08855-0939, USA.

Osmoregulation is important to living organisms for survival in responding to
environmental changes of water and ionic strength. We demonstrated here for the
first time that exposure of HeLa cells to a hypotonic medium (30% growth medium
and 70% water) prominently induced the binding activity of the heat shock
transcription factor (HSF). Pretreatment of cells with cycloheximide did not
inhibit the induction of HSF-binding activity, indicating that the mechanisms of 
induction are independent of new protein synthesis. The magnitude of hypo-osmotic
stress-induced HSF-binding activity was comparable with that induced by heat
shock. The induction, as monitored by gel-mobility-shift assay, occurred within 5
min of hypo-osmotic stress and persisted at least up to 4 h in HeLa cells under
the hypotonic conditions. Addition of sorbitol to the hypotonic medium abolished 
HSF activation. Hypo-osmotic stress-induced HSF binding could also be
demonstrated in HeLa cells maintained in simple sorbitol solution by decreasing
the sorbitol concentration from 300 mM to 200 mM or less. Competition analysis
suggests that the effects of hypo-osmotic stress on HSF-binding activity was
specific. Cross-linking experiments and Western-blot analysis demonstrated that
hypo-osmotic stress induced trimerization of human heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) in 
intact HeLa cells, suggesting that trimer formation of HSF1 was responsible for
inducing HSF-binding activity in hypo-osmotically stressed cells. However, unlike
heat shock response, the activation of HSF by hypo-osmotic stress did not lead to
accumulation of hsp70 mRNA in HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC1136655
PMID: 7733868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Mar 28;208(3):1099-105.

Quercetin suppresses heat shock response by down regulation of HSF1.

Nagai N(1), Nakai A, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Kyoto University, Japan.

A bioflavonoid quercetin suppressed the stress response in heat-shocked cells and
we have investigated the inhibitory mechanism in this report. After treatment of 
cells with nonlethal concentrations of quercetin, the binding of heat shock
factor (HSF) to the heat shock element (HSE) was inhibited as detected by gel
shift assay. We examined whether quercetin inhibits heat shock response by
inhibiting HSF trimer-formation and found it was not the case. Instead,
pretreatment of the cells with quercetin caused a decrease in the level of HSF1, 
especially of the constitutively phosphorylated form. This decrease was more
prominent in heat-shocked cells than in control cells. These data suggest that
(1) quercetin does not affect the trimer formation of HSF1, and (2) the decline
of the HSF1-HSE complex might be linked to the decrease of HSF1 levels caused by 
quercetin.

PMID: 7702609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Mar 14;92(6):2126-30.

Heat shock protein hsp70 accelerates the recovery of heat-shocked mammalian cells
through its modulation of heat shock transcription factor HSF1.

Kim D(1), Ouyang H, Li GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021.

The role of mammalian 70-kDa heat shock protein (hsp70) in regulating cellular
response to heat shock was examined by using three closely related rat cells:
control Rat-1 cells, thermotolerant Rat-1 (TT Rat-1) cells, and heat-resistant
M21 cells, a derivative of Rat-1 cells that constitutively overexpress human
hsp70. In all these cells, after a prescribed heat shock, the level of the
phosphorylated form of heat shock transcription factor HSF1 and that of HSF1
capable of binding to its cognitive DNA sequence heat shock element (HSE) exhibit
similar time dependence. The amount of a constitutive HSE-binding activity
(CHBA), on the other hand, inversely correlates with those of the two
aforementioned forms of HSF1. The recovery kinetics from heat shock are different
for the three cell lines, with the thermal-resistant TT Rat-1 and M21 cells
showing faster recovery in terms of the state of phosphorylation of HSF1 and its 
ability to bind HSE or in terms of the reappearance of CHBA. Treatment with
okadaic acid, a serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitor, delays the recovery
kinetics of Rat-1 cells but not that of thermal-resistant M21 cells. These
results are interpreted in terms of a role for hsp70 in the recovery of
heat-shocked mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC42436
PMID: 7892235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 11;23(3):467-74.

Complex expression of murine heat shock transcription factors.

Fiorenza MT(1), Farkas T, Dissing M, Kolding D, Zimarino V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

A central step in the transcriptional activation of heat shock genes is the
binding of the heat shock factor (HSF) to upstream heat shock elements (HSEs). In
vertebrates, HSF1 mediates the ubiquitous response to stress stimuli, while the
role of a second HSE-binding factor, HSF2, is still unclear. In this work we show
that both factors are expressed in a wide range of murine tissues and each exists
as two splicing isoforms. Although HSFs are virtually ubiquitous proteins, their 
abundance is predominant in testis and variable among other tissues, indicating
specific regulations of their expression. A low level of DNA-binding activity of 
HSF1, detected in many tissues, is probably physiological and is not explained by
an anomalous regulation of one of the two isoforms. Our observations suggest that
these regulatory proteins may all have roles in fully developed tissues. This
possibility is not mutually exclusive of a role of HSF2 during cellular
differentiation and tissue development [L. Sistonen, K. D. Sarge and R. I.
Morimoto (1994), Mol. Cell. Biol., 14, 2087-2099].

PMCID: PMC306699
PMID: 7885843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 10;270(6):2447-50.

Heat-inducible DNA binding of purified heat shock transcription factor 1.

Goodson ML(1), Sarge KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chandler Medical Center, University of Kentucky,
Lexington 40536-0084.

The heat-induced expression of heat shock proteins, called the cellular stress
response, is mediated by heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 exists in
unstressed cells in an inactive form, which is converted to the DNA binding from 
upon exposure of cells to elevated temperature. We have developed a protocol for 
isolation of the non-DNA binding form of recombinant mouse HSF1, involving
expression and affinity purification of HSF1 as a fusion with the glutathione
S-transferase protein in Escherichia coli, followed by specific protease cleavage
to release pure HSF1 protein. We report here that the purified inactive HSF1 can 
be converted to the DNA binding form by heat treatment in vitro. Chemical
cross-linking analysis demonstrates that this conversion is accompanied by
oligomerization of HSF1 from a monomeric to a trimeric native structure, similar 
to that observed for HSF1 in heat-shocked cells. These results indicate that
elements residing in the HSF1 polypeptide are sufficient both for maintenance of 
this factor in the non-DNA binding from and for its heat-induced conversion to
the DNA binding form and support a role for HSF1 as the "molecular thermostat" in
eukaryotic cells, which senses adverse environmental conditions and activates the
cellular stress response.

PMID: 7852305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 20;270(3):1449-54.

Stimulation of the DNA-dependent protein kinase by RNA polymerase II
transcriptional activator proteins.

Peterson SR(1), Jesch SA, Chamberlin TN, Dvir A, Rabindran SK, Wu C, Dynan WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder
80309-0215.

The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) phosphorylates RNA polymerase II and a 
number of transcription factors. We now show that the activity of DNA-PK is
directly stimulated by certain transcriptional activator proteins, including the 
human heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) and a transcriptionally active
N-terminal 147 amino acid GAL4 derivative. Stimulation of DNA-PK activity
required specific sequences in the activator proteins outside the minimal DNA
binding domains. The stimulation of DNA-PK activity also required DNA and was
greater with DNA containing relevant activator binding sites. Comparison of
different HSF binding fragments showed that optimal stimulation occurred when two
HSF binding sites were present. Stimulation with HSF and GAL4 was synergistic
with Ku protein, another regulator of DNA-PK activity. DNA-PK is tightly
associated with the transcriptional template, and an increase in its activity
could potentially influence transcription through the phosphorylation of proteins
associated with the transcription complex.

PMID: 7836414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 23;269(51):32272-8.

Effects of neurohormonal stress and aging on the activation of mammalian heat
shock factor 1.

Fawcett TW(1), Sylvester SL, Sarge KD, Morimoto RI, Holbrook NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Gene Expression and Aging, NIA, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224.

The mammalian heat shock response has been investigated extensively using tissue 
culture cells with only a limited amount of information available on animals and 
intact tissues. The neurohormonal stress response mediated by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis leads to the activation of heat shock factor 
(HSF) in rat adrenal tissue. Here we show through the use of antibodies specific 
to each member of the HSF family that restraint-induced stress in intact Wistar
rats and adrenocorticotropic hormone treatment of hypophysectomized animals leads
to the activation of HSF1 monomers to trimers with DNA-binding activity. Because 
HSF1 is also the target factor for metabolic and environmental stress, these data
reveal an intersection of pathways leading to HSF1 activation. Comparison of the 
biochemical properties and levels of HSF1 in the Wistar and Fischer 344 rat
strains reveals that HSF1 is constitutively present in an activated DNA-binding
state in the adrenals of Fischer 344 rats. During aging, the levels of HSF1
remain constant, yet the transcription factor from aged animals exhibits a
decreased ability to bind DNA.

PMID: 7798227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Dev Biol. 1994 Dec;166(2):819-22.

Heat shock factor 2-like activity in mouse blastocysts.

Mezger V(1), Rallu M, Morimoto RI, Morange M, Renard JP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire du Stress, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
Paris, France.

The expression of heat shock genes is induced in all living cells by a series of 
proteotoxic treatments. Heat shock genes are also activated spontaneously during 
different phases of embryonic development. HSP89 alpha and HSC70 are expressed at
a high level in the mouse blastocyst. A family of factors, called HSFs, are able 
to bind to the promoters of heat shock genes on upstream conserved elements
(HSEs). HSF1 is unable to bind to HSE sequences in absence of stress. It is
activated after a stress by post-translational modifications and conformational
change. HSF2 shows common structural domains with HSF1; however, it is active at 
normal temperatures. Recently we showed the presence of an abundant HSE-binding
activity in nonshocked blastocysts. We demonstrate here by using polyclonal
antibodies that HSF2 is the major constituent of this constitutive HSE-binding
activity. HSF2 might be involved in the control of heat shock gene expression
during early mammalian embryogenesis.

PMID: 7813800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7592-603.

Selection of new HSF1 and HSF2 DNA-binding sites reveals difference in trimer
cooperativity.

Kroeger PE(1), Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

Multiple heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) have been discovered in several 
higher eukaryotes, raising questions about their respective functions in the
cellular stress response. Previously, we had demonstrated that the two mouse HSFs
(mHSF1 and mHSF2) interacted differently with the HSP70 heat shock element (HSE).
To further address the issues of cooperativity and the interaction of multiple
HSFs with the HSE, we selected new mHSF1 and mHSF2 DNA-binding sites through
protein binding and PCR amplification. The selected sequences, isolated from a
random population, were composed primarily of alternating inverted arrays of the 
pentameric consensus 5'-nGAAn-3', and the nucleotides flanking the core GAA motif
were nonrandom. The average number of pentamers selected in each binding site was
four to five for mHSF1 and two to three for mHSF2, suggesting differences in the 
potential for cooperative interactions between adjacent trimers. Our comparison
of mHSF1 and mHSF2 binding to selected sequences further substantiated these
differences in cooperativity as mHSF1, unlike mHSF2, was able to bind to extended
HSE sequences, confirming previous observations on the HSP70 HSE. Certain
selected sequences that exhibited preferential binding of mHSF1 or mHSF2 were
mutagenized, and these studies demonstrated that the affinity of an HSE for a
particular HSF and the extent of HSF interaction could be altered by single base 
substitutions. The domain of mHSF1 utilized for cooperative interactions was
transferable, as chimeric mHSF1/mHSF2 proteins demonstrated that sequences within
or adjacent to the mHSF1 DNA-binding domain were responsible. We have
demonstrated that HSEs can have a greater affinity for a specific HSF and that in
mice, mHSF1 utilizes a higher degree of cooperativity in DNA binding. This
suggests two ways in which cells have developed to regulate the activity of
closely related transcription factors: developing the ability to fully occupy the
target binding site and alteration of the target site to favor interaction with a
specific factor.

PMCID: PMC359295
PMID: 7935474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Protein Sci. 1994 Oct;3(10):1806-21.

Solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of the heat shock transcription
factor determined by multidimensional heteronuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy.

Damberger FF(1), Pelton JG, Harrison CJ, Nelson HC, Wemmer DE.

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics Graduate Group, University of California, Berkeley 94720.

The solution structure of the 92-residue DNA-binding domain of the heat shock
transcription factor from Kluyveromyces lactis has been determined using
multidimensional NMR methods. Three-dimensional (3D) triple resonance,
1H-13C-13C-1H total correlation spectroscopy, and 15N-separated total correlation
spectroscopy-heteronuclear multiple quantum correlation experiments were used
along with various 2D spectra to make nearly complete assignments for the
backbone and side-chain 1H, 15N, and 13C resonances. Five-hundred eighty-three
NOE constraints identified in 3D 13C- and 15N-separated NOE spectroscopy
(NOESY)-heteronuclear multiple quantum correlation spectra and a 4-dimensional
13C/13C-edited NOESY spectrum, along with 35 phi, 9 chi 1, and 30 hydrogen bond
constraints, were used to calculate 30 structures by hybrid distance
geometry/stimulated annealing protocol, of which 24 were used for structural
comparison. The calculations revealed that a 3-helix bundle packs against a small
4-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet. The backbone RMS deviation (RMSD) for the
family of structures was 1.03 +/- 0.19 A with respect to the average structure.
The topology is analogous to that of the C-terminal domain of the catabolite gene
activator protein and appears to be in the helix-turn-helix family of DNA-binding
proteins. The overall fold determined by the NMR data is consistent with recent
crystallographic work on this domain (Harrison CJ, Bohm AA, Nelson HCM, 1994,
Science 263:224) as evidenced by RMSD between backbone atoms in the NMR and X-ray
structures of 1.77 +/- 0.20 A. Several differences were identified some of which 
may be due to protein-protein interactions in the crystal.

PMCID: PMC2142621
PMID: 7849597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Curr Eye Res. 1994 Oct;13(10):739-42.

Cloning and sequencing of heat shock factor (HSF1) cDNA from human retina.

Pardhasaradhi K(1), Kutty RK, Park CS, Krishna G.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Drug-Tissue Interaction, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Transcription of heat shock genes takes place in response to the exposure of
cells to elevated temperatures or other stress conditions. Heat shock
transcription factor (HSF) plays an important role in the activation of such
transcription. We report here the identification of human heat shock factor from 
human retina by RT-PCR and cloning studies. Human retinal poly A+ RNA was reverse
transcribed and the cDNAs thus obtained were subjected to PCR using a set of
primers designed from the reported cDNA sequence for human HSF1. The amplified
product showed 100% sequence identity with the appropriate region of HSF1. A
human retinal cDNA library was screened to isolate the full length cDNA for heat 
shock factor, which showed 100% sequence identity to that reported for human
HSF1. Northern blot analysis showed the size of human retinal HSF to be
approximately 2.4 kb.

PMID: 7842723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Nat Struct Biol. 1994 Sep;1(9):615-20.

Mutational analysis of the DNA-binding domain of yeast heat shock transcription
factor.

Hubl ST(1), Owens JC, Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720-3206, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 1994 Sep;1(9):561-2.

Both randomized oligonucleotide cassette mutagenesis and site-directed
mutagenesis have been used in combination with a yeast genetic screen to identify
critical residues in the DNA-binding domain of heat shock transcription factor
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Most of the surface residues in this highly
conserved domain can be changed to alanine with no observable effect on function.
Of nine critical residues identified in this screen, five are within helix alpha 
3, previously designated as the probable DNA recognition helix in the crystal
structure of the Kluyveromyces lactis protein. The other four residues may be
involved in DNA-binding or protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 7634101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nat Struct Biol. 1994 Sep;1(9):605-14.

Solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of Drosophila heat shock
transcription factor.

Vuister GW(1), Kim SJ, Orosz A, Marquardt J, Wu C, Bax A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 1994 Sep;1(9):561-2.

The solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of the Drosophila heat shock
transcription factor, as determined by multidimensional multinuclear NMR,
resembles that of the helix-turn-helix class of DNA-binding proteins. The domain 
comprises a four-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet, packed against a three-helix
bundle. The second helix is significantly distorted and is separated from the
third helix by an extended turn which is subject to conformational averaging on
an intermediate time scale. Helix 3 forms a classical amphipathic helix with
polar and charged residues exposed to the solvent. Upon titration with DNA,
resonance shifts in the backbone and Asn and Gln side-chain amides indicate that 
helix 3 acts as the recognition helix of the heat shock transcription factor.

PMID: 7634100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Aug 11;22(15):3113-8.

Cooperative interaction of human HSF1 heat shock transcription factor with
promoter DNA.

Wang Y(1), Morgan WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

We investigated the thermodynamics and kinetics of binding of human HSF1 heat
shock transcription factor to different configurations of heat shock element
(HSE) sequences on DNA fragments, in order to analyze binding cooperativity under
various conditions and to evaluate the significance of interactions between
multiple HSE sites. Constructs with different arrangements of one or more copies 
of a 15 base pair idealized HSE sequence (AGAACGTTCTAGAAC) were used for in vitro
binding experiments performed by multiple probe band shift assays and titrations.
Dissociation kinetics under various conditions were also measured by band shift
assays. These experiments indicated significant differences in behavior between
constructs with a pair of tandem sites in correct orientation (forming a
continuous array of alternating GAA and TTC blocks), and those with only a single
site, or a pair of sites in reversed orientation. These differences in behavior
indicated significant effects of cooperative binding to tandem sites in vitro,
and showed in particular a strong temperature dependence of binding to different 
constructs. Thermodynamic parameters for binding affinity and cooperativity were 
also evaluated from direct titrations.

PMCID: PMC310283
PMID: 8065924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5309-17.

Characterization of constitutive HSF2 DNA-binding activity in mouse embryonal
carcinoma cells.

Murphy SP(1), Gorzowski JJ, Sarge KD, Phillips B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

Two distinct murine heat shock transcription factors, HSF1 and HSF2, have been
identified. HSF1 mediates the transcriptional activation of heat shock genes in
response to environmental stress, while the function of HSF2 is not understood.
Both factors can bind to heat shock elements (HSEs) but are maintained in a
non-DNA-binding state under normal growth conditions. Mouse embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cells are the only mammalian cells known to exhibit HSE-binding activity, as
determined by gel shift assays, even when maintained at normal physiological
temperatures. We demonstrate here that the constitutive HSE-binding activity
present in F9 and PCC4.aza.R1 EC cells, as well as a similar activity found to be
present in mouse embryonic stem cells, is composed predominantly of HSF2. HSF2 in
F9 EC cells is trimerized and is present at higher levels than in a variety of
nonembryonal cell lines, suggesting a correlation of these properties with
constitutive HSE-binding activity. Surprisingly, transcription run-on assays
suggest that HSF2 in unstressed EC cells does not stimulate transcription of two 
putative target genes, hsp70 and hsp86. Genomic footprinting analysis indicates
that HSF2 is not bound in vivo to the HSE of the hsp70 promoter in unstressed F9 
EC cells, although HSF2 is present in the nucleus and the promoter is accessible 
to other transcription factors and to HSF1 following heat shock. Thus
trimerization and nuclear localization of HSF2 do not appear to be sufficient for
in vivo binding of HSF2 to the HSE of the hsp70 promoter in unstressed F9 EC
cells.

PMCID: PMC359050
PMID: 8035809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. EMBO J. 1994 Jun 1;13(11):2617-24.

A short element required for turning off heat shock transcription factor:
evidence that phosphorylation enhances deactivation.

Høj A(1), Jakobsen BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

Transcriptional activation of heat shock genes is mediated by a presynthesized
nuclear protein, the heat shock factor (HSF), which transiently converts from an 
inactive to an active form in response to hyperthermia. It has been suggested
that hyperphosphorylation of HSF upon heat shock triggers activation through the 
induction of a conformational change unmasking transcriptional activator domains.
Here we report that a short conserved element is involved in returning yeast HSF 
to the inactive state after heat shock and show that deactivation can be enhanced
by phosphorylation of adjacent serine residues. These results suggest that
phosphorylation of HSF in yeast serves as a regulatory mechanism to deactivate
HSF, rather than being involved in its activation.

PMCID: PMC395136
PMID: 8013461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Biol Chem. 1994 Apr 29;269(17):12475-81.

Yeast heat shock transcription factor contains a flexible linker between the
DNA-binding and trimerization domains. Implications for DNA binding by trimeric
proteins.

Flick KE(1), Gonzalez L Jr, Harrison CJ, Nelson HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California,
Berkeley 94720-3206.

All heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) share two regions of homology,
identified as the DNA binding and trimerization regions. The DNA binding region
consists of two parts, an 89-amino-acid minimal DNA-binding domain and an
additional 21 amino acids which are not necessary for specific DNA binding of a
monomeric DNA-binding domain. These 21 amino acids may act as a flexible linker
between the DNA-binding and trimerization domains. Saccharomyces cerevisiae HSF
has an additional 52 amino acids between the proposed flexible linker and the
trimerization domain. Deletion of this unique region has no effect on the
structural integrity or essential in vivo functions of HSF. To investigate the
role of the 21-amino-acid proposed linker, a series of internal deletions was
created in fragments containing the DNA-binding and trimerization domains. The
deletions have no effect on the structural integrity of the protein as assayed by
circular dichroism spectroscopy. However, alterations of the linker do affect
affinity of trimeric HSF binding to its target DNA. In addition, deletion of part
or all of the proposed linker from full-length yeast HSF, an essential protein,
disrupts growth of yeast.

PMID: 8175654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 15;91(6):2280-4.

Arachidonate is a potent modulator of human heat shock gene transcription.

Jurivich DA(1), Sistonen L, Sarge KD, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208.

Cell and tissue injury activate the inflammatory response through the action(s)
of arachidonic acid and its metabolites, leading to the expression of acute-phase
proteins and inflammatory cytokines. At the molecular level, little is known how 
arachidonic acid regulates the inflammatory response. As inflammation is also
associated with local increase in tissue temperatures, we examined whether
arachidonic acid was directly involved in the heat shock response. Extracellular 
exposure to arachidonic acid induced heat shock gene transcription in a
dose-dependent manner via acquisition of DNA-binding activity and phosphorylation
of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). In addition, exposure of cells to low
concentrations of arachidonic acid, which by themselves did not induce HSF1
DNA-binding activity, reduced the temperature threshold for HSF1 activation from 
elevated temperatures which are not physiologically relevant (> 42 degrees C) to 
temperatures which can be attained during the febrile response (39-40 degrees C).
These results indicate that elevated heat shock gene expression is a direct
consequence of an arachidonic acid-mediated cellular response.

PMCID: PMC43354
PMID: 8134388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):2087-99.

Human heat shock factors 1 and 2 are differentially activated and can
synergistically induce hsp70 gene transcription.

Sistonen L(1), Sarge KD, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

Two members of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF) family, HSF1 and HSF2,
both function as transcriptional activators of heat shock gene expression.
However, the inducible DNA-binding activities of these two factors are regulated 
by distinct pathways. HSF1 is activated by heat shock and other forms of stress, 
whereas HSF2 is activated during hemin-induced differentiation of human K562
erythroleukemia cells, suggesting a role for HSF2 in regulating heat shock gene
expression under nonstress conditions such as differentiation and development. To
understand the distinct regulatory pathways controlling HSF2 and HSF1 activities,
we have examined the biochemical and physical properties of the control and
activated states of HSF2 and compared these with the properties of HSF1. Our
results reveal that the inactive, non-DNA-binding forms of HSF2 and HSF1 exist
primarily in the cytoplasm of untreated K562 cells as a dimer and monomer,
respectively. This difference in the control oligomeric states suggests that the 
mechanisms used to control the DNA-binding activities of HSF2 and HSF1 are
distinct. Upon activation, both factors acquire DNA-binding activity, oligomerize
to a trimeric state, and translocate into the nucleus. Interestingly, we find
that simultaneous activation of both HSF2 and HSF1 in K562 cells subjected to
hemin treatment followed by heat shock results in the synergistic induction of
hsp70 gene transcription, suggesting a novel level of complex regulation of heat 
shock gene expression.

PMCID: PMC358569
PMID: 8114740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Jan 25;22(2):167-73.

Fine structure analyses of the Drosophila and Saccharomyces heat shock
factor--heat shock element interactions.

Fernandes M(1), Xiao H, Lis JT.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853.

Heat shock genes are activated by the binding of the heat shock transcription
factor (HSF) to heat shock elements (HSEs), consisting of arrays of the 5-bp unit
NGAAN arranged as inverted repeats. Here, we have investigated the interaction of
the 5-bp unit with HSFs of Drosophila and Saccharomyces. Mutations within the
conserved, central trinucleotide GAA reduce the relative binding affinity of both
HSFs. In addition, the base at position 1 (N1) also influences binding, with a
strong preference for an A at this position. Methylation interference initially
indicated that HSF contacts A1 in the minor groove, but interacts with the
immediately adjacent base G2 in the major groove. Further characterization of
this apparently abrupt minor to major groove transition by substitution of A1
with an inosine, shows that HSF contacts A1 in the major groove. We offer an
explanation for this apparent contradiction and propose that HSF recognizes the
HSE primarily through contacts within the major groove of the DNA helix. Finally,
based on these observations and a re-evaluation of the base frequencies and
criteria for consensus sequence assignment, we propose that the sequence AGAAN
more accurately represents the consensus HSE motif.

PMCID: PMC307767
PMID: 8121800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):501-8.

Interactions between DNA-bound trimers of the yeast heat shock factor.

Bonner JJ(1), Ballou C, Fackenthal DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is a trimer that binds to DNA
containing inverted repeats of the sequence nGAAn. HSF can bind DNA with the
sequence nGAAnnTTCn or with the sequence nTTCnnGAAn, with little preference for
either sequence over the other. However, (nGAAnnTTCn)2 is considerably less
active as a heat shock response element (HSE) than is (nTTCnnGAAn)2. The
electrophoretic mobilities of DNA-protein complexes and chemical cross-linking
between protein monomers indicate that the sequence (nGAAnnTTCn)2 is capable of
binding a single HSF trimer. In contrast, the sequence with higher biological
activity, (nTTCnnGAAn)2, is capable of binding two trimers. Thus, the ability of 
four-nGAAn-element HSEs to bind one or two trimers depends on the permutation
with which the elements are presented. A survey of naturally occurring HSEs shows
the sequence (nTTCnnGAAn)2 to be the more prevalent. We suggest that the greater 
ability of one permutation over the other to bind two HSF trimers accounts for
the initial identification of the naturally occurring heat shock consensus
sequence as a region of dyad symmetry.

PMCID: PMC358400
PMID: 8264619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jan;14(1):189-99.

Heat shock factor can activate transcription while bound to nucleosomal DNA in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Pederson DS(1), Fidrych T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont
School of Medicine, Burlington 05405.

After each round of replication, new transcription initiation complexes must
assemble on promoter DNA. This process may compete with packaging of the same
promoter sequences into nucleosomes. To elucidate interactions between regulatory
transcription factors and nucleosomes on newly replicated DNA, we asked whether
heat shock factor (HSF) could be made to bind to nucleosomal DNA in vivo. A heat 
shock element (HSE) was embedded at either of two different sites within a DNA
segment that directs the formation of a stable, positioned nucleosome. The
resulting DNA segments were coupled to a reporter gene and transfected into the
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Transcription from these two plasmid
constructions after induction by heat shock was similar in amount to that from a 
control plasmid in which HSF binds to nucleosome-free DNA. High-resolution
genomic footprint mapping of DNase I and micrococcal nuclease cleavage sites
indicated that the HSE in these two plasmids was, nevertheless, packaged in a
nucleosome. The inclusion of HSE sequences within (but relatively close to the
edge of) the nucleosome did not alter the position of the nucleosome which formed
with the parental DNA fragment. Genomic footprint analyses also suggested that
the HSE-containing nucleosome was unchanged by the induction of transcription.
Quantitative comparisons with control plasmids ruled out the possibility that HSF
was bound only to a small fraction of molecules that might have escaped
nucleosome assembly. Analysis of the helical orientation of HSE DNA in the
nucleosome indicated that HSF contacted DNA residues that faced outward from the 
histone octamer. We discuss the significance of these results with regard to the 
role of nucleosomes in inhibiting transcription and the normal occurrence of
nucleosome-free regions in promoters.

PMCID: PMC358369
PMID: 8264586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. EMBO J. 1993 Dec 15;12(13):5007-18.

Identification of the C-terminal activator domain in yeast heat shock factor:
independent control of transient and sustained transcriptional activity.

Chen Y(1), Barlev NA, Westergaard O, Jakobsen BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

In yeast, heat shock factor (HSF) is a trimer that binds DNA constitutively but
only supports high levels of transcription upon heat shock. The C-terminal
regions of HSF from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Kluyveromyces lactis are
unconserved yet both contain strong transactivators which are correctly regulated
when substituted for each other. We have performed high resolution mapping of
these activator domains which shows that in K.lactis HSF (KlHSF) activity can be 
located to a confined short domain, while in S.cerevisiae HSF (ScHSF) two
separate regions are required for full activity. Alignment of the activator
domains reveals similarity, as both overlap potential leucine zipper motifs
(zipper C) with a distribution of hydrophobic residues similar to two highly
conserved N-terminal domains which mediate HSF trimerization (zippers A and B).
In higher eukaryotes a C-terminal leucine zipper is required to maintain HSF in a
monomeric and non DNA-binding state under normal conditions and we therefore
address the regulatory roles of the three leucine zipper motifs in KlHSF. Whilst 
the longest and most N-terminal of the trimer region zippers, A, is dispensable
for regulation, mutation of a single leucine in zipper B makes HSF constitutively
active. In contrast to the situation in higher eukaryotes disruption of zipper C 
has no observable regulatory effect and therefore, although an intramolecular
contact between zippers B and C cannot be ruled out, such contact is not required
for restraining the C-terminal activator domain. We furthermore find that
deletions which abolish activator potential of the C-terminus render the host
strain temperature sensitive. However, deletion of a double proline-glycine motif
in the activator, whilst leaving HSF unable to respond to heat shock, does not
cause temperature sensitivity. This result demonstrates that independent
mechanisms control the transient and sustained activities of HSF.

PMCID: PMC413761
PMID: 8262043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biol Chem. 1993 Nov 25;268(33):25229-38.

Stable fluorescent dye-DNA complexes in high sensitivity detection of protein-DNA
interactions. Application to heat shock transcription factor.

Rye HS(1), Drees BL, Nelson HC, Glazer AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
94720.

The gel mobility-shift assay is an important tool for the study of
protein-nucleic acid interactions. High detection sensitivity is typically
attained by radioisotopic labeling of the target nucleic acid fragments. A novel 
fluorescence methodology offers significant advantages over this conventional
approach. Ethidium, thiazole orange, and oxazole yellow homodimers form stable,
highly fluorescent complexes with double-stranded DNA that can be detected in
gels by a laser-excited, confocal, fluorescence scanning system with a
sensitivity higher than that attainable with radioisotopic labeling. We describe 
here the use of these dyes in a gel-mobility assay to detect complexes of a
truncation of the Kluyveromyces lactis heat shock transcription factor,
containing the trimerization and DNA-binding domains (HSFDT), with target DNA. At
an appropriate molar DNA base pair to dye ratio, the labeling of a DNA fragment
with dimeric dye did not affect the binding to HSFDT. The detection of the
fluorescent-dye labeled HSFDT-DNA complexes with the laser scanner achieves a
spatial resolution far superior to that of conventional autoradiography and
permits analysis of multimer protein-DNA complexes that are not resolved by
traditional detection methods. We have used this technique to demonstrate that
HSF forms multimeric complexes on DNA by addition of trimeric units. The latter
conclusion is based on an analysis of the mobilities of the multiple HSFDT-DNA
complexes and on a two-color mobility-shift fluorescence assay that uses a mutant
of HSFDT engineered for site-specific labeling with fluorescein and target DNA
labeled with an "energy transfer" dye, thiazole orange-thiazole blue heterodimer.

PMID: 8227088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. EMBO J. 1993 Oct;12(10):3931-45.

A critical role for heat shock transcription factor in establishing a
nucleosome-free region over the TATA-initiation site of the yeast HSP82 heat
shock gene.

Gross DS(1), Adams CC, Lee S, Stentz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Medical Center, Shreveport 71130.

Heat shock genes are poised for rapid transcriptional activation in response to
environmental stress. A universal structural characteristic of such genes is the 
presence of a nucleosome-free, DNase I hypersensitive promoter region. Here we
investigate the structural and functional effects of mutating HSE1, the preferred
heat shock factor (HSF) binding site upstream of the yeast HSP82 gene. In situ
deletion or substitution of this sequence reduces both basal and induced
transcription by at least two orders of magnitude. Moreover, such mutations lead 
to a dramatic transition in chromatin structure: the DNase I hypersensitive
region is replaced by two stable, sequence-positioned nucleosomes. One of these
is centered over the mutated heat shock element, while the other--as revealed by 
DNase I genomic footprinting--is precisely positioned in a rotational sense over 
the TATA-initiation site. Overexpression of yeast HSF strongly suppresses the
null phenotype of the induced hsp82-delta HSE1 gene and re-establishes DNase I
hypersensitivity over its promoter. Such suppression is mediated through sequence
disposed immediately upstream of HSE1 and containing two low affinity heat shock 
elements. These data imply a critical role for HSF in displacing stably
positioned nucleosomes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and suggest that HSF
transcriptionally activates HSP82 at least partly through its ability to
alleviate nucleosome repression of the core promoter.

PMCID: PMC413676
PMID: 8404861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2486-96.

Activation of human heat shock genes is accompanied by oligomerization,
modification, and rapid translocation of heat shock transcription factor HSF1.

Baler R(1), Dahl G, Voellmy R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Florida 33101.

Transcriptional activity of heat shock (hsp) genes is controlled by a
heat-activated, group-specific transcription factor(s) recognizing arrays of
inverted repeats of the element NGAAN. To date genes for two human factors, HSF1 
and HSF2, have been isolated. To define their properties as well as the changes
they undergo during heat stress activation, we prepared polyclonal antibodies to 
these factors. Using these tools, we have shown that human HeLa cells
constitutively synthesize HSF1, but we were unable to detect HSF2. In unstressed 
cells HSF1 is present mainly in complexes with an apparent molecular mass of
about 200 kDa, unable to bind to DNA. Heat treatment induces a shift in the
apparent molecular mass of HSF1 to about 700 kDa, concomitant with the
acquisition of DNA-binding ability. Cross-linking experiments suggest that this
change in complex size may reflect the trimerization of monomeric HSF1. Human
HSF1 expressed in Xenopus oocytes does not bind DNA, but derepression of
DNA-binding activity, as well as oligomerization of HSF1, occurs during heat
treatment at the same temperature at which hsp gene expression is induced in this
organism, suggesting that a conserved Xenopus protein(s) plays a role in this
regulation. Inactive HSF1 resides in the cytoplasm of human cells; on activation 
it rapidly translocates to a soluble nuclear fraction, and shortly thereafter it 
becomes associated with the nuclear pellet. On heat shock, activatable HSF1,
which might already have been posttranslationally modified in the unstressed
cell, undergoes further modification. These different process provide multiple
points of regulation of hsp gene expression.

PMCID: PMC359569
PMID: 8455624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):1983-97.

Characterization of a novel chicken heat shock transcription factor, heat shock
factor 3, suggests a new regulatory pathway.

Nakai A(1), Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

We have cloned three avian heat shock transcription factor (HSF) genes
corresponding to a novel factor, HSF3, and the avian homologs of mammalian HSF1
and HSF2. The predicted amino acid sequence of HSF3 is approximately 40% related 
to the sequence of HSF1 and HSF2. The sequences for all three factors exhibit
extensive identify in the DNA binding motifs and the heptad repeats of
hydrophobic amino acids which are common to all eukaryotic HSFs. Despite these
overall similarities, each avian HSF exhibits distinct DNA binding properties.
HSF2 when expressed in vitro binds constitutively to the heat shock element
promoter sequence, whereas neither HSF1 nor HSF3 expressed in vitro binds to DNA.
HSF1 DNA binding is induced upon heat shock or treatment with nonionic
detergents, whereas the DNA binding properties of HSF3 are not induced by these
conditions in vitro. These results suggest that HSF3 activation may involve an
induction pathway distinct from the traditional forms of heat shock gene
induction. HSF3 DNA binding activity, however, is obtained when the
carboxyl-terminal region including the distal heptad repeat is deleted,
indicating the presence of negative cis-regulatory sequences. The HSF3 message,
like HSF1 and HSF2 messages, is coexpressed during development and in most
tissues, which suggests a general role for the regulatory pathway involving HSF3.

PMCID: PMC359520
PMID: 8455593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1392-407.

Activation of heat shock gene transcription by heat shock factor 1 involves
oligomerization, acquisition of DNA-binding activity, and nuclear localization
and can occur in the absence of stress.

Sarge KD(1), Murphy SP, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1993 Jun;13(6):3838-9.
    Mol Cell Biol 1993 May;13(5):3122-3.

The existence of multiple heat shock factor (HSF) genes in higher eukaryotes has 
promoted questions regarding the functions of these HSF family members,
especially with respect to the stress response. To address these questions, we
have used polyclonal antisera raised against mouse HSF1 and HSF2 to examine the
biochemical, physical, and functional properties of these two factors in
unstressed and heat-shocked mouse and human cells. We have identified HSF1 as the
mediator of stress-induced heat shock gene transcription. HSF1 displays
stress-induced DNA-binding activity, oligomerization, and nuclear localization,
while HSF2 does not. Also, HSF1 undergoes phosphorylation in cells exposed to
heat or cadmium sulfate but not in cells treated with the amino acid analog
L-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid, indicating that phosphorylation of HSF1 is not
essential for its activation. Interestingly, HSF1 and HSF2 overexpressed in
transfected 3T3 cells both display constitutive DNA-binding activity,
oligomerization, and transcriptional activity. These results demonstrate that
HSF1 can be activated in the absence of physiological stress and also provide
support for a model of regulation of HSF1 and HSF2 activity by a titratable
negative regulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC359449
PMID: 8441385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Science. 1993 Jan 8;259(5092):230-4.

Regulation of heat shock factor trimer formation: role of a conserved leucine
zipper.

Rabindran SK(1), Haroun RI, Clos J, Wisniewski J, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

The human and Drosophila heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) are multi-zipper
proteins with high-affinity binding to DNA that is regulated by heat
shock-induced trimerization. Formation of HSF trimers is dependent on hydrophobic
heptad repeats located in the amino-terminal region of the protein. Two
subregions at the carboxyl-terminal end of human HSF1 were identified that
maintain the monomeric form of the protein under normal conditions. One of these 
contains a leucine zipper motif that is conserved between vertebrate and insect
HSFs. These results suggest that the carboxyl-terminal zipper may suppress
formation of trimers by the amino-terminal HSF zipper elements by means of
intramolecular coiled-coil interactions that are sensitive to heat shock.

PMID: 8421783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):248-56.

Identification of cis and trans components of a novel heat shock stress
regulatory pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kobayashi N(1), McEntee K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Los Angeles,
School of Medicine 90024.

The stress-responsive DDR2 gene (previously called DDRA2) of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is transcribed at elevated levels following stress caused by heat
shock or DNA damage. Previously, we identified a 51-bp promoter fragment,
oligo31/32, which conferred heat shock inducibility on the heterologous CYC1-lacZ
reporter gene in S. cerevisiae (N. Kobayashi and K. McEntee, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 87:6550-6554, 1990). Using a series of synthetic oligonucleotides, we
have identified a pentanucleotide, CCCCT (C4T), as an essential component of this
stress response sequence. This element is not a binding site for the
well-characterized heat shock transcription factor which recognizes a distinct
cis-acting heat shock element in the promoters of many heat shock genes. Here we 
demonstrate the ability of oligonucleotides containing the C4T sequence to confer
heat shock inducibility on the reporter gene and show that the presence of two
such elements produces more than additive effects on induction. Gel retardation
experiments have been used to demonstrate specific complex formation between
C4T-containing fragments and one or more yeast proteins. Formation of these
complexes was not competed by fragments containing mutations in the C4T sequence 
nor by heat shock element-containing competitor DNAs. Fragments containing the
C4T element bound to a single 140-kDa polypeptide, distinct from heat shock
transcription factors in yeast crude extracts. These experiments identify key
cis- and trans-acting components of a novel heat shock stress response pathway in
S. cerevisiae.

PMCID: PMC358904
PMID: 8417330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;12(9):4104-11.

Activation of heat shock factor 2 during hemin-induced differentiation of human
erythroleukemia cells.

Sistonen L(1), Sarge KD, Phillips B, Abravaya K, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern 
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

Hemin induces nonterminal differentiation of human K562 erythroleukemia cells,
which is accompanied by the expression of certain erythroid cell-specific genes, 
such as the embryonic and fetal globins, and elevated expression of the stress
genes hsp70, hsp90, and grp78/BiP. Previous studies revealed that, as during heat
shock, transcriptional induction of hsp70 in hemin-treated cells is mediated by
activation of heat shock transcription factor (HSF), which binds to the heat
shock element (HSE). We report here that hemin activates the DNA-binding activity
of HSF2, whereas heat shock induces predominantly the DNA-binding activity of a
distinct factor, HSF1. This constitutes the first example of HSF2 activation in
vivo. Both hemin and heat shock treatments resulted in equivalent levels of
HSF-HSE complexes as analyzed in vitro by gel mobility shift assay, yet
transcription of the hsp70 gene was stimulated much less by hemin-induced HSF
than by heat shock-induced HSF. Genomic footprinting experiments revealed that
hemin-induced HSF and heat shock-induced HSF, HSF2, and HSF1, respectively,
occupy the HSE of the human hsp70 promoter in a similar yet not identical manner.
We speculate that the difference in occupancy and/or in the transcriptional
abilities of HSF1 and HSF2 accounts for the observed differences in the
stimulation of hsp70 gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC360308
PMID: 1508207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Gen Genet. 1992 Sep;234(3):369-78.

Translational readthrough at nonsense mutations in the HSF1 gene of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.

Kopczynski JB(1), Raff AC, Bonner JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405.

The HSF1 gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae directs the synthesis of the heat shock
transcription factor, HSF. The gene is essential; disruption mutations are
lethal. Using a plasmid shuffle screen, we isolated mutations in the HSF1 gene
after in vitro mutagenesis of plasmid DNA with hydroxylamine. From a collection
of both conditional (temperature-sensitive) and unconditional lethal mutations,
we recovered mutations that map exclusively to the 5' half of the gene. All are
nonsense mutations, including conditional mutations that map 5' to the portion of
the HSF1 gene that encodes the DNA-binding domain of the transcription factor.
For one such mutation, we demonstrated that the nonsense mutation is subject to
translational readthrough, even though there are no known nonsense suppressors in
the genetic background of our strain. Our results suggest that the HSF protein is
highly tolerant of amino acid changes, a conclusion that is consistent with the
very low degree of evolutionary conservation among HSF proteins. Our results also
suggest that translational readthrough occurs with moderate efficiency in yeast, 
particularly when the terminator codon is followed immediately by an A or C
residue. This result illustrates that the inference of gene function from mutant 
phenotype depends critically upon the analysis of a true null allele, and not
merely an amber or ochre allele.

PMID: 1406583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Aug;12(8):3490-8.

Inhibition of the activation of heat shock factor in vivo and in vitro by
flavonoids.

Hosokawa N(1), Hirayoshi K, Kudo H, Takechi H, Aoike A, Kawai K, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Japan.

Transcriptional activation of human heat shock protein (HSP) genes by heat shock 
or other stresses is regulated by the activation of a heat shock factor (HSF).
Activated HSF posttranslationally acquires DNA-binding ability. We previously
reported that quercetin and some other flavonoids inhibited the induction of HSPs
in HeLa and COLO 320DM cells, derived from a human colon cancer, at the level of 
mRNA accumulation. In this study, we examined the effects of quercetin on the
induction of HSP70 promoter-regulated chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
activity and on the binding of HSF to the heat shock element (HSE) by a gel
mobility shift assay with extracts of COLO 320DM cells. Quercetin inhibited
heat-induced CAT activity in COS-7 and COLO 320DM cells which were transfected
with plasmids bearing the CAT gene under the control of the promoter region of
the human HSP70 gene. Treatment with quercetin inhibited the binding of HSF to
the HSE in whole-cell extracts activated in vivo by heat shock and in cytoplasmic
extracts activated in vitro by elevated temperature or by urea. The binding of
HSF activated in vitro by Nonidet P-40 was not suppressed by the addition of
quercetin. The formation of the HSF-HSE complex was not inhibited when quercetin 
was added only during the binding reaction of HSF to the HSE after in vitro heat 
activation. Quercetin thus interacts with HSF and inhibits the induction of HSPs 
after heat shock through inhibition of HSF activation.

PMCID: PMC364598
PMID: 1321338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Genetics. 1992 Jun;131(2):277-85.

Isolation and characterization of extragenic suppressors of mutations in the SSA 
hsp70 genes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Nelson RJ(1), Heschl MF, Craig EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison 53706.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains that contain null alleles of two hsp70 genes,
SSA1 and SSA2, are temperature sensitive for growth. In this study, extragenic
suppressors of ssa1 ssa2 have been isolated. Suppression is due to mutations at
nuclear loci designated EXA1, EXA2 and EXA3 for EXtragenic suppressor hsp70
subfamily A. Two of the four EXA1 alleles are dominant as is EXA3-1. The other
two EXA1 alleles as well as the sole EXA2 allele are recessive. EXA1 mutations
lead to accumulation of a previously uncharacterized form of hsp70. EXA2 and EXA3
mutations affect the regulation of the stress response. In exa2-1 ssa1 ssa2
strains the gene products of the remaining SSA hsp70 genes, SSA3 and SSA4
(Ssa3/4p), accumulate to higher levels. The EXA3-1 mutation results in increased 
accumulation of both Ssa3/4p and the hsp70s encoded by the SSB1 and SSB2 genes
(Ssb1/2p), suggesting that the EXA3 gene product plays a central role in the
yeast stress response. Consistent with this hypothesis, EXA3-1 is tightly linked 
to HSF1, the gene encoding the transcriptional regulatory protein known as "heat 
shock factor." All of the genes identified in this study seem to be involved in
regulating the expression of SSA3 and SSA4 or the activity of their protein
products.

PMCID: PMC1205003
PMID: 1644272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Bioessays. 1992 Apr;14(4):227-36.

Maize mutants and variants altering developmental time and their heterochronic
interactions.

Freeling M(1), Bertrand-Garcia R, Sinha N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of California, Berkeley 94720.

It is useful to envision two fundamentally different ways by which the timing of 
plant development is regulated: developmental stage-transition mechanisms and
time-to-flowering mechanisms. The existence of both mechanisms is indicated by
the behavior of various mutants. Shoot stage transitions are defined by dominant 
mutants representing at least four different genes; each mutant retards
transitions from juvenile shoot stages to more adult shoot stages. In addition,
dominant leaf stage-transition mutants in at least seven different genes have
similar phenotypes, but the leaf rather than the shoot is the focus (and at least
two of these genes encode homeodomain proteins.) One mutant, Hairy sheath frayed 
1-O (Hsf1-O) simultaneously affects shoot and leaf; this mutant's behavior
initiated our interest in plant heterochronism. The second type of timekeeping
involves time-to-flowering. As with most plant but not animal species, cultivars 
of the maize species vary greatly for the time-to-flowering quantitative trait:
between 6 and 14 weeks is common. It is via the 'slipping time frames'
interaction that takes place between stage-transition mutants and
time-to-flowering genetic backgrounds that unexpected and radical phenotypes
occur. We see a reservoir of previously unsuspected morphological possibilities
among the few heterochronic genotypes we have constructed, possibilities that may
mimic the sort of variation needed to fuel macroevolution without having to posit
(as done by Goldschmidt) any special macromutational mechanisms.

PMID: 1596272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Mar;12(3):1021-30.

Temperature-dependent regulation of a heterologous transcriptional activation
domain fused to yeast heat shock transcription factor.

Bonner JJ(1), Heyward S, Fackenthal DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
is posttranslationally modified. At low growth temperatures, it activates
transcription of heat shock genes only poorly; after shift to high temperatures, 
it activates transcription readily. In an effort to elucidate the mechanism of
this regulation, we constructed a series of HSF-VP16 fusions that join the HSF
DNA-binding domain to the strong transcriptional activation domain from the VP16 
gene of herpes simplex virus. Replacement of the endogenous C-terminal
transcriptional activation domain with that of VP16 generates an HSF derivative
that exhibits behavior reminiscent of HSF itself: low transcriptional activation 
activity at normal growth temperature and high activity after heat shock. HSF can
thus restrain the activity of the heterologous VP16 transcriptional activation
domain. To determine what is required for repression of activity at low
temperature, we deleted portions of HSF from this HSF-VP16 fusion to map the
regulatory domain. We also isolated point mutations that convert the HSF-VP16
fusion into a constitutive transcriptional activator. We conclude that the
central, evolutionarily conserved domain of HSF, encompassing the DNA-binding and
multimerization domains, contains a major determinant of temperature-dependent
regulation.

PMCID: PMC369534
PMID: 1545786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 15;88(24):11091-4.

Uncoupling thermotolerance from the induction of heat shock proteins.

Smith BJ(1), Yaffe MP.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Diego, Department of Biology, La Jolla 92093.

Exposure of cells to elevated temperatures causes a rapid increase in the
synthesis of heat shock proteins (hsps) and induces thermotolerance, the
increased ability of cells to survive exposure to lethal temperatures; however,
the connection between hsp induction and the acquisition of thermotolerance is
unclear. hsp induction in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is mediated by the
activation of heat-shock transcription factor, and recently we have described a
mutation, hsf1-m3, in heat-shock transcription factor that prevents the factor's 
activation. We now demonstrate that this mutation results in a general block in
heat-shock induction but does not affect the acquisition of thermotolerance. Our 
results indicate that high-level induction of the major hsps is not required for 
cells to acquire thermotolerance.

PMCID: PMC53079
PMID: 1763024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Aug 15;88(16):6911-5.

Isolation of a cDNA for HSF2: evidence for two heat shock factor genes in humans.

Schuetz TJ(1), Gallo GJ, Sheldon L, Tempst P, Kingston RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

The heat shock response is transcriptionally regulated by an evolutionarily
conserved protein termed heat shock factor (HSF). We report the purification to
homogeneity and the partial peptide sequence of HSF from HeLa cells. The peptide 
sequence was used to isolate a human cDNA with a predicted open reading frame
that has homology to the DNA binding domains of both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Drosophila HSFs. The cDNA directs the synthesis of a protein that binds to the
heat shock element with specificity identical to HeLa HSF and stimulates
transcription from a heat shock promoter. The expressed protein cross-reacts with
anti-HSF antibodies. Surprisingly, however, this cDNA does not encode all of the 
peptides obtained from purified HeLa HSF. These peptides are encoded by a
distinct human cDNA, HSF1, described by Rabindran et al. [Rabindran, S. K.,
Giorgi, G., Clos, J. & Wu, C. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 6906-6910.]
It therefore appears that there is a human heat shock factor gene family and that
at least two separate but related HSF proteins regulate the stress response in
humans.

PMCID: PMC52203
PMID: 1871106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Aug 15;88(16):6906-10.

Molecular cloning and expression of a human heat shock factor, HSF1.

Rabindran SK(1), Giorgi G, Clos J, Wu C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Human cells respond to heat stress by inducing the binding of a preexisting
transcriptional activator (heat shock factor, HSF) to DNA. We have isolated
recombinant DNA clones for a human HSF (HSF1) by screening cDNA libraries with a 
human cDNA fragment. The human HSF1 probe was produced by the PCR with primers
deduced from conserved amino acids in the Drosophila and yeast HSF sequences. The
human HSF1 mRNA is constitutively expressed in HeLa cells under nonshock
conditions and encodes a protein with four conserved leucine zipper motifs. Like 
its counterpart in Drosophila, human HSF1 produced in Escherichia coli in the
absence of heat shock is active as a DNA binding transcription factor, suggesting
that the intrinsic activity of HSF is under negative control in human cells.
Surprisingly, an independently isolated human HSF clone, HSF2, is related to but 
significantly different from HSF1 [Schuetz, T. J., Gallo, G. J., Sheldon, L.,
Tempst, P. & Kingston, R. E. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 6911-6915].

PMCID: PMC52202
PMID: 1871105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Gene. 1991 Jul 31;104(1):113-8.

Vectors for the expression and analysis of DNA-binding proteins in yeast.

Bonner JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405.

A series of 13 vectors is described. All are yeast centromere plasmids with the
LEU2 gene for selection in yeast, and pUC19 sequences for growth in Escherichia
coli. All contain the GAL1 promoter directing transcription into a multiple
cloning site (MCS). For twelve of the plasmids, synthetic
oligodeoxyribonucleotides create an ATG start codon, in a productive context for 
yeast, prior to the MCS. Spacing between the ATG and the MCS is variable, to
facilitate the cloning of gene fragments in the appropriate reading frame. Nine
of the plasmids also contain the strong transcriptional activator from the herpes
simplex virus VP16 gene, joined downstream from the MCS. In these nine vectors,
all possible combinations of reading frames are available. The suitability of
these plasmids for the expression and analysis of DNA-binding domains is tested
by cloning into them fragments of the yeast HSF1 gene, encoding the heat shock
transcription factor (HSF). The regulation of reporter gene expression by the
chimeric HSF-VP16 fusions is described, as is the utility of these vectors for
other applications.

PMID: 1655575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Cell. 1991 May 3;65(3):363-6.

Heat shock factor and the heat shock response.

Sorger PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco 94143-0502.

PMID: 2018972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;11(3):1232-8.

Heat shock transcription factor activates transcription of the yeast
metallothionein gene.

Silar P(1), Butler G, Thiele DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor 48109-0606.

In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, transcription of the metallothionein gene 
CUP1 is induced by copper and silver. Strains with a complete deletion of the
ACE1 gene, the copper-dependent activator of CUP1 transcription, are
hypersensitive to copper. These strains have a low but significant basal level of
CUP1 transcription. To identify genes which mediate basal transcription of CUP1
or which activate CUP1 in response to other stimuli, we isolated an extragenic
suppressor of an ace1 deletion. We demonstrate that a single amino acid
substitution in the heat shock transcription factor (HSF) DNA-binding domain
dramatically enhances CUP1 transcription while reducing transcription of the SSA3
gene, a member of the yeast hsp70 gene family. These results indicate that yeast 
metallothionein transcription is under HSF control and that metallothionein
biosynthesis is important in response to heat shock stress. Furthermore, our
results suggest that HSF may modulate the magnitude of individual heat shock gene
transcription by subtle differences in its interaction with heat shock elements
and that a single-amino-acid change can dramatically alter the activity of the
factor for different target genes.

PMCID: PMC369394
PMID: 1996089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. EMBO J. 1991 Feb;10(2):369-75.

A conserved heptapeptide restrains the activity of the yeast heat shock
transcription factor.

Jakobsen BK(1), Pelham HR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

In yeast, expression of heat shock genes is regulated by a factor (HSF) which
binds constitutively to DNA, but activates transcription efficiently only after
heat shock. We have compared the HSFs from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Kluyveromyces lactis. Both factors contain an activation domain whose activity is
masked at low temperature, but the amino acid sequences of these activators are
unrelated. Masking requires the evolutionarily conserved DNA binding and
oligomerization domains, as well as a short conserved element close to the
activator. Although this element contains potential phosphorylation sites, they
are not required for induction. We suggest that the conserved element binds
either to the structural core of the protein or to another polypeptide, holding
the activator in an inactive configuration, and that high temperatures disrupt
this interaction. Our results emphasize the importance of global protein
structure in the regulation of transcription factor activity.

PMCID: PMC452656
PMID: 1899375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Oct;10(10):5226-34.

REB1, a yeast DNA-binding protein with many targets, is essential for growth and 
bears some resemblance to the oncogene myb.

Ju QD(1), Morrow BE, Warner JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York 10461.

REB1 is a DNA-binding protein that recognizes sites within both the enhancer and 
the promoter of rRNA transcription as well as upstream of many genes transcribed 
by RNA polymerase II. We report here the cloning of the gene for REB1 by
screening a yeast genomic lambda gt11 library with specific oligonucleotides
containing the REB1 binding site consensus sequence. The REB1 gene was sequenced,
revealing an open reading frame encoding 809 amino acids. The predicted protein
was highly hydrophilic, with numerous OH-containing amino acids and glutamines,
features common to many of the general DNA-binding proteins of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, such as ABF1, RAP1, GCN4, and HSF1. There was some homology between a
portion of REB1 and the DNA-binding domain of the oncogene myb. REB1 is an
essential gene that maps on chromosome II. However, the physiological role that
it plays in the cell has yet to be established.

PMCID: PMC361205
PMID: 2204808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cell. 1988 Sep 9;54(6):841-53.

Isolation of the gene encoding the S. cerevisiae heat shock transcription factor.

Wiederrecht G(1), Seto D, Parker CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

The yeast heat shock transcription factor gene, HSF1, has been isolated from an
S. cerevisiae genomic expression library (in lambda gt11). The sequenced gene
encodes an 833 amino acid protein having a mass of 93,218 daltons. Expression of 
specific DNA-binding activity in E. coli and of transcriptional activity in yeast
confirmed the identity of the cloned gene. Southern analysis and gene-disruption 
experiments indicate that the heat shock transcription factor is encoded by a
single-copy, essential gene. The DNA-binding domain was localized to a 118 amino 
acid region in the amino-terminal third of the protein. Inspection of the
DNA-binding domain reveals no resemblance to any currently known secondary
structural motifs implicated in DNA recognition and binding.

PMID: 3044612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


