
1. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0014-4835(16)30040-9. doi:
10.1016/j.exer.2016.03.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Systems biology of lens development: A paradigm for disease gene discovery in the
eye.

Anand D(1), Lachke SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA;
Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE, USA. Electronic address: salil@udel.edu.

Over the past several decades, the biology of the developing lens has been
investigated using molecular genetics-based approaches in various vertebrate
model systems. These efforts, involving target gene knockouts or knockdowns, have
led to major advances in our understanding of lens morphogenesis and the
pathological basis of cataracts, as well as of other lens related eye defects. In
particular, we now have a functional understanding of regulators such as Pax6,
Six3, Sox2, Oct1 (Pou2f1), Meis1, Pnox1, Zeb2 (Sip1), Mab21l1, Foxe3, Tfap2a
(Ap2-alpha), Pitx3, Sox11, Prox1, Sox1, c-Maf, Mafg, Mafk, Hsf4, Fgfrs, Bmp7, and
Tdrd7 in this tissue. However, whether these individual regulators interact or
their targets overlap, and the significance of such interactions during lens
morphogenesis, is not well defined. The arrival of high-throughput approaches for
gene expression profiling (microarrays, RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq), etc.), which
can be coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) or RNA
immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays, along with improved computational resources and
publically available datasets (e.g. those containing comprehensive
protein-protein, protein-DNA information), presents new opportunities to advance 
our understanding of the lens tissue on a global systems level. Such
systems-level knowledge will lead to the derivation of the underlying lens gene
regulatory network (GRN), defined as a circuit map of the regulator-target
interactions functional in lens development, which can be applied to expedite
cataract gene discovery. In this review, we cover the various systems-level
approaches such as microarrays, RNA-seq, and ChIP that are already being applied 
to lens studies and discuss strategies for assembling and interpreting these vast
amounts of high-throughput information for effective dispersion to the scientific
community. In particular, we discuss strategies for effective interpretation of
this new information in the context of the rich knowledge obtained through the
application of traditional single-gene focused experiments on the lens. Finally, 
we discuss our vision for integrating these diverse high-throughput datasets in a
single web-based user-friendly tool iSyTE (integrated Systems Tool for Eye gene
discovery) - a resource that is already proving effective in the identification
and characterization of genes linked to lens development and cataract. We
anticipate that application of a similar approach to other ocular tissues such as
the retina and the cornea, and even other organ systems, will significantly
impact disease gene discovery.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26992779  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Front Genet. 2015 Nov 18;6:331. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2015.00331. eCollection 2015.

Mapping Mammalian Cell-type-specific Transcriptional Regulatory Networks Using
KD-CAGE and ChIP-seq Data in the TC-YIK Cell Line.

Lizio M(1), Ishizu Y(1), Itoh M(2), Lassmann T(3), Hasegawa A(1), Kubosaki A(4), 
Severin J(1), Kawaji H(2), Nakamura Y(5); FANTOM consortium, Suzuki H(1),
Hayashizaki Y(6), Carninci P(1), Forrest AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan ; Division of
Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan.
(2)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan ; Division of
Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan 
; RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program Yokohama, Japan.
(3)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan ; Division of
Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan 
; Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia Subiaco, WA,
Australia. (4)RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan. (5)Cell
Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center Ibaraki, Japan. (6)RIKEN Center
for Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan ; RIKEN Preventive Medicine and
Diagnosis Innovation Program Yokohama, Japan. (7)RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies Yokohama, Japan ; Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies Yokohama, Japan ; QEII Medical Centre and Centre for
Medical Research, Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, The University of 
Western Australia Nedlands, WA, Australia.

Mammals are composed of hundreds of different cell types with specialized
functions. Each of these cellular phenotypes are controlled by different
combinations of transcription factors. Using a human non islet cell insulinoma
cell line (TC-YIK) which expresses insulin and the majority of known pancreatic
beta cell specific genes as an example, we describe a general approach to
identify key cell-type-specific transcription factors (TFs) and their direct and 
indirect targets. By ranking all human TFs by their level of enriched expression 
in TC-YIK relative to a broad collection of samples (FANTOM5), we confirmed known
key regulators of pancreatic function and development. Systematic siRNA mediated 
perturbation of these TFs followed by qRT-PCR revealed their interconnections
with NEUROD1 at the top of the regulation hierarchy and its depletion drastically
reducing insulin levels. For 15 of the TF knock-downs (KD), we then used Cap
Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) to identify thousands of their targets
genome-wide (KD-CAGE). The data confirm NEUROD1 as a key positive regulator in
the transcriptional regulatory network (TRN), and ISL1, and PROX1 as antagonists.
As a complimentary approach we used ChIP-seq on four of these factors to identify
NEUROD1, LMX1A, PAX6, and RFX6 binding sites in the human genome. Examining the
overlap between genes perturbed in the KD-CAGE experiments and genes with a
ChIP-seq peak within 50 kb of their promoter, we identified direct
transcriptional targets of these TFs. Integration of KD-CAGE and ChIP-seq data
shows that both NEUROD1 and LMX1A work as the main transcriptional activators. In
the core TRN (i.e., TF-TF only), NEUROD1 directly transcriptionally activates the
pancreatic TFs HSF4, INSM1, MLXIPL, MYT1, NKX6-3, ONECUT2, PAX4, PROX1, RFX6,
ST18, DACH1, and SHOX2, while LMX1A directly transcriptionally activates DACH1,
SHOX2, PAX6, and PDX1. Analysis of these complementary datasets suggests the need
for caution in interpreting ChIP-seq datasets. (1) A large fraction of binding
sites are at distal enhancer sites and cannot be directly associated to their
targets, without chromatin conformation data. (2) Many peaks may be
non-functional: even when there is a peak at a promoter, the expression of the
gene may not be affected in the matching perturbation experiment.

PMCID: PMC4650373
PMID: 26635867  [PubMed]


3. J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;61(2):177-9. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.127. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

A novel homozygous mutation in HSF4 causing autosomal recessive congenital
cataract.

Behnam M(1), Imagawa E(2), Chaleshtori AR(3), Ronasian F(1), Salehi M(4), Miyake 
N(2), Matsumoto N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Center of Genome, Isfahan, Iran. (2)Department of Human
Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. 
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. (4)Division of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School
of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.

Cataract is defined as opacity in the crystalline lens and congenital cataract
occurs during the first year of life. Until now, mutations of more than 50 genes 
in congenital cataract have been reported with various modes of inheritance.
Among them, HSF4 mutations have been reported in autosomal dominant, autosomal
recessive and age-related forms of cataract. The inheritance patterns of these
mutations depend on their mutational positions in HSF4: autosomal dominant or
recessive mutations are respectively found either in a DNA-binding domain or in
(or downstream of) hydrophobic repeats. Here we report a novel homozygous HSF4
mutation (c.521T>C, p.Leu174Pro) in two affected sibs of an Iranian
consanguineous family using whole exome sequencing. The mutation is predicted as 
highly pathogenic by in silico analysis (SIFT, Polyphen2 and MutationTaster) and 
is not found in any of control databases. This mutation is located in a
hydrophobic repeat of the HSF4 protein, which is consistent with the mode of
inheritance as an autosomal recessive trait.

PMID: 26490182  [PubMed - in process]


4. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2015 Dec;215(4):191-203. doi: 10.1111/apha.12600. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

Deficiency of heat shock transcription factor 1 suppresses heat stress-associated
increase in slow soleus muscle mass of mice.

Ohno Y(1), Egawa T(2,)(3), Yokoyama S(1), Nakai A(4), Sugiura T(5), Ohira Y(6),
Yoshioka T(7), Goto K(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiology, School of Health Sciences, Toyohashi SOZO
University, Toyohashi, Japan. (2)Department of Physiology, Graduate School of
Health Sciences, Toyohashi SOZO University, Toyohashi, Japan. (3)Research Fellow 
of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of
Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Ube, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Education, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan. (6)Graduate
School of Health and Sports Science, Doshisha University, Kyotanabe, Japan.
(7)Hirosaki Gakuin University, Hirosaki, Japan.

AIM: Effects of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) deficiency on heat
stress-associated increase in slow soleus muscle mass of mice were investigated.
METHODS: Both HSF1-null and wild-type mice were randomly assigned to control and 
heat-stressed groups. Mice in heat-stressed group were exposed to heat stress (41
°C for 60 min) in an incubator without anaesthesia.
RESULTS: Significant increase in wet and dry weights, and protein content of
soleus muscle in wild-type mice was observed seven days after the application of 
the heat stress. However, heat stress had no impact on soleus muscle mass in
HSF1-null mice. Neither type of mice exhibited much effect of heat stress on HSF 
mRNA expression (HSF1, HSF2 and HSF4). On the other hand, heat stress upregulated
heat shock proteins (HSPs) at the mRNA (HSP72) and protein (HSP72 and HSP110)
levels in wild-type mice, but not in HSF1-null mice. The population of
Pax7-positive nuclei relative to total myonuclei of soleus muscle in wild-type
mice was significantly increased by heat stress, but not in HSF1-null mice.
Furthermore, the absence of HSF1 gene suppressed heat stress-associated
phosphorylation of Akt and p70 S6 kinase (p-p70S6K) in soleus muscle.
CONCLUSION: Heat stress-associated increase in skeletal muscle mass may be
induced by HSF1 and/or HSF1-mediated stress response that activates muscle
satellite cells and Akt/p70S6K signalling pathway.

© 2015 Scandinavian Physiological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26347147  [PubMed - in process]


5. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:955-73. eCollection 2015.

Chromatin features, RNA polymerase II and the comparative expression of lens
genes encoding crystallins, transcription factors, and autophagy mediators.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(2), Chauss D(3), Wang P(4), Kantorow M(3), Zheng D(5),
Cvekl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. (4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

PURPOSE: Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies
have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II),
and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first
genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and
lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis
and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by
predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying
their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
METHODS: The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions
(FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq 
data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data
interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers,
erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish 
the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene
expression across other differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that
crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These 
findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the
crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as 
well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The
expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g.,
Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts 
form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The
expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1a, 
was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors
compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the
remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features 
of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred
DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf,
E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRß, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and
Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high 
levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber 
cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4551281
PMID: 26330747  [PubMed - in process]


6. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Nov;68:78-86. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.08.016.
Epub 2015 Aug 28.

BCAS2 interacts with HSF4 and negatively regulates its protein stability via
ubiquitination.

Liao S(1), Du R(2), Wang L(3), Qu Z(1), Cui X(4), Li C(1), Liu F(1), Huang M(1), 
Wang J(1), Chen J(1), Gao M(1), Yu S(1), Tang Z(1), Li DW(5), Jiang T(6), Liu
M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Center
for Human Genome Research, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China. (2)Union Hospital, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, PR China.
(3)Department of Pathology & Lab Medicine, University of Cincinnati Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, Institute of Immunology, Medical College of Henan University,
Kaifeng, Henan 475004, PR China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology,
Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China;
Truhlsen Eye Institute, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (6)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the
Ministry of Education, Center for Human Genome Research, College of Life Science 
and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, PR
China. Electronic address: tjiang20100@hust.edu.cn. (7)Key Laboratory of
Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education, Center for Human Genome
Research, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, PR China. Electronic address:
lium@mail.hust.edu.cn.

Heat shock factor 4 (HSF4) is an important transcriptional factor that plays a
vital role in lens development and differentiation, but the mechanism underlying 
the regulation of HSF4 is ambiguous. BCAS2 was reported to be an essential
subunit of pre-mRNA splicing complex. Here, we identified BCAS2 as a novel HSF4
interacting partner. High expression of BCAS2 in the lens epithelium cells and
the bow region of mouse lens was detected by immunohistochemistry. In human lens 
epithelial cells, BCAS2 negatively regulates HSF4 protein level and
transcriptional activity, whereas in BCAS2 knockdown cells, HSF4 protein
stability was increased significantly. We further demonstrated that the prolonged
protein half-time of HSF4 in BCAS2 knockdown cells was due to reduced
ubiquitination. Moreover, we have identified the lysine 206 of HSF4 as the key
residue for ubiquitination. The HSF4-K206R mutant blocked the impact of BCAS2 on 
HSF4 protein stability. Taken together, we identified a pathway for HSF4
degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and a novel function for
BCAS2 that may act as a negative regulatory factor for modulating HSF4 protein
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26319152  [PubMed - in process]


7. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2015;134:129-67. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2015.05.001.
Epub 2015 Jun 12.

Lens Development and Crystallin Gene Expression.

Cvekl A(1), McGreal R(2), Liu W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics and Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Electronic address:
ales.cvekl@einstein.yu.edu. (2)Departments of Genetics and Ophthalmology and
Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

The eye and lens represent excellent models to understand embryonic development
at cellular and molecular levels. Initial 3D formation of the eye depends on a
reciprocal invagination of the lens placode/optic vesicle to form the eye
primordium, i.e., the optic cup partially surrounding the lens vesicle.
Subsequently, the anterior part of the lens vesicle gives rise to the lens
epithelium, while the posterior cells of the lens vesicle differentiate into
highly elongated lens fibers. Lens fiber differentiation involves cytoskeletal
rearrangements, cellular elongation, accumulation of crystallin proteins,
production of extracellular matrix for the lens capsule, and degradation of
organelles. This chapter summarizes recent advances in lens development and
provides insights into the regulatory mechanisms and differentiation at the level
of chromatin structure and dynamics, the emerging field of noncoding RNAs, and
novel strategies to fill the gaps in our understanding of lens development.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26310154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Ophthalmol. 2015 Jul 18;15:76. doi: 10.1186/s12886-015-0066-3.

Screening of potential target genes for cataract by analyzing mRNA expression
profile of mouse Hsf4-null lens.

Zhao W(1,)(2), Zhao W(3), Zhao J(4), Wang D(5), Li J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Wenhuaxi
Road 107, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, China. WenjuanZhaooa@163.com. (2)Department of
Ophthalmology, Shandong University Affiliated Jinan Central Hospital, Jinan,
250013, China. WenjuanZhaooa@163.com. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, The 5th
People's Hospital of Jinan, Jinan, 250022, China. wenqingzhaooa@163.com.
(4)Health Examination Center, Jinan 2nd People's Hospital, Jinan, 250001, China. 
junzhaooa@163.com. (5)School of Management Science and Engineering, Shandong
University of Finance and Economics, Jinan, 250014, China. DongWanggn@163.com.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Wenhuaxi
Road 107, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, China. jinghailild@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Hsf4 is closely related to the development of cataract. However, the 
molecular mechanisms remain unknown. This study aimed to explore the molecular
mechanisms that how Hsf4 mutations influence development of lens and thus lead to
cataract in mouse.
METHODS: The mRNA expression profile of mouse tissue samples from Hsf4-null and
wile-type lenses was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database. Then the
LIMMA package was used to screen differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and DAVID 
was applied to identify the significantly enriched Gene Ontology (GO) categories 
for DEGs. Furthermore, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of DEGs was 
constructed using Cytoscape and the key modules were selected from the PPI
network based on the MCODE analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 216 DEGs were screened, including 51 up- and 165
down-regulated genes. Meanwhile, nine GO terms were obtained, and DEGs such as
SGK1, CRY2 and REV1 were enriched in response to DNA damage stimulus.
Furthermore, 89 DEGs and 99 gene pairs were mapped into the PPI network and Ubc
was the hob node. Two key modules, which contained the genes (e.g. Ubc, Egr1,
Ptgs2, Hmox1, Cd44, Btg2, Cyr61 and Fos) were related to response to DNA damage
stimulus.
CONCLUSIONS: The deletion of Hsf4 affects the expression of many genes, such as
Ubc, Ptgs2, Egr1 and Fos. These genes may be involved in the development of
cataract and could be used as therapeutic targets for cataract.

PMCID: PMC4506420
PMID: 26187041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2015 Aug;18(4):393-8. doi: 10.1017/thg.2015.34. Epub 2015 Jun
5.

Exome Sequencing and Epigenetic Analysis of Twins Who Are Discordant for
Congenital Cataract.

Wei T(1), Sun H(1), Hu B(2), Yang J(1), Qiao C(1), Yan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology,Center for Gene Diagnosis,Zhongnan Hospital,Wuhan 
University,Wuhan,China. (2)Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University,Guanzhou,Guandong,China.

PURPOSE: To further understand genetic factors that contribute to congenital
cataracts, we sought to identify early post-twinning mutational and epigenetic
events that may account for the discordant phenotypes of a twin pair.
METHODS: A patient with a congenital cataract and her twin sister were assessed
for genetic factors that might contribute to their discordant phenotypes by
mutation screening of 11 candidate genes (CRYGC, CRYGD, CRYAA, CRYAB, CRYBA1,
CRYBB1, CRYBB2, MIP, HSF4, GJA3, and GJA8), exome analysis followed by Sanger
sequencing of 10 additional candidate genes (PLEKHO2, FRYL, RBP3, P2RX2, GSR,
TRAM1, VEGFA, NARS2, CADPS, and TEKT4), and promoter methylation analysis of five
representative genes (TRAM1, CRYAA, HSF4, VEGFA, GJA3, DCT) plus one additional
candidate gene (FTL).
RESULTS: Mutation screening revealed no gene mutation differences between the
patient and her twin sister for the 11 candidate genes. Exome sequencing analysis
revealed variations between the twins in 442 genes, 10 of which are expressed in 
the eye. However, these differential variants could not be confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. Furthermore, epigenetic discordance was not detected in the twin
pair.
CONCLUSIONS: The genomic DNA mutational and epigenetic events assessed in this
study could not explain the discordance in the development of phenotypic
differences between the twin pair, suggesting the possible involvement of somatic
mutations or environmental factors. Identification of possible causes requires
further research.

PMID: 26045100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 31;463(3):303-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.056. Epub 2015 May 21.

Heat shock-induced interactions among nuclear HSFs detected by fluorescence
cross-correlation spectroscopy.

Pack CG(1), Ahn SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan, College of Medicine,
Asan Medical Center, Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
changipack@amc.seoul.kr. (2)Dept. of Pathology, College of Dentistry, Chosun
University, Seosuk-dong, Dong-gu, Gwangju 501-759, Republic of Korea.

The cellular response to stress is primarily controlled in cells via
transcriptional activation by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1). HSF1 is well-known to
form homotrimers for activation upon heat shock and subsequently bind to target
DNAs, such as heat-shock elements, by forming stress granules. A previous study
demonstrated that nuclear HSF1 and HSF2 molecules in live cells interacted with
target DNAs on the stress granules. However, the process underlying the binding
interactions of HSF family in cells upon heat shock remains unclear. This study
demonstrate for the first time that the interaction kinetics among nuclear HSF1, 
HSF2, and HSF4 upon heat shock can be detected directly in live cells using dual 
color fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (FCCS). FCCS analyses indicated
that the binding between HSFs was dramatically changed by heat shock.
Interestingly, the recovery kinetics of interaction between HSF1 molecules after 
heat shock could be represented by changes in the relative interaction amplitude 
and mobility.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26003728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1853(8):1808-17. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.04.018. Epub 2015 May 1.

HSF4 promotes G1/S arrest in human lens epithelial cells by stabilizing p53.

Huang M(1), Li D(2), Huang Y(1), Cui X(3), Liao S(1), Wang J(1), Liu F(1), Li
C(1), Gao M(1), Chen J(1), Tang Z(1), Li DW(4), Liu M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of
Life Science and Technology, Center for Human Genome Research, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Kidney Disease Pathogenesis and Intervention of Hubei Province, Key
Discipline of Pharmacy of Hubei Department of Education, Medical College, Hubei
Polytechnic University, Huangshi, Hubei, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Molecular
and Cellular Immunology, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Henan
University School of Medicine, Kaifeng, Henan, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory 
of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 
510060, China; Truhlsen Eye Institute, College of Medicine, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. Electronic address:
dwli1688@hotmail.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Science and Technology, Center for Human Genome
Research, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR 
China. Electronic address: lium@mail.hust.edu.cn.

The differentiation from constantly dividing epithelial cells into secondary
fiber cells is a key step during lens development. Failure in this process, which
requires cell proliferation inhibition and cell cycle exit, causes cataract
formation. HSF4 (Heat Shock Transcription Factor 4) gene mutations may lead to
both congenital and senile cataract. However, how HSF4 mutations induce cataract 
formation remains obscure. In this study, we demonstrate that HSF4 can suppress
the proliferation of human lens epithelial cells (HLECs) by promoting G1/S arrest
in a p53-dependent manner. In contrast, HSF4 with cataract causative mutations
fail to cause cell cycle arrest and have no obvious effect on cell proliferation.
We further identify that HSF4 recruits p53 in the nucleus and promotes its
transcriptional activity, leading to the expression of its target gene p21 in
HLECs. HSF4, but not its cataract-causing mutants, stabilizes p53 protein and
inhibits its ubiquitin degradation. Our data reveal that HSF4 may work as a
switch between lens epithelial cell proliferation and secondary fiber cell
differentiation, a process which mainly depends on p53. Through demonstration of 
this novel downstream pathway of HSF4, our results help uncover the pathogenic
mechanisms caused by HSF4 mutations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25940838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mamm Genome. 2015 Jun;26(5-6):257-63. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9562-2. Epub 2015
Apr 19.

A novel locus on canine chromosome 13 is associated with cataract in the
Australian Shepherd breed of domestic dog.

Ricketts SL(1), Pettitt L, McLaughlin B, Jenkins CA, Mellersh CS.

Author information: 
(1)Canine Genetics Research Group, Kennel Club Genetics Centre, Animal Health
Trust, Lanwades Park, Kentford, Newmarket, Suffolk, CB8 7UU, UK,
sally.ricketts@aht.org.uk.

Hereditary cataract is a common ocular disorder in the purebred dog population
and is a leading cause of visual impairment and blindness in dogs. Despite this, 
little is known to date about the genetics underlying this condition. We have
used a genome-wide association study and targeted resequencing approach to
identify a novel locus for cataracts in the Australian Shepherd breed of dog,
using dogs that are clear of an HSF4 mutation, previously identified as the major
susceptibility locus in this breed. Cataract cases were defined as dogs with
bilateral posterior cataracts, or bilateral nuclear cataracts. Controls were at
least 8 years of age with no evidence of cataracts or other ocular abnormality.
Using 15 bilateral posterior polar cataract cases and 68 controls, we identified 
a genome-wide statistical association for cataracts in the Australian Shepherd on
canine chromosome 13 at 46.4 Mb (P value: 1.5 × 10(-7)). We sequenced the 14.16
Mb associated region in ten Australian Shepherds to search for possible causal
variants underlying the association signal and conducted additional fine-mapping 
of the region by genotyping 28 intronic variants that segregated correctly in our
ten sequenced dogs. From this analysis, the strongest associated variants were
located in intron 5 of the SCFD2 gene. Further study will require analysis of
additional cases and controls and ocular tissue from dogs affected with bilateral
cataracts that are free of the HSF4 mutation.

PMID: 25894238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2015 Apr;35(2):316-8. doi:
10.1007/s11596-015-1430-5. Epub 2015 Apr 16.

A novel HSF4 mutation in a Chinese family with autosomal dominant congenital
cataract.

Liu L(1), Zhang Q, Zhou LX, Tang ZH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China, liuling0927@mail.hust.edu.cn.

This study was aimed to identify the mutation of the whole coding region of shock
transcription factor 4 (HSF4) gene in a Chinese family with autosomal dominant
congenital cataract (ADCC). All exons of HSF4 were amplified by PCR. Sequence
analysis of PCR products was performed. Restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) analysis was conducted to confirm the pathogenic mutation. The results
showed that a C to T substitution occurred at nucleotide 331 in patients of this 
family, leading to the replacement of the amino acid arginine-111 with cysteine
in exon 3. RFLP analysis showed that the amino acid change was co-segregated with
all affected individuals. It was concluded that the new mutation of c.331C>T in
HSF4 DNA may be responsible for the autosomal dominant congenital cataract in
this family.

PMID: 25877371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2014 Mar-Apr;48(2):306-13.

[Kinetics of heat shock response upon disfunction of general transcription factor
(HSF)].

[Article in Russian]

Funikov SIu, Garbuz DG, Zatsepina OG.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) is a universal activator of hsp gene
expression in eukaryotes. A temperature sensitive Drosophila melanogaster strain 
(hsf4) with a mutation in the hsfgene was originally described as a strain
lacking the transcription of hsp genes in response to heat shock. Our results
demonstrated that physiological function of HSF4 is not fully abrogated after
heat exposure and is able to recover even after severe heat stress, causing the
induction of hsp gene expression. We have studied the kinetics of accumulation
and degradation of hsp gene products at transcriptional and translational levels 
and shown that induction of hsp genes, particularly hsp68, in mutant strain is
weaker than that in the wild type. Thus, despite the fact that the HSF4 causes a 
delayed ac- tivation of hsp, response to heat shock in hsf4 strain remains
defective.

PMID: 25850300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1853(3):746-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.01.004.
Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Hsf4 counteracts Hsf1 transcription activities and increases lens epithelial cell
survival in vitro.

Cui X(1), Xie PP(1), Jia PP(1), Lou Q(1), Dun G(1), Li S(1), Liu G(1), Zhang
J(1), Dong Z(2), Ma Y(1), Hu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Henan Key laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Department of Cell 
Biology and Genetics, Henan University School of Medicine, Jin-Ming Road,
Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China. (2)Henan Key laboratory of Molecular and Cellular
Immunology, Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Henan University School of
Medicine, Jin-Ming Road, Kaifeng, Henan 475004, China; Department of Cell Biology
and Anatomy, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. (3)Henan Key
laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Department of Cell Biology and
Genetics, Henan University School of Medicine, Jin-Ming Road, Kaifeng, Henan
475004, China. Electronic address: hyz@henu.edu.cn.

The interplay between Hsf4 and Hsf1 plays an important role in the regulation of 
lens homeostasis. However, the mechanism of the intermolecular association
involved is still unclear. In this paper, we find that reconstitution of Hsf4b
into Hsf4-/- lens epithelial (mLEC/Hsf4-/-) cells can simultaneously downregulate
Hsp70 expression and upregulate the expression of small heat shock proteins Hsp25
and aB-crystallin at both RNA and protein levels. ChIP assay results indicate
Hsf4b, which binds to the promoters of Hsp90a, Hsp70.3, Hsp25 and aB-crystallin
but not Hsp70.1, can inhibit Hsf1 binding to Hsp70.3 promoter and the heat shock 
mediated Hsp70 promoter activity by reducing Hsf1 protein expression. Hsf4b
N-terminal hydrophobic region can interact with Hsf1 N-terminal hydrophobic
region. Their interaction impairs Hsf1's intramolecular interaction between the
N- and C-terminal hydrophobic regions, leading to Hsf1's cytosolic retention and 
protein degradation. Both lysosome inhibitors (chloroquine, pepstatin A plus
E64d) and proteasome inhibitor MG132 can inhibit Hsf4-mediated Hsf1 protein
degradation, but MG132 can induce Hsf1 activation as well. Upregulation of Hsf4b 
can significantly inhibit cisplatin and staurosporine induced lens epithelial
cell apoptosis through direct upregulation of Hsp25 and aB-crystallin expression.
Taken together, our results imply that upregulation of Hsf4b modulates the
expression pattern of heat shock proteins in lens tissue by either directly
binding to their promoters or promoting Hsf1 protein degradation. Moreover,
upregulation of Hsf4b protects lens cell survival by upregulating anti-apoptotic 
pathways. These studies reveal a novel regulatory mechanism between Hsf1 and
Hsf4b in modulating lens epithelial cell homeostasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25601714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Feb;131:42-55. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2014.12.011. Epub 2014 Dec
19.

Molecular characterization of mouse lens epithelial cell lines and their
suitability to study RNA granules and cataract associated genes.

Terrell AM(1), Anand D(1), Smith SF(1), Dang CA(1), Waters SM(1), Pathania M(1), 
Beebe DC(2), Lachke SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University, St.
Louis, MO, USA. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE, USA; Center for Bioinformatics & Computational Biology, University of
Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. Electronic address: salil@udel.edu.

The discovery of cytosolic RNA granule (RG) component proteins associated with
human cataract has initiated investigations on post-transcriptional mechanisms of
gene expression control in the lens. Application of established mouse lens
epithelial cell lines (LECs) can provide rapid insights on RG function in lens
cells, especially because mouse mutants in several RG components are not
available. However, although these LECs represent potential reagents for such
analyses, they are uncharacterized for lens gene expression or RG formation.
Therefore, a detailed molecular and cellular characterization of three permanent 
mouse LECs 17EM15, 21EM15 and aTN4 is performed in this study. Comparative
analysis between microarray gene expression datasets on LEC 21EM15 and iSyTE lens
tissue demonstrates that 30% of top 200 iSyTE identified lens-enriched genes are 
expressed in these cells. Majority of these candidates are independently
validated to either have lens expression, function or linkage to cataract.
Moreover, analysis of microarray data with genes described in Cat-Map, an online 
database of cataract associated genes and loci, demonstrates that 131 genes
linked to cataract loci are expressed in 21EM15 cells. Furthermore, gene
expression in LECs is compared to isolated lens epithelium or fiber cells by
qRT-PCR and by comparative analyses with publically available epithelium or
fiber-specific microarray and RNA-seq (sequencing) datasets. Expression of select
candidate genes was validated by regular and real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
Expression of lens epithelium-enriched genes Foxe3, Pax6, Anxa4 and Mcm4 is
up-regulated in LEC lines, compared to isolated lens fiber cells. Moreover,
similar to isolated lens epithelium, all three LECs exhibit down-regulation of
fiber cell-expressed genes Crybb1, Mip and Prox1 when compared to fiber cells.
These data indicate that the LEC lines exhibit greater similarity to lens
epithelium than to fiber cells. Compared to non-lens cell line NIH3T3, LECs
exhibit significantly enriched expression of transcription factors with important
function in the lens, namely Pax6, Foxe3 and Prox1. In addition to these genes,
all three LECs also express key lens- and cataract-associated genes, namely Dkk3,
Epha2, Hsf4, Jag1, Mab21l1, Meis1, Pknox1, Pou2f1, Sfrp1, Sparc, Tdrd7 and Trpm3.
Additionally, 21EM15 microarrays indicate expression of Chmp4b, Cryab and Tcfap2a
among others important genes. Immunostaining with makers for Processing bodies
(P-bodies) and Stress granules (SGs) demonstrates that these classes of RGs are
robustly expressed in all three LECs. Moreover, under conditions of stress,
17EM15 and aTN4 exhibit significantly higher numbers of P-bodies and SGs compared
to NIH3T3 cells. In sum, these data indicate that mouse LECs 21EM15, 17EM15 and
aTN4 express key lens or cataract genes, are similar to lens epithelium than
fiber cells, and exhibit high levels of P-bodies and SGs, indicating their
suitability for investigating gene expression control and RG function in
lens-derived cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4387128
PMID: 25530357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Aug 28;55(11):7227-40. doi:
10.1167/iovs.14-14594.

Expression of the HSF4 DNA binding domain-EGFP hybrid gene recreates early
childhood lamellar cataract in transgenic mice.

Gangalum RK(1), Jing Z(1), Bhat AM(1), Lee J(2), Nagaoka Y(3), Deng SX(4), Jiang 
M(3), Bhat SP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, Geffen School of Medicine at University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States. (2)Jules Stein
Eye Institute, Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, United States Department of Molecular and Medical
Pharmacology, Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, California, United States Molecular Biology Institute and Brain
Research Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, United States. (3)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology,
Geffen School of Medicine at University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, United States. (4)Molecular Biology Institute and Brain Research
Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United 
States. (5)Jules Stein Eye Institute, Geffen School of Medicine at University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States Molecular Biology 
Institute and Brain Research Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States.

PURPOSE: The clinical management of cataracts in infancy involves surgical
removal of the lens to ensure transmission of light to the retina, which is
essential for normal neural development of the infant. This surgery, however,
entails a lifelong follow-up and impaired vision. To our knowledge, no animal
models recapitulate human lamellar opacities, the most prevalent form of early
childhood cataracts. We present data on the recreation of the human lamellar
cataract phenotype in transgenic mice.
METHODS: Mutations in the DNA binding domain (DBD) of the heat shock
transcription factor 4 (HSF4) are known to be associated with early childhood
autosomal dominant lamellar cataract. We used bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) transgenesis to express a hybrid gene: Hsf4 (DBD)-enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP), by recombineering EGFP sequences into the DBD of the 
Hsf4 gene, to interfere with the DNA binding properties of Hsf4.
RESULTS: We recapitulated the human lamellar cataract, in its temporal as well as
spatial presentation, within the transgenic mouse lens. This phenotype was
reproduced faithfully using four different BACs, indicating that EGFP can be used
to target transcription factor function in transgenic mice. Molecular and cell
biological examination of early postnatal transgenic lens reveals impairment of
secondary fiber cell differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Recreation of the human lamellar cataract phenotype in mice allows
investigation of this human pathology at a level not possible previously and
points to the relevance of fiber cell heterogeneity dictated by fiber
cell-specific gene activity in the biogenesis of the lamellar cataract.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4231995
PMID: 25168898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 24;453(3):674-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.07.118. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Effect of HSF4b on age related cataract may through its novel downstream target
Hif1a.

Chen Y(1), Wu Q(2), Miao A(3), Jiang Y(3), Wu X(3), Wang Z(4), Wu F(4), Lu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated of Shanghai
Jiaotong University, China; Department of Ophthalmology, Eye and ENT Hospital of 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Sixth People's
Hospital Affiliated of Shanghai Jiaotong University, China. (3)Department of
Ophthalmology, Eye and ENT Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Lab of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of Life
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye
and ENT Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
luyieent@126.com.

Our previous study identified five new heat shock factor 4 (HSF4) mutations in
150 age-related cataract (ARC) patients which indicated that HSF4 mutations may
be associated with this disease. Hypoxia-inducible factor (Hif1a) is an important
downstream target of HSF4b. It has been found that Hif1a play also important
roles in cataract development. To identify if HSF4b play it role in cataract
development through HIF1a, we transfected SRA01/04 lens epithelial cells with
small hairpin RNA of HSF4b and measured expressions Hif1a after transfection.
Then, we perform chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative PCR to see the
relationship between HSF4b and HIF1a. We found that HSF4 downregulation led to
decrease of HIF1a mRNA expression. Furthermore, we demonstrated by ChIP followed 
by quantitative PCR (ChIP-qPCR) that these HIF-1a is bound by HSF4b near
promoters, not gene bodies.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25088997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Hum Mutat. 2014 Sep;35(9):1068-71. doi: 10.1002/humu.22610. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

HSF4 mutation p.Arg116His found in age-related cataracts and in normal
populations produces childhood lamellar cataract in transgenic mice.

Jing Z(1), Gangalum RK, Bhat AM, Nagaoka Y, Jiang M, Bhat SP.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute.

The p.Arg116His mutation in the heat shock transcription factor-4 (HSF4) has been
associated with age-related cataracts, but it is also seen in 2% of the normal
population, indicating either reduced penetrance or that the normal subjects were
not old enough to express the phenotype. Based on the proximity of p.Arg116His to
two known mutations in the DNA-binding domain of HSF4, namely, p.Leu114Pro and
p.Arg119Cys, which segregate with childhood lamellar cataract, we tested the
possibility that this phenotype may have been missed by the ophthalmologist
and/or that it did not spread to the visual axis so as to affect vision
significantly. Here, we demonstrate via BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome)
transgenesis that p.Arg116His recreates the childhood lamellar cataract in mice
suggesting that incomplete penetrance associated with early cataracts may not be 
an absence but a limitation of the detection of the phenotype.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4134754
PMID: 24975927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Mar 17;4(5):823-8. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.009860.

A novel HSF4 gene mutation causes autosomal-dominant cataracts in a Chinese
family.

Lv H(1), Huang C(2), Zhang J(1), Liu Z(1), Zhang Z(1), Xu H(3), You Y(1), Hu
J(1), Li X(4), Wang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing University Third Hospital, Beijing,
100191, China. (2)Medical Research Center, Beijing University Third Hospital,
Beijing, 100191, China. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, WeiHaiWei People's
Hospital, 264200, Shandong China. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Beijing
University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, China lxmlxm66@sina.com.cn.

Congenital cataracts are a significant cause of visual impairment or blindness in
children. One-third of cases estimated to have a genetic cause. We carried out
gene analysis and bioinformatics analysis to map the locus and to identify the
underlying genetic defect in a 12-member, four-generation Chinese family affected
with bilateral congenital cataracts. We screened individuals of the family and
discovered a distinct missense mutation in HSF4 (a gene at this locus that
encodes teat-shock transcription factor 4). Bioinformatics analysis was used to
determine possible changes in the protein structure that could affect the
phenotype. Sequencing of the candidate genes showed a heterozygous c.69 G<U+2192>T
change in the heat shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) gene, which resulted in
the substitution of a lysine with an asparagine (p. K23N). This mutation
cosegregated with all affected individuals and was not observed in unaffected
family members. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that the p. K23N mutation was
predicted to be disease causing. This is the first report of the novel missense
mutation, c.69 G<U+2192>T (p. K23N), in exon 3 of the HSF4 locus on 16q21-q22 associated
with bilateral congenital cataracts in a Chinese family. This novel mutation
could enable propergenetic diagnostics and counseling in affected families and
could lead to a better understanding of the structure and function of HSF4 in
health and disease.

Copyright © 2014 Lv et al.

PMCID: PMC4025481
PMID: 24637349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Nov;49(11):1029-31.

[Establishment of mouse lens epithelial cell lines with the genotype of Hsf4-/-].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang J(1), Ma ZY, Wang YL, Wang JY, Hu YZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Immunology, Medical College of Henan
University, Kaifeng 475000, China. (2)Email: hyz@henu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To establish mouse lens epithelial cell lines with the genotype of
Hsf4-/-.
METHODS: The expended mouse lens epithelial cells, which were generated from P6
Hsf4-deficient mouse lens epithelia, were immortalized with SV40-T-antigen and
named MLEC/Hsf4-/- cell. The expression of alpha A-crystallin was immunoblotted. 
Hsf4b cDNA was reconstituted by transiently transfection.
RESULTS: The SV40-immortalized cells were in adherent growth mode with spindle
morphology, pseudopodia, clear nuclear boundary membrane and cytoplasm
translucent. Immunoblotting results indicated that the lens biomarker protein
alpha A-crystallin was expressed in MLEC/Hsf4-/- cells. Reconstitution of Hsf4b
into MLEC/Hsf4-/- cells upregulated the expression of Hsp25.
CONCLUSIONS: The SV40-immortalized MLEC/Hsf4-/- cells have the lens epithelial
characteristics and could be used as a tool for studying the signal transduction 
in vitro.

PMID: 24513006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Mar;1843(3):580-9.

Regulation of Hsf4b nuclear translocation and transcription activity by
phosphorylation at threonine 472.

Zhang J, Ma Z, Wang J, Li S, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Wang M, Feng X, Liu X, Liu G, Lou
Q, Cui X, Ma Y, Dong Z, Hu YZ.

Hsf4b, a key regulator of postnatal lens development, is subjected to
posttranslational modifications including phosphorylation. However, the
phosphorylation sites in Hsf4b and their biological effects on the transcription 
activity of Hsf4b are poorly understood. Here we examined 17 potential
phosphorylation residues in Hsf4b with alanine-scanning assays and found that a
T472A mutation diminished Hsf4b-mediated expression of Hsp25 and
alphaB-crystallin. In contrast, the phosphomimetic mutation of T472D enhanced
their expression. Further investigation demonstrated that Hsf4b could interact
with nuclear-transporter importin beta-1 and Hsc70 via amino acids 246-320 and
320-493, respectively. T472A mutation reduced Hsf4bs interaction with importin
beta-1, while enhancing its interaction with Hsc7O, resulting in Hsf4b cytosolic 
re-localization, protein instability and transcription activity attenuation. At
the upstream, MEK6 was found to interact with Hsf4b and enhance Hsf4b's nuclear
translocation and transcription activity, probably by phosphorylation at sites
such as T472. Taken together, our results suggest that phosphotylation of Hsf4b
at T472 by protein kinases such as MEI(6 regulates Hsf4b interaction with the
importin V I -Hsc7O complex, resulting in blockade of its nuclear translocation
and transcriptional activity of Hsf4b.

PMID: 24361130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Oct 11;54(10):6646-54. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-12283.

Functional analysis of HSF4 mutations found in patients with autosomal recessive 
congenital cataracts.

Merath K(1), Ronchetti A, Sidjanin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.

PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to functionally evaluate three previously
uncharacterized heat shock factor protein 4 (HSF4) mutations (c.595_599delGGGCC, 
c.1213C>T, c.1327+4A>G) encoding mutant HSF4 proteins (G199EfsX15, R405X, and
M419GfsX29) with missing C-terminal ends. These HSF4 mutations were previously
identified in families with congenital autosomal recessive cataracts.
METHODS: FLAG-tagged recombinant wild type (WT) and mutant HSF4 proteins were
analyzed using the protein stability assay, cellular immunofluorescence, Western 
blotting, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), and reporter activation.
RESULTS: HSF4 mutant proteins did not differ in the protein turnover rate when
compared with WT HSF4. Immunofluorescence revealed that WT and mutant HSF4
proteins were properly trafficked to the nucleus. EMSA analysis revealed that the
G199EfsX15 and M419GfsX29 proteins exhibited decreased heat shock element
(HSE)-mediated DNA binding, whereas the R405X mutant exhibited increased
HSE-mediated DNA binding when compared with WT HSF4. All three HSF4 mutant
proteins exhibited abolished HSE-mediated luciferase reporter activation.
Detailed evaluation of the C-terminal region identified three novel domains: two 
activation domains and one repression domain.
CONCLUSIONS: The three HSF4 autosomal recessive mutations evaluated here result
in a loss of HSF4 function due to a loss of regulatory domains present at the
C-terminal end. These findings collectively indicate that the transcriptional
activation of HSF4 is mediated by interactions between activator and repressor
domains within the C-terminal end.

PMCID: PMC3796937
PMID: 24045990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Epigenetics. 2013 Oct;8(10):1114-22. doi: 10.4161/epi.26017. Epub 2013 Aug 15.

DNA methylation analysis of murine hematopoietic side population cells during
aging.

Taiwo O(1), Wilson GA(2), Emmett W(3), Morris T(2), Bonnet D(4), Schuster E(5),
Adejumo T(6), Beck S(7), Pearce DJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genomics; UCL Cancer Institute; University College London; London, UK;
UCL Institute of Healthy Ageing; University College London; London, UK.
(2)Medical Genomics; UCL Cancer Institute; University College London; London, UK.
(3)UCL Genetics Institute; University College London; London, UK. (4)Cancer
Research UK; London Research Institute; Lincoln's Inn Fields; London, UK. (5)UCL 
Institute of Healthy Ageing; University College London; London, UK. (6)Scientific
Support Services; Flow Facility; University College London; London, UK.
(7)Medical Genomics; UCL Cancer Institute; University College London; London, UK;
These senior authors contributed equally to this work. (8)UCL Institute of
Healthy Ageing; University College London; London, UK; These senior authors
contributed equally to this work.

Stem cells have been found in most tissues/organs. These somatic stem cells
produce replacements for lost and damaged cells, and it is not completely
understood how this regenerative capacity becomes diminished during aging. To
study the possible involvement of epigenetic changes in somatic stem cell aging, 
we used murine hematopoiesis as a model system. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
were enriched for via Hoechst exclusion activity (SP-HSC) from young, medium-aged
and old mice and subjected to comprehensive, global methylome (MeDIP-seq)
analysis. With age, we observed a global loss of DNA methylation of approximately
5%, but an increase in methylation at some CpG islands. Just over 100 significant
(FDR<0.2) aging-specific differentially methylated regions (aDMRs) were
identified, which are surprisingly few considering the profound age-based changes
that occur in HSC biology. Interestingly, the polycomb repressive complex -2
(PCRC2) target genes Kiss1r, Nav2 and Hsf4 were hypermethylated with age. The
promoter for the Sdpr gene was determined to be progressively hypomethylated with
age. This occurred concurrently with an increase in gene expression with age. To 
explore this relationship further, we cultured isolated SP-HSC in the presence of
5-aza-deoxycytdine and demonstrated a negative correlation between Sdpr promoter 
methylation and gene expression. We report that DNA methylation patterns are well
preserved during hematopoietic stem cell aging, confirm that PCRC2 targets are
increasingly methylated with age, and suggest that SDPR expression changes with
age in HSCs may be regulated via age-based alterations in DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3891692
PMID: 23949429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Nov;47(11):1725-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.07.018. 
Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Pattern of heat shock factor and heat shock protein expression in lymphocytes of 
bipolar patients: increased HSP70-glucocorticoid receptor heterocomplex.

Bei ES(1), Salpeas V, Alevizos B, Anagnostara C, Pappa D, Moutsatsou P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Chemistry, Medical School, University of Athens, 75
Mikras Asias Str, Goudi, GR 11527 Athens, Greece.

Bipolar disorder (BD), a stress-related disease, is characterized by altered
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) signalling. Stress response includes activation of
heat shock factor (HSF) and subsequent heat shock protein (HSP) synthesis which
regulate GR folding and function. The objective of this study was to investigate 
the possible role of HSFs, HSPs and their interaction with GR in BD. We applied
immunoprecipitation, SDS-PAGE/Western blot analysis and electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay (EMSA) in lymphocytes (whole cell or nuclear extracts) from BD
patients and healthy subjects and determined the HSPs (HSP90 and HSP70), the
heterocomplexes HSP90-GR and HSP70-GR, the HSFs (HSF1 and HSF4) as well as the
HSF-DNA binding. The HSP70-GR heterocomplex was elevated (p < 0.05) in BD
patients vs healthy subjects, and nuclear HSP70 was reduced (p = 0.01) in bipolar
manic patients. Protein levels of HSF1, HSF4, HSP90, HSP90-GR heterocomplex, and 
HSF-DNA binding remained unaltered in BD patients vs healthy subjects. The
corresponding effect sizes (ES) indicated a large ES for HSP70-GR, HSP70, HSF-DNA
binding and HSF4, and a medium ES for HSP90, HSF1 and HSP90-GR between healthy
subjects and bipolar patients. Significant correlations among HSFs, HSPs, GR and 
HSP70-GR heterocomplex were observed in healthy subjects, which were abrogated in
bipolar patients. The higher interaction between GR and HSP70 and the
disturbances in the relations among heat shock response parameters and GR as
observed in our BD patients may provide novel insights into the contribution of
these factors in BD aetiopathogenesis.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23938235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Curr Mol Med. 2013 Jul;13(6):959-67.

ERK signaling pathway regulates embryonic survival and eye development in
goldfish, Carassius auratus.

Li L(1), Wang L, Li TT, Li X, Huang XQ, Chen XW, Li ZL, Lv XM, Liu FY, Luo ZW,
Liu M, Hu XH, Hu WF, Huang ZX, Yi M, Liu SJ, Liu YZ, Li DW.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, 54 Xianlie Road, Guangzhou, China. dwli1688@hotmail.com

The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is one of the three major types
of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Previous studies showed that ERKs mediate
various signaling pathways for cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and 
transformation in mammals. In the present study, we use goldfish as a model
system and demonstrate that ERK kinases play important roles in promoting
embryonic survival and regulate development of eye and trunk in vertebrates. ERKs
are highly expressed in multiple tissues including lens epithelial cells, lens
fiber cells, retina, brain, muscle and heart of adult goldfish. Injection of the 
dominant negative ERK mutant (DNM-ERK) into the fertilized eggs of goldfish
significantly inhibited ERK activity at blastula stage, and completely blocked
ERK activity at gastrula and later stages. As a result, the blastula cells were
induced into apoptosis, and majority of the injected embryos were lethal at
embryonic stages. At the molecular level, inhibition of ERK activity by DNM-ERKs 
suppressed phosphorylation of Bad at Ser-112 to promote apoptosis. Similar
results were observed when MEK activity was inhibited by U0126 treatment. The
survived embryos display significant abnormality in the phenotypes of both eye
and trunk. Associated with the abnormality in the eye development,
phosphorylation in Pax-6 and expression of HSF4 were significantly decreased and 
expression of the ß-crystallin gene was also downregulated. These results provide
novel information regarding the roles of ERKs in regulating vertebrate
development.

PMID: 23745584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1832(8):1167-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.007. Epub 2013 Mar 16.

HSF4 regulates DLAD expression and promotes lens de-nucleation.

Cui X(1), Wang L, Zhang J, Du R, Liao S, Li D, Li C, Ke T, Li DW, Huang H, Yin Z,
Tang Z, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of
Life Science and Technology, Center for Human Genome Research, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR China.

HSF4 mutations lead to both congenital and age-related cataract. The purpose of
this study was to explore the mechanism of cataract formation caused by HSF4
mutations. The degradation of nuclear DNA is essential for the lens fiber
differentiation. DNase 2ß (DLAD) is highly expressed in lens cells, and mice with
deficiencies in the DLAD gene develop nuclear cataracts. In this study, we found 
that HSF4 promoted the expression and DNase activity of DLAD by directly binding 
to the DLAD promoter. In contrast, HSF4 cataract causative mutations failed to
bind to the DLAD promoter, abrogating the expression and DNase activity of DLAD. 
These results were confirmed by HSF4 knockdown in zebrafish, which led to
incomplete de-nucleation of the lens and decreased expression and activity of
DLAD. Together, our results suggest that HSF4 exerts its function on lens
differentiation via positive regulation of DLAD expression and activity, thus
facilitating de-nucleation of lens fiber cells. Our demonstration that HSF4
cataract causative mutations abrogate the induction of DLAD expression reveals a 
novel molecular mechanism regarding how HSF4 mutations cause cataractogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23507146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Feb 1;54(2):932-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-10948.

Copy number variations of DNA repair genes and the age-related cataract: Jiangsu 
Eye Study.

Jiang J(1), Zhou J, Yao Y, Zhu R, Liang C, Jiang S, Yang M, Lu Y, Xing Q, Guan H.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Institute, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Jiangsu Province,
China.

PURPOSE: DNA damage is critical in the pathogenesis of age-related cataract
(ARC). This study examined the association of copy number variations (CNVs) of
DNA repair genes with susceptibility to ARC in the Han Chinese.
METHODS: Study participants were from the population-based Jiangsu Eye Study,
which includes 780 ARC patients and 525 controls. DNA was extracted from blood
for copy number (CN) assays using RT-PCR. The Comet assay was to assess DNA
damage in peripheral lymphocytes.
RESULTS: Novel CNV was detected in WRN. Initial analyses found that CN = 3+ for
WRN had an increased risk of ARC (odds ratio [OR] = 1.88, P = 0.02); CN = 1 for
HSF4 had an increased risk of ARC (OR = 4.09, P = 0.004). CN = 3+ for WRN was
associated with nuclear and posterior subcapsular cataract (OR = 2.06, P = 0.02; 
OR = 3.72, P = 0.02). CN = 1 for HSF4 was associated with nuclear and posterior
subcapsular cataract (OR = 5.73, P = 0.001; OR = 6.80, P = 0.01). The combination
WRN and HSF4 CNVs markedly increased the risk of ARC; the OR was increased from
2.63 by HSF4 alone to 6.80 by combined WRN and HSF4 CNVs. However, after multiple
testing correction, only HSF4 CNV was associated with ARC overall and with
nuclear and posterior subcapsular cataract as well. The DNA damage in lymphocytes
from ARC patients was significantly higher when compared to normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: HSF4 and WRN CNVs might be involved in ARC pathogenesis in the Han
Chinese. These findings suggest the importance of DNA repair in ARC
susceptibility and distinct risk factors in ARC subtypes.

PMID: 23329665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 May;18(3):377-87. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0386-7.
Epub 2012 Dec 23.

Cell-type-dependent access of HSF1 and HSF4 to aB-crystallin promoter during heat
shock.

Jing Z(1), Gangalum RK, Lee JZ, Mock D, Bhat SP.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Brain
Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Stress Chaperones. 2013 May;18(3):389-90.

Epithelial cells and fibroblasts both express heat shock transcription factors,
HSF1 and HSF4, yet they respond to heat shock differentially. For example, while 
HSP70 is induced in both cell types, the small heat shock protein, aB-crystallin 
gene (CRYAB) that contains a canonical heat shock promoter, is only induced in
fibroblasts. A canonical heat shock promoter contains three or more inverted
repeats of the pentanucleotide 5'-nGAAn-3' that make the heat shock element. It
is known that, in vitro, promoter architecture (the order and spacing of these
repeats) impacts the interaction of various heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs) with the heat shock promoter, but in vivo relevance of these binding
preferences so far as the expression is concerned is poorly understood. In this
report, we first establish cell-type-dependent differential expression of CRYAB
in four established cell lines and then working with adult human retinal pigment 
epithelial cells and NIH3T3 fibroblasts and employing chromatin
immunoprecipitation, attempt to relate expression to promoter occupancy by HSF1
and HSF4. We show that HSF4 occupies only CRYAB and not HSP70 promoter in
epithelial cells, while HSF1 occupies only HSP70 promoter in both cell types, and
cryab promoter, only in heat shocked fibroblasts; HSF4, on the other hand, is
never seen on these two promoters in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. This comparative
analysis with CRYAB and HSP70 demonstrates that differential heat shock response 
is controlled by cell-type-dependent access of HSFs (HSF1 and HSF4) to specific
promoters, independent of the promoter architecture.

PMCID: PMC3631099
PMID: 23264262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;45(2):317-25. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.11.013. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

The transcription activity of heat shock factor 4b is regulated by FGF2.

Hu YZ(1), Zhang J, Li S, Wang C, Chu L, Zhang Z, Ma Z, Wang M, Jiang Q, Liu G, Qi
Y, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Hunan University School
of Medicine, Jin-Ming Road, Kaifeng, Henan, China. hyz@henu.edu.cn

Heat shock factor 4b has been found to be closely associated with postnatal lens 
development. It expresses in postnatal lens epithelial and secondary fiber cells 
and controls the expression of small heat shock proteins which are important for 
lens homeostasis. However, the signal pathways underlying Hsf4b are still not
completely understood. Here we present that Hsf4b transcription activity is
regulated by FGF2 a key growth factor that is involved in regulating lens
development at multiple stages. FGF2 can promote Hsf4b nuclear-translocation and 
the expression of Hsp25 and aB-crystallin, the key downstream targets of Hsf4b in
the Hsf4b-reconstituted mouse hsf4-/- lens epithelial cells. Further study
indicates that FGF2 can induce Hsf4b protein stabilization through
ERK1/2-mediated posttranslational phosphorylation or sumoylation. Hsf4b can
promote FGF2-induced morphology transition from lens epithelial cell to the fiber
cell, and this morphology transition can be inhibited by ERK1/2 inhibitor U0126. 
Taken together, our data demonstrate that Hsf4b is a novel downstream
transcription factor of FGF2, and its transcription activity is associated with
FGF2-modulated lens epithelial cell-fiber cell transition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23200779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;44(10):1593-612. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.06.012. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Transcriptional regulation of small HSP-HSF1 and beyond.

de Thonel A(1), Le Mouël A, Mezger V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U866, Dijon, France.

The members of the small heat shock protein (sHSP) family are molecular
chaperones that play major roles in development, stress responses, and diseases, 
and have been envisioned as targets for therapy, particularly in cancer. The
molecular mechanisms that regulate their transcription, in normal, stress, or
pathological conditions, are characterized by extreme complexity and subtlety.
Although historically linked to the heat shock transcription factors (HSFs), the 
stress-induced or developmental expression of the diverse members, including
HSPB1/Hsp27/Hsp25, aA-crystallin/HSPB4, and aB-crystallin/HSPB5, relies on the
combinatory effects of many transcription factors. Coupled with remarkably
different cis-element architectures in the sHsp regulatory regions, they confer
to each member its developmental expression or stress-inducibility. For example, 
multiple regulatory pathways coordinate the spatio-temporal expression of mouse
aA-, aB-crystallin, and Hsp25 genes during lens development, through the action
of master genes, like the large Maf family proteins and Pax6, but also HSF4. The 
inducibility of Hsp27 and aB-crystallin transcription by various stresses is
exerted by HSF-dependent mechanisms, by which concomitant induction of Hsp27 and 
aB-crystallin expression is observed. In contrast, HSF-independent pathways can
lead to aB-crystallin expression, but not to Hsp27 induction. Not surprisingly,
deregulation of the expression of sHSP is associated with various pathologies,
including cancer, neurodegenerative, or cardiac diseases. However, many questions
remain to be addressed, and further elucidation of the developmental mechanisms
of sHsp gene transcription might help to unravel the tissue- and stage-specific
functions of this fascinating class of proteins, which might prove to be crucial 
for future therapeutic strategies. This article is part of a Directed Issue
entitled: Small HSPs in physiology and pathology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Oct;90(10):1941-8. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23079. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Transcriptional profiling of microdissected areas of active multiple sclerosis
lesions reveals activation of heat shock protein genes.

Mycko MP(1), Brosnan CF, Raine CS, Fendler W, Selmaj KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Laboratory of Neuroimmunology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are stress-responsive proteins that serve as important
molecules contributing to cellular "protein triage." We and others have reported 
an increase of selected HSPs in multiple sclerosis (MS) lesions. However, the
exact expression pattern of HSP family genes in MS is not known. The aim of our
research was to assess global transcriptional changes of all gene members of the 
HSP families within MS lesions and associated normal-appearing white matter
(NAWM). To this end, we used laser capture microdissection (LCM) to isolate
defined regions of chronic-active MS lesions (n = 5), one of the most common
types of MS lesions. To identify changes in HSP genes in relation to different
areas of the plaque, we used genome-wide microarray analysis. We detected a
significant change in the transcriptional profile of the demyelinated region
compared with NAWM. In particular, overall expression of different HSP genes was 
upregulated in different areas of chronic-active lesion. These changes were
linked to an upregulation of heat shock factor 4 (HSF4). This is the first global
analysis of transcriptional changes in HSPs in the central nervous system during 
MS. The results support a relationship between HSP activation and lesion
activity.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22715030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1822(8):1308-15. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.05.005. Epub 2012 May 14.

HSF4 is involved in DNA damage repair through regulation of Rad51.

Cui X(1), Zhang J, Du R, Wang L, Archacki S, Zhang Y, Yuan M, Ke T, Li H, Li D,
Li C, Li DW, Tang Z, Yin Z, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of Ministry of Education, College of
Life Science and Technology, Center for Human Genome Research, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, PR China.

Heat shock factor protein 4 (HSF4) is expressed exclusively in the ocular lens
and plays a critical role in the lens formation and differentiation. Mutations in
the HSF4 gene lead to congenital and senile cataract. However, the molecular
mechanisms causing this disease have not been well characterized. DNA damage in
lens is a crucial risk factor in senile cataract formation, and its timely repair
is essential for maintaining the lens' transparency. Our study firstly found
evidence that HSF4 contributes to the repair of DNA strand breaks. Yet, this does
not occur with cataract causative mutations in HSF4. We verify that DNA damage
repair is mediated by the binding of HSF4 to a heat shock element in the Rad51
promoter, a gene which assists in the homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA
strand breaks. HSF4 up-regulates Rad51 expression while mutations in HSF4 fail,
and DNA does not get repaired. Camptothecin, which interrupts the regulation of
Rad51 by HSF4, also affects DNA damage repair. Additionally, with HSF4 knockdown 
in the lens of Zebrafish, DNA damage was observed and the protein level of Rad51 
was significantly lower. Our study presents the first evidence demonstrating that
HSF4 plays a role in DNA damage repair and may contribute a better understanding 
of congenital cataract formation.

© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22587838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2012 Sep;17(5):623-37. doi: 10.1007/s12192-012-0337-3.
Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Zebrafish HSF4: a novel protein that shares features of both HSF1 and HSF4 of
mammals.

Swan CL(1), Evans TG, Sylvain N, Krone PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Heat-shock proteins (hsps) have important roles in the development of the eye
lens. We previously demonstrated that knockdown of hsp70 gene expression using
morpholino antisense technology resulted in an altered lens phenotype in
zebrafish embryos. A less severe phenotype was seen with knockdown of heat-shock 
factor 1 (HSF1), suggesting that, while it likely plays a role in hsp70
regulation during lens formation, other regulatory factors are also involved.
Heat-shock factor 4 plays an important role in mammalian lens development, and an
expressed sequence tag encoding zebrafish HSF4 has been identified. The deduced
amino acid sequence shares structural similarities with mammalian HSF4 including 
the lack of an HR-C domain. However, the HR-C domain is absent due to a severe
C-terminal truncation within zebrafish HSF4 (zHSF4) relative to the mammalian
protein. Surprisingly, the amino acid composition of the zHSF4 DNA binding domain
shares a greater degree of identity with HSF1 proteins than it does with
mammalian HSF4 proteins. Consistent with this, the binding affinity of in vitro
synthesized zHSF4 for discontinuous heat-shock response element sequences is more
limited, similar to what has been previously observed for HSF1 proteins. Hsf4
mRNA is expressed in zebrafish adult eye tissue but is only observed in
developing embryonic tissue at 60 h post-fertilization or later. This, together
with the lack of an observable phenotype following morpholino-based antisense
knockdown of hsf4, suggests that zHSF4 is unlikely to play a role in regulating
early embryonic lens development.

PMCID: PMC3535164
PMID: 22528049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Vis. 2012;18:694-704. Epub 2012 Mar 24.

Proteomic analysis of SRA01/04 transfected with wild-type and mutant HSF4b
identified from a Chinese congenital cataract family.

Miao A(1), Zhang X, Jiang Y, Chen Y, Fang Y, Ye H, Chu R, Lu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye & ENT Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai,
PR China.

PURPOSE: Congenital cataracts account for about 10% of cases of childhood
blindness. Heat shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) is related with human
autosomal dominant lamellar and Marner cataracts; a T<U+2192>C transition at nucleotide 
348 was found in a large Chinese cataract family. The aim of this study was to
analyze the unique role of HSF4b and the mutation of HSF4b.
METHODS: The isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ),
coupled with the two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
(2D LC-MS/MS) technique, was used to identify and quantify differential proteomes
in human lens epithelial cell lines SRA 01/04 expressing wild-type and mutant
HSF4b.
RESULTS: A total of 104 unique proteins were identified from the human lens
epithelial cell lines SRA 01/04. Apart from the proteins due to the effect of the
pcDNA3.1 vector, the wild-type and mutant HSF4b led to 23 differentially
expressed proteins, of which four were histone proteins and three were ribosomal 
proteins. The T<U+2192>C transition at nucleotide 348 in HSF4b led to 18 differentially 
expressed proteins in SRA 01/04, among which serpin H1 precursor, heat shock
protein beta-1, and stress-70 protein belong to heat shock protein families. The 
up- or down-regulated proteins were functionally analyzed using Ingenuity
Pathways Analysis (IPA) to interpret the interaction network and predominant
canonical pathways involved in these differentially expressed proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: A multitude of differentially expressed proteins was found to be
associated with HSF4b and a T<U+2192>C transition at nucleotide 348 in HSF4b. The
proteins interacted directly or indirectly with each other, and they may provide 
clues as to how HSF4b modulates protein expression in the lens epithelial cells
of SRA 01/04. Although further investigation is required, the results may provide
some new clues to the transcriptional mechanism of HSF4b and cataract formation.

PMCID: PMC3324350
PMID: 22509099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Proteome Res. 2012 May 4;11(5):2625-34. doi: 10.1021/pr201151a. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

Post-translational modification of human heat shock factors and their functions: 
a recent update by proteomic approach.

Xu YM(1), Huang DY, Chiu JF, Lau AT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Epigenetics, Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, China.

Heat shock factors (HSFs) are vital for modulating stress and heat shock-related 
gene expression in cells. The activity of HSFs is controlled largely by
post-translational modifications (PTMs). For example, basal phosphorylation of
HSF1 on three serine sites suppresses the heat shock response, and
hyperphosphorylation of HSF1 on several other serine and threonine sites by
stress-activated kinases results in its activation, while acetylation on K80
inhibits its DNA-binding ability. Sumoylation of HSF2 on K82 regulates its
DNA-binding ability, whereas sumoylation of HSF4B on K293 represses its
transcriptional activity. With the advancement of proteomic technology, novel PTM
sites on various HSFs have been identified with the use of tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS), but the functions of many of these PTMs are still unclear. 
Yet, it should be noted that the discovery of these novel PTM sites provided the 
necessary evidence for the existence of these PTM marks in vivo. Followed by
subsequent functional analysis, this would ultimately lead to a better
understanding of these PTM marks. MS/MS-based proteomic approach is becoming a
gold standard in PTM validation in the field of life science. Here, the recent
literature of all known PTMs reported on human HSFs and the resulting functions
will be discussed.

PMID: 22494029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Apr;10(4):523-34. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0530. Epub
2012 Feb 21.

Inactivation of heat shock factor Hsf4 induces cellular senescence and suppresses
tumorigenesis in vivo.

Jin X(1), Eroglu B, Cho W, Yamaguchi Y, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, Georgia Health Sciences University,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Studies suggest that Hsf4 expression correlates with its role in cell growth and 
differentiation. However, the role of Hsf4 in tumorigenesis in vivo remains
unexplored. In this article, we provide evidence that absence of the Hsf4 gene
suppresses evolution of spontaneous tumors arising in p53- or Arf-deficient mice.
Furthermore, deletion of hsf4 alters the tumor spectrum by significantly
inhibiting development of lymphomas that are normally observed in the majority of
mice lacking p53 or Arf tumor suppressor genes. Using mouse embryo fibroblasts
deficient in the hsf4 gene, we have found that these cells exhibit reduced
proliferation that is associated with induction of senescence and
senescence-associated ß-galactosidase (SA-ß-gal). Cellular senescence in
hsf4-deficient cells is associated with the increased expression of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, p21 and p27 proteins. Consistent with the
cellular senescence observed in vitro, specific normal tissues of hsf4(-/-) mice 
and tumors that arose in mice deficient in both hsf4 and p53 genes exhibit
increased SA-ß-gal activity and elevated levels of p27 compared with wild-type
mice. These results suggest that hsf4 deletion-induced senescence is also present
in vivo. Our results therefore indicate that Hsf4 is involved in modulation of
cellular senescence, which can be exploited during cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3690822
PMID: 22355043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Vis. 2011;17:3062-71. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Functional analysis of the Hsf4(lop11) allele responsible for cataracts in lop11 
mice.

Liang L(1), Liegel R, Endres B, Ronchetti A, Chang B, Sidjanin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

PURPOSE: Lens opacity 11 (lop11) is a spontaneous autosomal recessive mouse
mutation resulting in cataracts. Insertion of an early transposable element (ETn)
in intron 9 of heat shock factor 4 (Hsf4) was previously identified as
responsible for lop11 cataracts. Although molecular analysis showed that the ETn 
insertion resulted in an aberrant Hsf4 transcript encoding a truncated mutant
HSF4(lop11) protein, the function of the mutant HSF4(lop11) protein was not
investigated. The goal of this study was to functionally evaluate the mutant
HSF4(lop11) protein and to establish the onset and progression of cataracts in
lop11 lenses.
METHODS: HSF4 is expressed as two alternatively transcribed isoforms Hsf4a and
Hsf4b. Given that only Hsf4b is expressed in the lens we pursued evaluation of
the mutant Hsf4b isoform only. Recombinant wild type HSF4b and mutant
HSF4b(lop11) proteins were analyzed using elecrophoretic mobility shift, reporter
transactivation, western blotting and protein half-life assays in HEK293 cells.
Prenatal and postnatal wild type and lop11 lenses were evaluated using a
combination of clinical, histological, and immunohistological analyses.
RESULTS: HSF4b(lop11) stability and nuclear translocation of did not differ from 
wild type HSF4b. However, HSF4b(lop11) exhibited abolished HSE-mediated DNA
binding and transactivation. Further investigation identified that HSF4b(lop11)
fails to form trimers. Histological analysis of lop11 lenses indicated the
persistence of nuclei in lens fiber cells as early as postnatal day 0.5 (P0.5).
No differences were observed between wild type and lop11 in lens epithelial cell 
proliferation and spatio-temporal differentiation to fiber cells. However, by
P10-12, lop11 lenses develop severely vacuolated cataracts commonly accompanied
by rupture of the lens capsule and release of the lenticular material in the
vitreous cavity. Clinically, lop11 vacuolated cataracts were visible upon eyelid 
opening between P12-14.
CONCLUSIONS: The ETn insertion in lop11 mice results in abolished HSF4b function.
Loss of 132 amino acids from the COOH-terminus in HSF4b(lop11) results in the
failure of trimer formation and subsequent failure of HSE-mediated DNA binding
and transactivation. These findings highlight the importance of the COOH-terminal
region for normal function. The persistence of nuclei in postnatal lop11 lens
fiber cells was identified as the initial lens abnormality, thus confirming a
previously identified role of HSF4b in denucleation of lens fiber cells. By P14
lop11 lenses develop severe fiber cell vacuoles although how the loss of HSF4b
function results in this process remains unknown. Collectively, these findings
further our understanding of the mechanism of HSF4 loss of function as well as
the resulting implications on lop11 cataractogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3233385
PMID: 22162625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Ophthalmol. 2011 Nov 21;11:35. doi: 10.1186/1471-2415-11-35.

Absence of mutations in four genes encoding for congenital cataract and expressed
in the human brain in Tunisian families with cataract and mental retardation.

Chograni M(1), Chaabouni M, Mâazoul F, Bouzid H, Kraiem A, Chaabouni HB.

Author information: 
(1)University Tunis Elmanar, Laboratoire Génétique Humaine, Tunis, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: To identify the genetic defect associated with autosomal recessive
congenital cataract (ARCC), mental retardation (MR) and ARCC, MR and microcephaly
present in most patients in four Tunisian consanguineous families.
METHODS: We screened four genes implicated in congenital cataract by direct
sequencing in two groups of patients; those affected by ARCC associated to MR and
those who presented also microcephaly. Among its three genes PAX6, PITX3 and HSF4
are expressed in human brain and one gene LIM2 encodes for the protein MP20 that 
interact with the protein galectin-3 expressed in human brain and plays a crucial
role in its development. All genes were screened by direct sequencing in two
groups of patients; those affected by ARCC associated to MR and those who
presented also microcephaly.
RESULTS: We report no mutation in the four genes of congenital cataract and its
flanking regions. Only variations that did not segregate with the studied
phenotypes (ARCC associated to MR, ARCC associated with MR and microcephaly) are 
reported. We detected three intronic variations in PAX6 gene: IVS4 -274insG
(intron 4), IVS12 -174G>A (intron12) in the four studied families and IVS4
-195G>A (intron 4) in two families. Two substitutions polymorphisms in PITX3
gene: c.439 C>T (exon 3) and c.930 C>A (exon4) in one family. One intronic
variation in HSF4 gene: IVS7 +93C>T (intron 7) identified in one family. And
three intronic substitutions in LIM2 gene identified in all four studied
families: IVS2 -24A>G (intron 2), IVS4 +32C>T (intron 4) and c.*15A>C
(3'-downstream sequence).
CONCLUSION: Although the role of the four studied genes: PAX6, PITX3, HSF4 and
LIM2 in both ocular and central nervous system development, we report the absence
of mutations in all studied genes in four families with phenotypes associating
cataract, MR and microcephaly.

PMCID: PMC3258189
PMID: 22103961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neurochem Res. 2012 Feb;37(2):244-52. doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0601-4. Epub 2011
Oct 9.

Protection against protein aggregation by alpha-crystallin as a mechanism of
preconditioning.

Ferns JE(1), Theisen CS, Fibuch EE, Seidler NW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of
Medicine, 4401 Wornall Road, Kansas City, MO 64111, USA.

Anesthetic preconditioning occurs when cells previously exposed to inhaled
anesthetics are protected against subsequent injury. We hypothesize that inhaled 
anesthetics may cause slight protein misfolding that involves site-specific
dehydration, stimulating cytoprotective mechanisms. Human neuroblastoma cells
were exposed to ethanol (as the dehydration agent) followed by quantitative
analysis of the expression of five heat shock genes: DNAJC5G, CRYAA, HSPB2, HSF4 
and HSF2. There was an ethanol-induced upregulation of all genes except HSF4,
similar to previous observations using isoflurane. CRYAA (the gene for
alphaA-crystallin) exhibited a 23.19 and 17.15-fold increase at 24 and 48 h post 
ethanol exposure, respectively. Additionally, we exposed glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase to ethanol, which altered oligomeric subspecies and
caused protein aggregation in a concentration-dependent manner. Ethanol-mediated 
dehydration-induced protein aggregation was prevented by incubation with
alpha-crystallin. These data indicate that ethanol mimics the effects of
isoflurane presumably through a cellular preconditioning mechanism that involves 
dehydration-induced protein aggregation.

PMID: 21984199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;787:1-20. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-295-3_1.

Targeted deletion of Hsf1, 2, and 4 genes in mice.

Jin X(1), Eroglu B, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA.

Heat-shock transcription factors (Hsfs) regulate transcription of heat-shock
proteins as well as other genes whose promoters contain heat-shock elements.
There are at least five Hsfs in mammalian cells, Hsf1, Hsf2, Hsf3, Hsf4, and
Hsfy. To understand the physiological roles of Hsf1, Hsf2, and Hsf4 in vivo, we
generated knockout mouse lines for these factors. In this chapter, we describe
the design of the targeting vectors, the plasmids used, and the successful
generation of mice lacking the individual genes. We also briefly describe what we
have learned about the physiological functions of these genes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3665288
PMID: 21898223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Oct;111(4):1142-9. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00471.2011. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Absence of heat shock transcription factor 1 retards the regrowth of atrophied
soleus muscle in mice.

Yasuhara K(1), Ohno Y, Kojima A, Uehara K, Beppu M, Sugiura T, Fujimoto M, Nakai 
A, Ohira Y, Yoshioka T, Goto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Japan.

Effects of heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) gene on the regrowth of
atrophied mouse soleus muscles were studied. Both HSF1-null and wild-type mice
were subjected to continuous hindlimb suspension for 2 wk followed by 4 wk of
ambulation recovery. There was no difference in the magnitude of
suspension-related decrease of muscle weight, protein content, and the
cross-sectional area of muscle fibers between both types of mice. However, the
regrowth of atrophied soleus muscle in HSF1-null mice was slower compared with
that in wild-type mice. Lower baseline expression level of HSP25, HSC70, and
HSP72 were noted in soleus muscle of HSF1-null mice. Unloading-associated
downregulation and reloading-associated upregulation of HSP25 and HSP72 mRNA were
observed not only in wild-type mice but also in HSF1-null mice.
Reloading-associated upregulation of HSP72 and HSP25 during the regrowth of
atrophied muscle was observed in wild-type mice. Minor and delayed upregulation
of HSP72 at mRNA and protein levels was also seen in HSF1-null mice. Significant 
upregulations of HSF2 and HSF4 were observed immediately after the suspension in 
HSF1-null mice, but not in wild-type mice. Therefore, HSP72 expression in soleus 
muscle might be regulated by the posttranscriptional level, but not by the stress
response. Evidence from this study suggested that the upregulation of HSPs
induced by HSF1-associated stress response might play, in part, important roles
in the mechanical loading (stress)-associated regrowth of skeletal muscle.

PMID: 21817109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jan;227(1):1-6. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22948.

Heat shock factor 4a (HSF4a) represses HSF2 expression and HSF2-mediated
transcriptional activity.

Kim SA(1), Yoon JH, Ahn SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Oriental Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju,
Republic of Korea.

Heat shock factors (HSFs) are the main transcriptional regulators of the
stress-induced expression of heat shock protein genes. HSF2, which is one of the 
HSFs, is activated during differentiation and development but it is unclear how
they regulate during cellular processes. Here, we examined the role of HSF4a on
the regulation of HSF2 in HEK 293 cells. We found that HSF2 levels are negatively
correlated with HSF4a expression and that overexpression of HSF4a reduces
hemin-induced HSF2 mRNA and protein levels. Moreover, hemin-induced activation of
HSF2 was also markedly inhibited in HSF4a expressed cells. Immunoprecipitation
assay showed that HSF2 binds to the oligomerization domain of HSF4a. Hemin
treatment inhibited their interaction and induced localization of HSF2 and HSF4a 
in nuclear. In addition, we found that HSF4a or HSF4a DNA binding domain (117 aa)
inhibited the activity of hemin-induced HSP70 promoter. Consequently, HSF4a
inhibits HSF2 expression or transcriptional activity through negative regulation 
of HSF2 binding to the HSP70 promoter. In summary, our findings suggest novel
mechanisms of HSF2 regulation controlled by HSF4a.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21792930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 2011 Jun 2;30(22):2570-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.623. Epub 2011 Jan 24.

Regulation of transcription of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) by heat shock
factors HSF2 and HSF4.

Chen R(1), Liliental JE, Kowalski PE, Lu Q, Cohen SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) is a principal regulator of angiogenesis and
other cellular responses to hypoxic stress in both normal and tumor cells. To
identify novel mechanisms that regulate expression of HIF-1a, we designed a
genome-wide screen for expressed sequence tags (ESTs) that when transcribed in
the antisense direction increase production of the HIF-1a target, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), in human breast cancer cells. We discovered
that heat shock factor (HSF) proteins 2 and 4-which previously have been
implicated in the control of multiple genes that modulate cell growth and
differentiation and protect against effects of environmental and cellular
stresses-function together to maintain a steady state level of HIF-1a
transcription and VEGF production in these cells. We show both HSFs bind to
discontinuous heat shock element (HSE) sequences we identified in the HIF-1a
promoter region and that downregulation of either HSF activates transcription of 
HIF-1a. We further demonstrate that HSF2 and HSF4 displace each other from
HSF/HSE complexes in the HIF-1a promoter so that HIF-1a transcription is also
activated by overexpression of either HSFs. These results argue that HSF2 and
HSF4 regulate transcription of HIF-1a and that a critical balance between these
HSF is required to maintain HIF-a expression in a repressed state. Our findings
reveal a previously unsuspected role for HSFs in control of VEGF and other genes 
activated by canonical HIF-1a-mediated signaling.

PMID: 21258402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Ophthalmol. 2011;4(4):422-32. doi: 10.3980/j.issn.2222-3959.2011.04.20.
Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Epidemiology and molecular genetics of congenital cataracts.

Yi J(1), Yun J, Li ZK, Xu CT, Pan BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Endocrine Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, China.

Congenital cataract is a crystallin severe blinding disease and genetic factors
in disease development are important. Crystallin growth is under a combination of
genes and their products in time and space to complete the coordination role of
the guidance. Congenital cataract-related genes, included crystallin protein gene
(CRYAA, CRYAB, CRYBA1/A3, CRYBA4, CRYBB1, CRYBB2, CRYBB3, CRYGC, CRYGD, CRYGS),
gap junction channel protein gene (GJA1, GJA3, GJA8), membrane protein gene
(GJA3, GJA8, MIP, LIM2), cytoskeletal protein gene (BF-SP2), transcription factor
genes (HSF4, MAF, PITX3, PAX6), ferritin light chain gene (FTL), fibroblast
growth factor (FGF) and so on. Currently, there are about 39 genetic loci
isolated to which primary cataracts have been mapped, although the number is
constantly increasing and depends to some extent on definition. We summarized the
recent advances on epidemiology and genetic locations of congenital cataract in
this review.

PMCID: PMC3340856
PMID: 22553694  [PubMed]


46. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2010 Dec;30(6):792-7. doi:
10.1007/s11596-010-0660-9. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Molecular genetic analysis of autosomal dominant late-onset cataract in a Chinese
Family.

Yang G(1), Zhong S, Zhang X, Peng B, Li J, Ke T, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. seawander@hotmail.com

Congenital cataract is a highly heterogeneous disorder at both the genetic and
the clinical-phenotypic levels. A unique cataract was observed in a 4-generation 
Chinese family, which was characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance and
late-onset. Mutations in the 13 known genes (CRYAA, CRYAB, CRYBB1, CRYBB2, CRYGC,
CRYBA1/A3, CRYGD, Connexin50, Connexin46, intrinsic membrane protein LIM2,
cytoskeletal protein BFSP2, the major intrinsic protein-MIP and the heat shock
factor HSF4) have previously been demonstrated to be the frequent reason for
isolated congenital cataracts, but the exact molecular basis and underlying
mechanisms of congenital cataract still remain unclear. This study was designed
to find whether these 13 genes developed any mutation in the family members and
to identify the disease-causing gene. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct 
DNA sequence analysis were carried out to detect the 13 genes. The results showed
that no mutation causing amino acid alternations was found in these potential
candidate genes among all patients in the family, and only several
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified. A transitional mutation
in the fourth intron of CRYBB2 and some silent mutations in the first exon of
BFSP2 and CRYGD were found in the cataract family, but further study showed that 
these mutations could also be found in normal controls. It was concluded that
some unidentified genes may underlie the occurrence of late-onset cataract in
this family. A genome-wide screening will be carried out in the next study.

PMID: 21181374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2010 Nov 30;3(1):21. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-3-21.

Chromatin remodeling enzyme Brg1 is required for mouse lens fiber cell terminal
differentiation and its denucleation.

He S(1), Pirity MK, Wang WL, Wolf L, Chauhan BK, Cveklova K, Tamm ER,
Ashery-Padan R, Metzger D, Nakai A, Chambon P, Zavadil J, Cvekl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, 
USA. ales.cvekl@einstein.yu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Brahma-related gene 1 (Brg1, also known as Smarca4 and Snf2ß) encodes
an adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP)-dependent catalytical subunit of the
(switch/sucrose nonfermentable) (SWI/SNF) chromatin remodeling complexes. SWI/SNF
complexes are recruited to chromatin through multiple mechanisms, including
specific DNA-binding factors (for example, heat shock transcription factor 4
(Hsf4) and paired box gene 6 (Pax6)), chromatin structural proteins (for example,
high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1)) and/or acetylated core histones. Previous studies
have shown that a single amino acid substitution (K798R) in the Brg1 ATPase
domain acts via a dominant-negative (dn) mechanism. Genetic studies have
demonstrated that Brg1 is an essential gene for early (that is, prior
implantation) mouse embryonic development. Brg1 also controls neural stem cell
maintenance, terminal differentiation of multiple cell lineages and organs
including the T-cells, glial cells and limbs.
RESULTS: To examine the roles of Brg1 in mouse lens development, a dnBrg1
transgenic construct was expressed using the lens-specific aA-crystallin promoter
in postmitotic lens fiber cells. Morphological studies revealed abnormal lens
fiber cell differentiation in transgenic lenses resulting in cataract. Electron
microscopic studies showed abnormal lens suture formation and incomplete
karyolysis (that is, denucleation) of lens fiber cells. To identify genes
regulated by Brg1, RNA expression profiling was performed in embryonic day 15.5
(E15.5) wild-type and dnBrg1 transgenic lenses. In addition, comparisons between 
differentially expressed genes in dnBrg1 transgenic, Pax6 heterozygous and Hsf4
homozygous lenses identified multiple genes coregulated by Brg1, Hsf4 and Pax6.
DNase IIß, a key enzyme required for lens fiber cell denucleation, was found to
be downregulated in each of the Pax6, Brg1 and Hsf4 model systems. Lens-specific 
deletion of Brg1 using conditional gene targeting demonstrated that Brg1 was
required for lens fiber cell differentiation, for expression of DNase IIß, for
lens fiber cell denucleation and indirectly for retinal development.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate a cell-autonomous role for Brg1 in lens
fiber cell terminal differentiation and identified DNase IIß as a potential
direct target of SWI/SNF complexes. Brg1 is directly or indirectly involved in
processes that degrade lens fiber cell chromatin. The presence of nuclei and
other organelles generates scattered light incompatible with the optical
requirements for the lens.

PMCID: PMC3003251
PMID: 21118511  [PubMed]


48. Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2010 Oct 20;4:103-7. doi: 10.4137/GRSB.S4546.

Overexpression of Colligin 2 in Glioma Vasculature is Associated with
Overexpression of Heat Shock Factor 2.

Mustafa DA(1), Sieuwerts AM, Zheng PP, Kros JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology.

In previous studies we found expression of the protein colligin 2 (heat shock
protein 47 (HSP47), SERPINH1) in glioma neovasculature while not in normal brain 
tissue. Generally, the regulation of heat shock gene expression in eukaryotes is 
mediated by heat shock factors (HSF). In mammals, three heat shock transcription 
factors, HSF-1, -2, and -4, have been isolated. Here we investigated the relation
between the expression of colligin 2 and these heat shock factors at the mRNA
level using real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) in different grades of 
astrocytic tumorigenesis, viz., low-grade glioma and glioblastoma. Endometrium
samples, representing physiological angiogenesis, were included as controls.
Since colligin 2 is a chaperon for collagens, the gene expression of collagen I
(COL1A1) was also investigated. The blood vessel density of the samples was
monitored by expression of the endothelial marker CD31 (PECAM1). Because
NG2-immunopositive pericytic cells are involved in glioma neovascularization, the
expression of NG2 (CSPG4) was also measured.We demonstrate overexpression of HSF2
in both stages of glial tumorigenesis (reaching significance only in low-grade
glioma) and also minor elevated levels of HSF1 as compared to normal brain. There
were no differences in expression of HSF4 between low-grade glioma and normal
brain while HSF4 was downregulated in glioblastoma. In the endometrium samples,
none of the HSFs were upregulated. In the low-grade gliomas SERPINH appeared to
be slightly overexpressed with a parallel 4-fold upregulation of COL1A1, while in
glioblastoma there was over 5-fold overexpression of SERPINH1 and more than
150-fold overexpression of COL1A1. In both the lowgrade gliomas and the
glioblastomas overexpression of CSPG4 was found and overexpression of PECAM1 was 
only found in the latter. Our data suggest that the upregulated expression of
colligin 2 in glioma is accompanied by upregulation of COL1A1, CSPG4, HSF2 and to
a lesser extent, HSF1. Further studies will unravel the association of these
factors with colligin 2 expression, possibly leading to keys for therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC2976072
PMID: 21072323  [PubMed]


49. Mol Vis. 2010 Sep 10;16:1837-47.

Molecular analysis of cataract families in India: new mutations in the CRYBB2 and
GJA3 genes and rare polymorphisms.

Santhiya ST(1), Kumar GS, Sudhakar P, Gupta N, Klopp N, Illig T, Söker T, Groth
M, Platzer M, Gopinath PM, Graw J.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. ALM Postgraduate Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Department of
Genetics, University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai, India.

PURPOSE: The aim of the study was to resolve the genetic etiology in families
having inherited cataracts.
METHODS: Families afflicted with congenital/childhood cataracts were registered
in Chennai and Orissa (India). Blood samples were collected from the probands and
available family members. Selected functional candidate genes were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and characterized by direct sequencing. Putative 
mutations were confirmed in healthy controls.
RESULTS: We observed interesting new polymorphisms of ethnic specificity, some of
frequent nature, such as a 3-bp deletion in intron 3 of CRYBB2 (encoding
ßB2-crystallin) and IVS1+9 c>t variation in HSF4 (encoding heat-shock factor 4). 
Some rare single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) co-segregate with the respective
phenotype such as IVS3+120c>a of CRYBB2, while M44V of CRYGD (encoding
<U+03B3>D-crystallin), although found in association with blue dot opacity was seen in a
few healthy controls too. We identified two new mutations co-segregating along
with the respective cataract phenotype within the families that were not seen in 
healthy controls from India or Germany. These include two missense mutations; one
in GJA3 (encoding gap junction protein a3, which is also referred to as connexin 
46); the mutation affects codon 19 (T19M), and the corresponding phenotype is a
posterior-polar cataract. The other missense mutation affects CRYBB2 (W59C; total
cataract). Additionally, a cDNA variation (G54A) identified in a zonular cataract
affects a highly conserved splice site of CRYBB2. This mutation, however, showed 
reduced penetrance in the family, which might be explained by different molecular
consequences in the affected family members: nonsense-mediated decay of the
mutated mRNA might have no clinical phenotype in heterozygotes, whereas the
translation of the mutated mRNA is predicted to lead to a small hybrid protein
(consisting of 16 amino acids of the ßB2-crystallin and 18 new amino-acids),
which might have a dominant-negative function in the lens.
CONCLUSIONS: This report identifies in families with childhood cataract some new 
alleles, which may be considered as causative for cataracts. Furthermore, we
report some geographically restricted rare polymorphic sites, whose significance 
might be considered in some context as modifiers or alleles in sensitizing ocular
lens toward cataractogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2956670
PMID: 21031021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. FEBS J. 2010 Oct;277(20):4112-25.

The heat shock factor family and adaptation to proteotoxic stress.

Fujimoto M(1), Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube, Japan.

The heat shock response was originally characterized as the induction of a set of
major heat shock proteins encoded by heat shock genes. Because heat shock
proteins act as molecular chaperones that facilitate protein folding and suppress
protein aggregation, this response plays a major role in maintaining protein
homeostasis. The heat shock response is regulated mainly at the level of
transcription by heat shock factors (HSFs) in eukaryotes. HSF1 is a master
regulator of the heat shock genes in mammalian cells, as is HSF3 in avian cells. 
HSFs play a significant role in suppressing protein misfolding in cells and in
ameliorating the progression of Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila and mouse
models of protein-misfolding disorders, by inducing the expression of heat shock 
genes. Recently, numerous HSF target genes were identified, such as the classical
heat shock genes and other heat-inducible genes, called nonclassical heat shock
genes in this study. Importance of the expression of the nonclassical heat shock 
genes was evidenced by the fact that mouse HSF3 and chicken HSF1 play a
substantial role in the protection of cells from heat shock without inducing
classical heat shock genes. Furthermore, HSF2 and HSF4, as well as HSF1, shown to
have roles in development, were also revealed to be necessary for the expression 
of certain nonclassical heat shock genes. Thus, the heat shock response regulated
by the HSF family should consist of the induction of classical as well as of
nonclassical heat shock genes, both of which might be required to maintain
protein homeostasis.

PMID: 20945528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Sep;1802(9):749-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.06.001.
Epub 2010 Jun 8.

DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of human HSF4 containing mutations
that associate with congenital and age-related cataracts.

Enoki Y(1), Mukoda Y, Furutani C, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Health Sciences, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0942, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor HSF4 is necessary for ocular lens development and
fiber cell differentiation. Mutations of the human HSF4 gene have been implicated
in congenital and age-related cataracts. Here, we show that HSF4 activates
transcription of genes encoding crystallins and beaded filament structural
proteins in lens epithelial cells. Five missense mutations that have been
associated with congenital cataract inhibited DNA-binding of HSF4, which
demonstrates the relationship between HSF4 mutations, loss of lens protein gene
expression, and cataractogenesis. However, two missense mutations that have been 
associated with age-related cataract did not or only slightly alter HSF4
activity, implying that other genetic and environmental factors affect the
functions of these mutant proteins.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20670914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;42(10):1698-707. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2010.06.024. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

The inhibition of CMV promoter by heat shock factor 4b is regulated by Daxx.

Zhang J(1), Hu YZ, Xueli L, Li S, Wang M, Kong X, Li T, Shen P, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Henan University School
of Medicine, Kaifeng, China.

Heat shock factor 4 (Hsf4b) has been identified as a novel cataractogenic protein
whose mutation has been closely associated with hereditary cataracts in humans
and animals. It acts both as a transcription activator and a transcription
inhibitor in the regulation of its downstream targets during lens development.
However, the signaling factors that regulate Hsf4b transcription activity are
still not completely defined. Here, we found that Hsf4b, not Hsf4a (another
isoform of Hsf4), acts as the inhibitor of CMV promoter as well as the activator 
of Hsp25 in the Hsf4-/- mouse lens epithelial cell line (mLEC/hsf4-/-). Hsf4b
inhibits CMV-promoter activity by directly binding to TTCC (HSE motif) at
173-176bps in the CMV promoter. The phosphorylation of Hsf4b/S299 in the PDSM
motif, which is absent in Hsf4a, participates in the negative regulation of the
CMV promoter. The transcriptional inhibition of Hsf4b is associated with
transcriptional inhibitor Daxx. Hsf4b can interact and co-localize with Daxx in
the nucleus, and their association is regulated by the phosphorylation of
Hsf4b/S299. In addition, we found that Hsf4a and Hsf1 were also associated with
Daxx. However, in contrast to activating Hsf1, Daxx can repress Hsf4b-induced
expression of Hsp25 in the mLEC/hsf4-/- cell line. Our results demonstrate that
the transcription-inhibitory function of Hsf4b is regulated by the
phosphorylation of Hsf4b/S299 and phosphorylation-dependent association with
Daxx.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20620219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;26(4):325-8.

[Construction of eukaryotic plasmid expression Hsf4b and phosphorylation of Hsf4b
by MAP kinase P38].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma ZY(1), Zhang J, Li XL, Xi ZM, Hu YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Cell and Molecular Immunology, Medical college of Henan
University, Kaifeng, China.

AIM: Ton construct eukaryotic plasmid expressing Hsf4B and to investigate Hsf4b
is phosphorylated by MAP kinase P38:
METHODS: The total RNA of human heart tissues were prepared. Hsf4b cDNA were then
synthesized with RT-PCR. The PCR products were digested with Kpn I and EcoR I and
subcloned into pcDNA3.0, pcDNA-Flag-Hsf4b was transfected into HEK293T cells. The
expression of Hsf4b was testified with Western blotting. The interaction between 
Hsf4b and P38 was assayed by immunoprecipitation. In vivo pull down GST
demonstrated that Hsf4B (196-493) could interact with P38, P38 phosphorylation of
Hsf4b were testified with Kinase assay.
RESULTS: We subcloned the human cDNA of Hsf4b into eukaryotic expression vectors 
pcDNA3 and PEBG, and Hsf4b was overexpressed in HEK293T cells. Further studies
demonstrated that Hsf4b could interact with and phosphorylated by MAP kinase P38.
CONCLUSION: Hsf4b could interact with and phosphorylated by MAP kinase P38. Our
results will provide more evidence for understanding the signal regulation of
Hsf4b transcription activity during lens development.

PMID: 20564821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Mar;46(3):280-4.

[Progress in pathogenic genes and their functions of congenital cataract].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang KJ(1), Zhu SQ, Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100730, China.

Congenital cataract is the common cause of visual disability in children.
Inherited isolated (non-syndromic) cataract represents one third of cases.
Currently, at least 22 specific genes associated with isolated inherited cataract
have been identified: ten crystallin genes: CRYAA, CRYAB, CRYBA1/A3, CRYBA4,
CRYBB1, CRYBB2, CRYBB3, CRYGC, CRYGD, CRYGS; 4 membrane protein genes: GJA3,
GJA8, MIP, LIM2; three growth and transcription factor genes: PITX3, MAF, HSF4;
two cytoskeletal protein gene: BSFP1, BSFP2; chromatin modifying protein-4B gene:
CHMP4B, EPHA2 and NHS, it is likely that more genes remain to be discovered. Some
of the genes have been studied for their function by expression in cells or/and
by knock-out animal models. The increasing availability of more detailed
information about their functions makes it possible to understand the
pathophysiology of congenital cataracts.

PMID: 20450675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Med Case Rep. 2010 Apr 20;4:108. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-4-108.

Coexistence of mal de Meleda and congenital cataract in a consanguineous Tunisian
family: two case reports.

Bchetnia M(1), Merdassi A, Charfeddine C, Mgaieth F, Kassar S, Ouechtati F,
Chouchene I, Boussen H, Mokni M, Osman AD, Boubaker MS, Abdelhak S, Elmatri L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit, Institut
Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia. sonia.abdelhak@pasteur.rns.tn.

INTRODUCTION: Mal de Meleda is a rare form of palmoplantar keratoderma, with
autosomal recessive transmission. It is characterized by diffuse erythema and
hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles. Recently, mutations in the ARS (component 
B) gene (ARS, MIM: 606119) on chromosome 8q24.3 have been identified in families 
with this disorder. Congenital cataract is a visual disease that may interfere
with sharp imaging of the retina. Mutations in the heat-shock transcription
factor 4 gene (HSF4; MIM: 602438) may result in both autosomal dominant and
autosomal recessive congenital cataracts.
CASE PRESENTATION: A Tunisian family with two female siblings aged 45 and 30
years, presented with a clinical association of mal de Meleda and congenital
cataract. The two patients exhibited diffuse palmoplantar keratodermas. One of
them presented with a total posterior subcapsular cataract and had a best
corrected visual acuity at 1/20 in the left eye and with the right eye was only
able to count fingers at a distance of one foot. The other woman had a slight
posterior subcapsular lenticular opacity and her best corrected visual acuity was
8/10 in the right eye and with her left eye she was only able to count fingers at
a distance of one foot. A mutational analysis of their ARS gene revealed the
presence of the homozygous missense mutation C99Y and two single nucleotide
polymorphisms (-55G>C and -60G>C). The splice mutation (c.1327+4A-G) within
intron 12 of the HSF4 gene, which has been previously described in Tunisian
families with congenital cataract, was not found in the two probands within this 
family.
CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, such original clinical association has 
not been reported previously. The association of these two autosomal recessive
diseases might have occurred in this family due to a high degree of inbreeding.
The C99Y mutation may be specific to the Tunisian population as it has been
exclusively reported so far in only three Tunisian families with mal de Meleda.

PMCID: PMC2874570
PMID: 20406438  [PubMed]


56. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Apr;15(4):783-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01048.x.

SKAP2, a novel target of HSF4b, associates with NCK2/F-actin at membrane ruffles 
and regulates actin reorganization in lens cell.

Zhou L(1), Zhang Z, Zheng Y, Zhu Y, Wei Z, Xu H, Tang Q, Kong X, Hu L.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences (SIBS), Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS) & Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine (SJTUSM), Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

In addition to roles in stress response, heat shock factors (HSFs) play crucial
roles in differentiation and development. Heat shock transcription factor 4
(HSF4) deficiency leads to defect in lens epithelial cell (LEC) differentiation
and cataract formation. However, the mechanism remains obscure. Here, we
identified Src kinase-associated phosphoprotein 2 (SKAP2) as a downstream target 
of HSF4b and it was highly expressed at the anterior tip of lens elongating fibre
cells in vivo. The HSF4-deficient lenses showed reduced SKAP2 expression and
defects in actin reorganization. The disassembly of stress fibres and formation
of cortical actin fibres are critical for the initiation of LEC differentiation. 
SKAP2 localized at actin-rich ruffles in human LECs (SRA01/04 cells) and
knockdown SKAP2 using RNA interference impaired the disassembly of cellular
stress fibres in response to fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-b. Overexpression of 
SKAP2, but not the N-terminal deletion mutant of SKAP2, induced the actin
remodelling. We further found that SKAP2 interacted with the SH2 domain of
non-catalytic region of tyrosine kinase adaptor protein 2 (NCK2) via its
N-terminus. The complex of SKAP2-NCK2-F-actin accumulated at the leading edge of 
the lamellipodium, where FGF receptors and focal adhesion were also recruited.
These results revealed an essential role for HSF4-mediated SKAP2 expression in
the regulation of actin reorganization during lens differentiation, likely
through a mechanism that SKAP2 anchors the complex of NCK2/focal adhesion to FGF 
receptors at the lamellipodium in lens epithelial cells.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3922667
PMID: 20219016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Vet Ophthalmol. 2009 Nov-Dec;12(6):372-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-5224.2009.00735.x.

Mutation in HSF4 is associated with hereditary cataract in the Australian
Shepherd.

Mellersh CS(1), McLaughlin B, Ahonen S, Pettitt L, Lohi H, Barnett KC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Preventive Medicine, Animal Health Trust, Lanwades Park, Newmarket,
Suffolk CB8 7UU, UK. cathryn.mellersh@aht.org.uk

Cataracts are a leading cause of blindness in dogs with approximately 100 breeds 
affected by primary hereditary forms. Despite the large number of breeds affected
with hereditary cataracts (HC) little is known about the genetics of the
condition, and to date only a single gene, HSF4, has been implicated in the
development of the disease in dogs. We previously identified a recessively
inherited 1-bp insertion in the transcription factor gene HSF4 resulting in the
loss of the open reading frame in Boston terriers and Staffordshire bull
terriers. While testing the insertion mutation in other breeds with HC, we
identified a 1-bp deletion at the same nucleotide of HSF4 in some Australian
Shepherds with cataract. Using DNA samples from almost 400 privately owned
Australian Shepherds we have investigated the association between the deletion
mutation in HSF4 and cataracts in this breed. We conclude that the mutation is
significantly associated with cataracts and that a dog carrying the mutation is
approximately 17 times more likely to develop binocular cataracts than dogs that 
are clear of the mutation. The data also indicate that additional mutations
associated with the development of cataracts are likely to be co-segregating in
the Australian Shepherd population.

PMID: 19883468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMB Rep. 2009 Oct 31;42(10):631-5.

Heat shock transcription factors and sensory placode development.

Nakai A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan. anakai@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) family consists of at least three
members in mammals and regulates expression of heat shock proteins in response to
heat shock and proteotoxic stresses. Especially, HSF1 is indispensable for this
response. Members of this family are also involved in development of some tissues
such as the brain and reproductive organs. However, we did not know the molecular
mechanisms that regulate developmental processes. Involvement of HSFs in the
sensory development was implicated by the finding that human hereditary cataract 
is associated with mutations of the HSF4 gene. Analysis of gene-disrupted mice
showed that HSF4 and HSF1 are required for the lens and the olfactory epithelium,
respectively. Furthermore, a common molecular mechanism that regulates
developmental processes was revealed by analyzing roles of HSFs in the two
developmentally-related organs.

PMID: 19874706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Jan 1;21(1):106-16. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-07-0639. Epub 2009
Oct 28.

A novel mouse HSF3 has the potential to activate nonclassical heat-shock genes
during heat shock.

Fujimoto M(1), Hayashida N, Katoh T, Oshima K, Shinkawa T, Prakasam R, Tan K,
Inouye S, Takii R, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine, Ube,
Japan.

The heat-shock response is characterized by the expression of a set of classical 
heat-shock genes, and is regulated by heat-shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) in
mammals. However, comprehensive analyses of gene expression have revealed very
large numbers of inducible genes in cells exposed to heat shock. It is believed
that HSF1 is required for the heat-inducible expression of these genes although
HSF2 and HSF4 modulate some of the gene expression. Here, we identified a novel
mouse HSF3 (mHSF3) translocated into the nucleus during heat shock. However,
mHSF3 did not activate classical heat-shock genes such as Hsp70. Remarkably,
overexpression of mHSF3 restored the expression of nonclassical heat-shock genes 
such as PDZK3 and PROM2 in HSF1-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Although
down-regulation of mHSF3 expression had no effect on gene expression or cell
survival in wild-type MEF cells, it abolished the moderate expression of PDZK3
mRNA and reduced cell survival in HSF1-null MEF cells during heat shock. We
propose that mHSF3 represents a unique HSF that has the potential to activate
only nonclassical heat-shock genes to protect cells from detrimental stresses.

PMCID: PMC2801703
PMID: 19864465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Jan;51(1):396-404. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-3772.
Epub 2009 Jul 23.

Identification of vimentin as a novel target of HSF4 in lens development and
cataract by proteomic analysis.

Mou L(1), Xu JY, Li W, Lei X, Wu Y, Xu G, Kong X, Xu GT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: To explore the target genes of HSF4, especially those involved in lens
developmental processes and cataract formation.
METHODS: A slit lamp biomicroscopy examination was performed on
Hsf4(tm1Xyk)-knockout mice and wild-type mice. Two-dimensional electrophoresis
combined with mass spectrometry was used to identify differentially expressed
lens proteins between wild-type and Hsf4(tm1Xyk)-knockout mice and further
confirmed by Western blot and immunohistochemistry. Histologic analysis was used 
to analyze the denucleation process of lens fiber cells. Moreover, an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), luciferase assay, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay were used to validate the effects of HSF4 on
vimentin expression.
RESULTS: Hsf4(tm1Xyk)-knockout mice had abnormal lenses and developed cataract.
The downregulated proteins were major structural proteins including alpha- and
beta-crystallins, whereas the upregulated proteins were mainly enzymes and an
intermediate filament protein, vimentin. The upregulated vimentin expression
level was further confirmed by Western blot, Q-PCR, and immunofluorescence. EMSA,
luciferase assay, and ChIP assay validated that HSF4 had DNA-binding ability to
vimentin promoter and repressed vimentin expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that HSF4 represses vimentin gene expression
via the HSE-like element. The loss of HSF4 function results in an increase in
vimentin expression in Hsf4(tm1Xyk)-knockout mice and affects lens
differentiation, particularly impairing the denucleation of lens fiber cells.
These events appear to implicate a molecular mechanism in abnormal lens
development and cataract formation in Hsf4(tm1Xyk)-knockout mice. The
HSF4-vimentin axis appears to be a new target for developing anti-cataract drugs,
especially for those cataracts resulting from aberrations in HSF4 expression.

PMID: 19628735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Vis. 2009;15:476-81. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Novel mutation in the gamma-S crystallin gene causing autosomal dominant
cataract.

Vanita V(1), Singh JR, Singh D, Varon R, Sperling K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Disorders, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India.
vanita_kumar@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: To identify the underlying genetic defect in a north Indian family with 
seven members in three-generations affected with bilateral congenital cataract.
METHODS: Detailed family history and clinical data were recorded. Linkage
analysis using fluorescently labeled microsatellite markers for the already known
candidate gene loci was performed in combination with mutation screening by
bidirectional sequencing.
RESULTS: Affected individuals had bilateral congenital cataract. Cataract was of 
opalescent type with the central nuclear region denser than the periphery.
Linkage was excluded for the known cataract candidate gene loci at 1p34-36,
1q21-25 (gap junction protein, alpha 8 [GJA8]), 2q33-36 (crystallin, gamma A
[CRYGA], crystallin, gamma B [CRYGB], crystallin, gamma C [CRYGC], crystallin,
gamma D [CRYGD], crystallin, beta A2 [CRYBA2]), 3q21-22 (beaded filament
structural protein 2, phakinin [BFSP2]), 12q12-14 (aquaporin 0 [AQP0]), 13q11-13 
(gap junction protein, alpha 3 [GJA3]), 15q21-22, 16q22-23 (v-maf
musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog [MAF], heat shock transcription 
factor 4 [HSF4]), 17q11-12 (crystallin, beta A1 [CRYBA1]), 17q24, 21q22.3
(crystallin, alpha A [CRYAA]), and 22q11.2 (crystallin, beta B1 [CRYBB1],
crystallin, beta B2 [CRYBB2], crystallin, beta B3 [CRYBB3], crystallin, beta A4
[CRYBA4]). Crystallin, alpha B (CRYAB) at chromosome 11q23-24 was excluded by
sequence analysis. However, sequencing the candidate gene, crystallin, gamma S
(CRYGS), at chromosome 3q26.3-qter showed a heterozygous c.176G-->A change that
resulted in the replacement of a structurally highly conserved valine by
methionine at codon 42 (p.V42M). This sequence change was not observed in
unaffected family members or in the 100 ethnically matched controls.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a novel missense mutation, p.V42M, in CRYGS associated
with bilateral congenital cataract in a family of Indian origin. This is the
third report of a mutation in this exceptional member of the
beta-/gamma-crystallin superfamily and further substantiates the genetic and
clinical heterogeneity of autosomal dominant cataract.

PMCID: PMC2650718
PMID: 19262743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. FEBS J. 2009 Apr;276(7):1962-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06923.x. Epub 2009
Feb 23.

Differential recognition of heat shock elements by members of the heat shock
transcription factor family.

Yamamoto N(1), Takemori Y, Sakurai M, Sugiyama K, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, Kanazawa University Graduate School
of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factor (HSF), an evolutionarily conserved stress
response regulator, forms trimers and binds to heat shock element (HSE),
comprising at least three continuous inverted repeats of the sequence
5'-nGAAn-3'. The single HSF of yeast is also able to bind discontinuously
arranged nGAAn units. We investigated interactions between three human HSFs and
various HSE types in vitro, in yeast cells, and in HeLa cells. Human HSF1, a
stress-activated regulator, preferentially bound to continuous HSEs rather than
discontinuous HSEs, and heat shock of HeLa cells caused expression of reporter
genes containing continuous HSEs. HSF2, whose function is implicated in neuronal 
specification and spermatogenesis, exhibited a slightly higher binding affinity
to discontinuous HSEs than did HSF1. HSF4, a protein required for ocular lens
development, efficiently recognized discontinuous HSEs in a
trimerization-dependent manner. Among four human gamma-crystallin genes encoding 
structural proteins of the lens, heat-induced HSF1 preferred HSEs on the
gammaA-crystallin and gammaB-crystallin promoters, whereas HSF4 preferred HSE on 
the gammaC-crystallin promoter. These results suggest that the HSE architecture
is an important determinant of which HSF members regulate genes in diverse
cellular processes.

PMID: 19250318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Feb 19;10:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-10.

Removal of Hsf4 leads to cataract development in mice through down-regulation of 
gamma S-crystallin and Bfsp expression.

Shi X(1), Cui B, Wang Z, Weng L, Xu Z, Ma J, Xu G, Kong X, Hu L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, PR China. sxhiii@sina.com

BACKGROUND: Heat-shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) mutations are associated
with autosomal dominant lamellar cataract and Marner cataract. Disruptions of the
Hsf4 gene cause lens defects in mice, indicating a requirement for HSF4 in fiber 
cell differentiation during lens development. However, neither the relationship
between HSF4 and crystallins nor the detailed mechanism of maintenance of lens
transparency by HSF4 is fully understood.
RESULTS: In an attempt to determine how the underlying biomedical and
physiological mechanisms resulting from loss of HSF4 contribute to cataract
formation, we generated an Hsf4 knockout mouse model. We showed that the Hsf4
knockout mouse (Hsf4-/-) partially mimics the human cataract caused by HSF4
mutations. Q-PCR analysis revealed down-regulation of several cataract-relevant
genes, including gamma S-crystallin (Crygs) and lens-specific beaded filament
proteins 1 and 2 (Bfsp1 and Bfsp2), in the lens of the Hsf4-/- mouse.
Transcription activity analysis using the dual-luciferase system suggested that
these cataract-relevant genes are the direct downstream targets of HSF4. The
effect of HSF4 on gamma S-crystallin is exemplified by the cataractogenesis seen 
in the Hsf4-/-,rncat intercross. The 2D electrophoretic analysis of whole-lens
lysates revealed a different expression pattern in 8-week-old Hsf4-/- mice
compared with their wild-type counterparts, including the loss of some alpha
A-crystallin modifications and reduced expression of gamma-crystallin proteins.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that HSF4 is sufficiently important to lens
development and disruption of the Hsf4 gene leads to cataracts via at least three
pathways: 1) down-regulation of gamma-crystallin, particularly gamma
S-crystallin; 2) decreased lens beaded filament expression; and 3) loss of
post-translational modification of alpha A-crystallin.

PMCID: PMC2653017
PMID: 19224648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Jul;50(7):3291-303. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3149.
Epub 2009 Jan 31.

Comprehensive mutational screening in a cohort of Danish families with hereditary
congenital cataract.

Hansen L(1), Mikkelsen A, Nürnberg P, Nürnberg G, Anjum I, Eiberg H, Rosenberg T.

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Erratum in
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012;53(10):6667.

Comment in
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Oct;53(10):6666.
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012;53(9):5770.

PURPOSE: Identification of the causal mutations in 28 unrelated families and
individuals with hereditary congenital cataract identified from a national Danish
register of hereditary eye diseases. Seven families have been published
previously, and the data of the remaining 21 families are presented together with
an overview of the results in all families.
METHODS: A combined screening approach of linkage analysis and sequencing of 17
cataract genes were applied to mutation analyses of total 28 families.
RESULTS: The study revealed a disease locus in seven of eight families that were 
amenable to linkage analysis. All loci represented known genes, and subsequent
sequencing identified the mutations. Mutations were found in eight genes, among
them crystallins (36%), connexins (22%), and the transcription factors HSF4 and
MAF (15%). One family carried a complex CRYBB2 allele of three DNA variants, and 
a gene conversion is the most likely mutational event causing this variant. Ten
families had microcornea cataract, and a mutation was identified in eight of
those. Most families displayed mixed phenotypes with nuclear, lamellar, and polar
opacities and no apparent genotype-phenotype correlation emerged.
CONCLUSIONS: In total, 28 families were analyzed, and mutations were identified
in 20 (71%) of them. Despite considerable locus heterogeneity, a high mutation
identification rate was achieved by sequencing a limited number of major cataract
genes. Provided these results are representative of Western European populations,
the applied sequencing strategy seems to be suitable for the exploration of the
large group of isolated cataracts with unknown etiology.

PMID: 19182255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Nov 11;9:99. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-99.

A novel HSF4 gene mutation (p.R405X) causing autosomal recessive congenital
cataracts in a large consanguineous family from Pakistan.

Sajjad N(1), Goebel I, Kakar N, Cheema AM, Kubisch C, Ahmad J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology and Informatics, BUITEMS, Quetta, Pakistan.
naheedsaj@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Hereditary cataracts are most frequently inherited as autosomal
dominant traits, but can also be inherited in an autosomal recessive or X-linked 
fashion. To date, 12 loci for autosomal recessive cataracts have been mapped
including a locus on chromosome 16q22 containing the disease-causing gene HSF4
(Genbank accession number NM_001040667). Here, we describe a family from Pakistan
with the first nonsense mutation in HSF4 thus expanding the mutational spectrum
of this heat shock transcription factor gene.
METHODS: A large consanguineous Pakistani family with autosomal recessive
cataracts was collected from Quetta. Genetic linkage analysis was performed for
the common known autosomal recessive cataracts loci and linkage to a locus
containing HSF4 (OMIM 602438) was found. All exons and adjacent splice sites of
the heat shock transcription factor 4 gene (HSF4) were sequenced. A
mutation-specific restriction enzyme digest (HphI) was performed for all family
members and unrelated controls.
RESULTS: The disease phenotype perfectly co-segregated with markers flanking the 
known cataract gene HSF4, whereas other autosomal recessive loci were excluded. A
maximum two-point LOD score with a Zmax=5.6 at theta=0 was obtained for D16S421. 
Direct sequencing of HSF4 revealed the nucleotide exchange c.1213C>T in this
family predicting an arginine to stop codon exchange (p.R405X).
CONCLUSION: We identified the first nonsense mutation (p.R405X) in exon 11 of
HSF4 in a large consanguineous Pakistani family with autosomal recessive
cataract.

PMCID: PMC2592245
PMID: 19014451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Radiats Biol Radioecol. 2008 Sep-Oct;48(5):565-72.

[Adaptive response on life span alteration in Drosophila melanogaster strains
with mutations in heat shock factor and heat shock proteins genes].

[Article in Russian]

Turysheva EV, Shaposhnikov MV, Moskalev AA.

The survival adaptive response (the life span alteration) induced by low-level
radiation was studied in Drosophila using wild type strain (Canton-S) and strains
mutant in genes of heat shock factor Hsf (1-4 alleles) and heat shock proteins
(Hsp70Ba(304), Hsp83(e6A), Hsp22(EY09909)). The inductive doses of
gamma-radiation were 6 and 60 cGy at a dose of 0.017 and 0.17 cGy/h. As a
challenging dose we used feeding of flies by 20 mM paraquat in 5% sucrose
solution during 24 h. The adaptive response was induced by chronic low dose
irradiation in all experimental variants except Hsf4 and Hsp70Ba(304) homozygous 
strains. In Hsp22 homozygous strain the adaptive response was found only in males
but wasn't in females. Thus the Drosophila strain homozygous on Hsp and
Hsfmutations do not demonstrate the adaptive response in the most of studied
variants. These results indicate the direct involvement of Hsp and Hsf genes to
the formation of adaptive response.

PMID: 19004329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Vis. 2008;14:1850-5. Epub 2008 Oct 20.

Mutation screening of HSF4 in 150 age-related cataract patients.

Shi Y(1), Shi X, Jin Y, Miao A, Bu L, He J, Jiang H, Lu Y, Kong X, Hu L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Science, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences of
CAS and Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: Heat shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) regulates the expression of
several heat shock protein (HSP) genes. HSPs are one of the major components
responsible for lens protein organization. Recently, we found that mutations of
HSF4 result in hereditary cataract. In this study, we explore the role of HSF4 in
the development of age-related cataract.
METHODS: We screened sequence variants of HSF4 in age-related cataract patients
and the natural population from Shanghai, China.
RESULTS: In individuals of natural populations, we detected no single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) with a frequency higher than 5% in a complete coding region or
in their exon-intron boundaries. In 150 age-related cataract patients, we
identified seven sequence changes. We found an intronic G-->A transition
(c.1020-25G>A) in one patient, a missense mutation (c.1078A>G) in exon 4 in two
patients, a silent mutation (c.1223 C>T) in exon 5 in two patients, an intronic
C-->T transition (c.1256+25C>T) in one patient, and a silent mutation in exon 6
(c.1286 C>T) in one patient. These five variants were not represented in 220
control individuals. We also identified an intronic C-->T transition
(c.1019+9C>T) and a missense mutation (c.1243G>A) in exon 3 in three patients,
but these two variants were also present in 100 control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified five new HSF4 mutations in 150 age-related cataract
patients, enlarging the spectrum of HSF4 mutations in cataract patients. This
result indicates that HSF4 mutations account for only a small fraction of
age-related cataracts.

PMCID: PMC2569895
PMID: 18941546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 31;283(44):29961-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804629200. Epub 2008
Aug 27.

Analysis of HSF4 binding regions reveals its necessity for gene regulation during
development and heat shock response in mouse lenses.

Fujimoto M(1), Oshima K, Shinkawa T, Wang BB, Inouye S, Hayashida N, Takii R,
Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yamaguchi University School of Medicine,
Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) regulate gene expression in response to
heat shock and in physiological conditions. In mammals, HSF1 is required for
heat-mediated induction of classic heat shock genes; however, we do not know the 
molecular mechanisms by which HSF4 regulates gene expression or the biological
consequences of its binding to chromatin. Here, we identified that HSF4 binds to 
various genomic regions, including the introns and distal parts of protein-coding
genes in vivo in mouse lenses, and a substantial numbers of the regions were also
occupied by HSF1 and HSF2. HSF4 regulated expression of some genes at a
developmental stage when HSF1 and HSF2 expression decreased. Although HSF4
binding did not affect expression of many genes, it induces demethylated status
of histone H3K9 on the binding regions. Unexpectedly, a lot of HSF4 targets were 
induced by heat shock treatment, and HSF4 is required for induction of a set of
non-classic heat shock genes in response to heat shock, in part by facilitating
HSF1 binding through chromatin modification. These results suggest novel
mechanisms of gene regulation controlled by HSF4 in non-classic heat shock
response and in lens development.

PMCID: PMC2662063
PMID: 18755693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Vet J. 2009 Nov;182(2):342-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2008.06.006. Epub 2008 Aug 13.

Scanning 17 candidate genes for association with primary cataracts in the
wire-haired Dachshund.

Müller C(1), Distl O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, Bünteweg 17p, 30559 Hannover, Germany.

Primary cataracts are breed-related eye diseases and are common in many dog
breeds. In this study, 17 genes (BFSP2, EYA1, FOXE3, FTL, GCNT2, GJA3, GJA8,
HSF4, MAF, MIP, PAX6, PITX3, SIX5, SORD, SOX1, SPARC, TRNT1) were evaluated as
candidates for primary non-congenital cataracts (CAT) in the Dachshund using
microsatellites adjacent to the candidate genes. Linkage and association with CAT
was tested in 15 affected and six unaffected wire-haired Dachshunds.
Non-parametric linkage analysis and association tests did not reveal significant 
linkage or association for the candidate gene flanking microsatellites tested.
Thus, it is unlikely that the 17 investigated candidate genes harbour a causative
mutation for CAT in these Dachshunds.

PMID: 18703362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Vet Res. 2008 Feb;69(2):222-7. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.69.2.222.

Inheritance of cataracts and primary lens luxation in Jack Russell Terriers.

Oberbauer AM(1), Hollingsworth SR, Belanger JM, Regan KR, Famula TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, College of Agricultural and Environmental
Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize heritability and mode of inheritance of cataracts and 
primary lens luxation in Jack Russell Terriers.
ANIMALS: 872 Jack Russell Terriers from which buccal epithelial cells were
collected and phenotypes for cataracts and lens luxation were determined and an
additional 1,898 Jack Russell Terriers without phenotypic information used to
complete pedigree relationships and that were included in the analyses.
PROCEDURES: Narrow-sense heritabilities and genetic correlation for cataracts and
lens luxation were modeled by use of threshold analysis, whereas complex
segregation analysis was used to characterize mode of inheritance. For the
analyses, dogs < 6 years old, unless confirmed as having cataracts or lens
luxation, were classified as an unknown phenotype. The possible involvement of an
HSF4 mutation in cataracts was determined by DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Cataracts and primary lens luxation were highly heritable and
genetically correlated, and neither was controlled by a single gene. Cataracts
were not associated with an HSF4 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Analysis of the data indicated that concerted
selection against both cataracts and primary lens luxation when choosing breeding
animals can be used to improve ocular health in Jack Russell Terriers.

PMID: 18241019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Vet Ophthalmol. 2008 Jan-Feb;11(1):34-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-5224.2007.00598.x.

Evaluation of canine heat shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) as a candidate gene
for primary cataracts in the Dachshund and the Entlebucher Mountain dog.

Müller C(1), Wöhlke A, Distl O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, Bünteweg 17p, 30559 Hannover, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Testing of the cataract-causing insertion/deletion mutation in the
canine HSF4 gene for its linkage and association with primary cataracts (CAT) in 
Dachshunds and Entlebucher Mountain dogs.
MATERIALS: Exon 9 with flanking intronic regions of the canine HSF4 gene was
sequenced in 24 Dachshunds and 20 Entlebucher Mountain dogs. The HSF4 cDNA
sequence of lens tissue was analyzed in a CAT-unaffected mixed-breed dog and in
three CAT-affected dogs of different breeds, including a Wire-haired Dachshund, a
Dachshund-mix and a German Shepherd dog.
RESULTS: In all dogs investigated here, the previously reported CAT-causing
mutation did not exist. We found a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in intron
9, which was neither associated nor linked with the CAT phenotype in the two dog 
breeds.
CONCLUSION: The CAT phenotype in the two dog breeds investigated here was not
caused by the same mutation found to be associated with early-onset CAT in the
Staffordshire Bull Terrier and Boston Terrier. The intronic SNP may be useful to 
test HSF4 for linkage with CAT in further dog breeds.

PMID: 18190350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurosci. 2007 Jul 25;27(30):7974-86.

Demyelination, astrogliosis, and accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins,
hallmarks of CNS disease in hsf1-deficient mice.

Homma S(1), Jin X, Wang G, Tu N, Min J, Yanasak N, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Chaperone/Radiobiology and Cancer Virology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The heat shock transcription factors (Hsfs) are responsible for the heat shock
response, an evolutionarily conserved process for clearance of damaged and
aggregated proteins. In organisms such as Caenorhabditis elegans, which contain a
single Hsf, reduction in the level of Hsf is associated with the appearance of
age-related phenotypes and increased accumulation of protein aggregates.
Mammalian cells express three hsfs (hsf1, hsf2, hsf4) and their role in CNS
homeostasis remains unclear. In this study, we examined the effects of deletion
of single or multiple hsf genes in the CNS using mutant mice. Our results show
that hsf1-/- mice display progressive myelin loss that accompanies severe
astrogliosis and this is exacerbated in the absence of either the hsf2 or hsf4
gene. Magnetic resonance imaging and behavioral studies indicate reduction in the
white matter tracts of the corpus callosum, and deficiencies in motor activity,
respectively, in aged hsf1-/- mice. Concomitantly, hsf1-/- aged CNS exhibit
increased activated microglia and apoptotic cells that are mainly positive for
GFAP, an astrocyte-specific marker. Studies based on the expression of
short-lived ubiquitinated green fluorescent protein (GFPu) in living hsf1-/-
cells indicate that they exhibit reduced ability to degrade ubiquitinated
proteins, accumulate short-lived GFPu, and accumulate aggregates of the
Huntington's model of GFP containing trinucleotide repeats (Q103-GFP). Likewise, 
hsf1-/- brain and astrocytes exhibit higher than wild-type levels of
ubiquitinated proteins, increased levels of protein oxidation, and increased
sensitivity to oxidative stress. These studies indicate a critical role for
mammalian hsf genes, but specifically hsf1, in the quality control mechanisms and
maintenance of CNS homeostasis during the organism's lifetime.

PMID: 17652588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Anim Breed Genet. 2007 Aug;124(4):242-5.

Evaluation of canine heat-shock transcription factor 4 as a candidate for primary
cataracts in English Cocker Spaniels and wire-haired Kromfohrlanders.

Engelhardt A(1), Wöhlke A, Distl O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

Canine heat-shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) was evaluated as a candidate for 
primary cataracts in English Cocker Spaniels (ECS) and wire-haired
Kromfohrlanders (KFL). We sequenced exon 9 and its flanking regions of the HSF4
gene in ECS and KFL but were not able to detect a previously reported insertion
mutation associated with primary cataracts in Staffordshire Bull Terriers and
Boston Terriers. Another single nucleotide polymorphism (LOC489766:g.3243A>G) in 
intron 9 was identified and included in linkage and association tests together
with two flanking microsatellites. Linkage and association tests with primary
cataracts in ECS and KFL were not significant. Therefore, we could not verify
that the mutation in exon 9 of canine HSF4 gene is causative for primary
cataracts in ECS and wire-haired KFL.

PMID: 17651328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Hered. 2007;98(5):531-3. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Mutation in HSF4 associated with early but not late-onset hereditary cataract in 
the Boston Terrier.

Mellersh CS(1), Graves KT, McLaughlin B, Ennis RB, Pettitt L, Vaudin M, Barnett
KC.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Health Trust, Lanwades Park, Newmarket, Suffolk, CB8 7UU, UK.
cathryn.mellersh@aht.org.uk

Primary hereditary cataract (HC) is one of the most common disorders in purebred 
dogs and is a leading cause of blindness. Boston Terriers suffer from 2 distinct 
forms of HC which occur at different ages and which are different in their
appearance and progression. Early-onset hereditary cataract (EHC) affects dogs
within the first few months of life, is always progressive and bilateral, and
results in total blindness, whereas late-onset hereditary cataract (LHC) in
general affects dogs over the age of 3 and is more variable in its clinical
phenotype, age of onset, progression, and the degree to which vision is impaired.
A mutation in HSF4 has recently been reported in a small number of Boston
Terriers affected with EHC. In this study, we analyzed 22 additional Boston
Terriers affected with early-onset cataract to confirm that the HSF4 mutation is 
causative for this form of cataract in this breed. In addition, we analyzed 40
Boston Terriers that were either clinically clear or affected with LHC for the
presence or absence of the HSF4 mutation. By also sequencing HSF4 in dogs
affected with LHC, we conclude that HSF4 is not associated with the development
of the late-onset form of cataract and that the 2 forms of cataract in this breed
are therefore genetically discrete conditions.

PMID: 17611257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Plant Physiol. 2007 Nov;145(3):814-30. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

STRESS RESPONSE SUPPRESSOR1 and STRESS RESPONSE SUPPRESSOR2, two DEAD-box RNA
helicases that attenuate Arabidopsis responses to multiple abiotic stresses.

Kant P(1), Kant S, Gordon M, Shaked R, Barak S.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Katz Department of Dryland Biotechnologies, Jacob Blaustein Institutes 
for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Midreshet Ben-Gurion
84990, Israel.

Two genes encoding Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) DEAD-box RNA helicases were
identified in a functional genomics screen as being down-regulated by multiple
abiotic stresses. Mutations in either gene caused increased tolerance to salt,
osmotic, and heat stresses, suggesting that the helicases suppress responses to
abiotic stress. The genes were therefore designated STRESS RESPONSE SUPPRESSOR1
(STRS1; At1g31970) and STRS2 (At5g08620). In the strs mutants, salt, osmotic, and
cold stresses induced enhanced expression of genes encoding the transcriptional
activators DREB1A/CBF3 and DREB2A and a downstream DREB target gene, RD29A. Under
heat stress, the strs mutants exhibited enhanced expression of the heat shock
transcription factor genes, HSF4 and HSF7, and the downstream gene HEAT SHOCK
PROTEIN101. Germination of mutant seed was hyposensitive to the phytohormone
abscisic acid (ABA), but mutants showed up-regulated expression of genes encoding
ABA-dependent stress-responsive transcriptional activators and their downstream
targets. In wild-type plants, STRS1 and STRS2 expression was rapidly
down-regulated by salt, osmotic, and heat stress, but not cold stress. STRS
expression was also reduced by ABA, but salt stress led to reduced STRS
expression in both wild-type and ABA-deficient mutant plants. Taken together, our
results suggest that STRS1 and STRS2 attenuate the expression of
stress-responsive transcriptional activators and function in ABA-dependent and
ABA-independent abiotic stress signaling networks.

PMCID: PMC2048787
PMID: 17556511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Oct;1113:15-27. Epub 2007 May 4.

Heat shock factors at a crossroad between stress and development.

Akerfelt M(1), Trouillet D, Mezger V, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, P.O. Box 123, FI-20521 Turku, Finland.

Organisms must be able to sense and respond rapidly to changes in their
environment in order to maintain homeostasis and survive. Induction of heat shock
proteins (Hsps) is a common cellular defense mechanism for promoting survival in 
response to various stress stimuli. Heat shock factors (HSFs) are transcriptional
regulators of Hsps, which function as molecular chaperones in protecting cells
against proteotoxic damage. Mammals have three different HSFs that have been
considered functionally distinct: HSF1 is essential for the heat shock response
and is also required for developmental processes, whereas HSF2 and HSF4 are
important for differentiation and development. Specifically, HSF2 is involved in 
corticogenesis and spermatogenesis, and HSF4 is needed for maintenance of sensory
organs, such as the lens and the olfactory epithelium. Recent evidence, however, 
suggests a functional interplay between HSF1 and HSF2 in the regulation of Hsp
expression under stress conditions. In lens formation, HSF1 and HSF4 have been
shown to have opposite effects on gene expression. In this chapter, we present
the different roles of the mammalian HSFs as regulators of cellular stress and
developmental processes. We highlight the interaction between different HSFs and 
discuss the discoveries of novel target genes in addition to the classical Hsps.

PMID: 17483205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):679-85. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

KLF6 and HSF4 transcriptionally regulate multidrug resistance transporters during
inflammation.

Ho EA(1), Piquette-Miller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toronto, Leslie Dan
Faculty of Pharmacy, 144 College Street, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S 3M2.

Endotoxin-induced inflammation alters the hepatic expression of the drug efflux
transporter genes mdr1b (Abcb1b) and mrp3 (Abcc3) in rats. In this study, we
identified a novel kruppel-like zinc finger protein 6 (KLF6) cis-element on the
rat mdr1b promoter which is important for basal activity and IL-1beta and
endotoxin-mediated induction in gene transcription. Interestingly, KLF6 also
functioned as a negative transcriptional regulator, inhibiting TNF-alpha-mediated
induction of mdr1b. Furthermore, novel CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta
(C/EBPbeta) and heat shock factor 4 (HSF4) transcription binding sites were
identified on the rat mrp3 promoter. Deletion of the HSF4 element significantly
increased transcriptional activity of the mrp3 gene when exposed to TNF-alpha.
Endotoxin treatment significantly affected transcriptional activity only in
C/EBPbeta and HSF4 double deletion mrp3 promoter constructs. In summary, KLF6 and
HSF4 are stimuli-specific regulatory elements which may be important in the
control of the rat mdr1b and mrp3 genes during health and disease.

PMID: 17196161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2007 Jan;146(1):131-40. Epub 2006 Oct 
6.

Heat shock factor 1 is required for constitutive Hsp70 expression and normal lens
development in embryonic zebrafish.

Evans TG(1), Belak Z, Ovsenek N, Krone PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, 107
Wiggins Road, Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5E5.

Heat shock factors (HSFs) are the major transcription factors responsible for
heat-induced upregulation of heat shock protein (Hsp) genes. All three mammalian 
HSFs (HSF1, HSF2, HSF4) have also been shown to be required for normal mammalian 
development. It is currently unknown if HSFs play similarly important roles
during normal development of non-mammalian vertebrates. In the present study, a
morpholino modified antisense oligonucleotide (MO) approach targeted against hsf1
mRNA (hsf1-MO) was used to examine the requirement of HSF1 in zebrafish
development. Embryos depleted of HSF1 displayed a reproducible small eye
phenotype characterized by an immature lens and a disorganized retinal structure.
These defects were strikingly similar to those observed when constitutive, lens
specific Hsp70 expression was reduced through the microinjection of MO targeting 
hsp70. The data suggest that HSF1 is involved in regulating constitutive lens
specific expression of hsp70 in the embryonic zebrafish. This conclusion is
supported by a marked reduction in Hsp70 protein in hsf1-MO injected embryos.
Microinjection of MO targeted to hsf2 mRNA (hsf2-MO) did not result in a small
eye phenotype in a significant number of embryos. These data also suggest that
HSF1 and HSF2 play distinct roles in non-mammalian vertebrates, similarly to what
has been demonstrated previously in mouse.

PMID: 17134927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Vet Ophthalmol. 2006 Sep-Oct;9(5):369-78.

Identification of mutations in HSF4 in dogs of three different breeds with
hereditary cataracts.

Mellersh CS(1), Pettitt L, Forman OP, Vaudin M, Barnett KC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Preventive Medicine, Animal Health Trust, Lanwades Park, Kentford, 
Newmarket, Suffolk, CB7 7UU, UK. cathryn.mellersh@aht.org.uk

Cataracts are a leading cause of blindness in both dogs and humans. Mutations in 
several genes have been associated with inherited forms of human cataract, but no
mutations have been identified as the cause of any form of canine inherited
cataract. We have used a candidate gene approach to investigate 20 genes, known
to be associated with cataract in humans, for their potential association with
the development of hereditary cataract (HC) in dogs. We have identified mutations
in the HSF4 gene in Staffordshire Bull Terriers, Boston Terriers and Australian
Shepherds affected by HC. Interestingly, different mutations in this single gene 
may be causing a recessive form of cataract in Staffordshire Bull Terriers and
Boston Terriers and a dominant cataract in Australian Shepherds. Identification
of the mutations that cause HC in these three breeds provides a method of
controlling the disease within populations at risk using a simple diagnostic
test, and also establishes cataract in these breeds as models for their human
counterparts.

PMID: 16939467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Ophthalmol. 2006 Aug;142(2):298-303.

Novel HSF4 mutation causes congenital total white cataract in a Chinese family.

Ke T(1), Wang QK, Ji B, Wang X, Liu P, Zhang X, Tang Z, Ren X, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genome Research and College of Life Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P. R. China.

PURPOSE: To identify the disease-causing gene (mutation) in a Chinese family
affected with autosomal dominant congenital total white cataract.
DESIGN: Observational case series.
METHODS: Genotyping and linkage analyses were used to identify the linkage of the
disease-causing gene in the Chinese family to the HSF4 gene encoding a member of 
the family of heat shock transcription factors (HSFs). Direct DNA sequence
analysis was used to identify the disease-causing mutation. Polymerase chain
reaction/restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis was used to
demonstrate cosegregation of the HSF4 mutation with the cataract and the absence 
of the mutation in the normal controls.
RESULTS: The cataract gene in the Chinese family was linked to marker D16S3043,
and further haplotype analysis defined the causative gene between D16S515 and
D16S415 within which HSF4 is located. A novel mutation c.221G>A was identified in
HSF4, which results in substitution of a highly conserved arginine residue by
histidine at codon 74 (p.R74H). The R74H mutation cosegregated with the affected 
individuals in the family and did not exist in unaffected family members and 150 
unrelated normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identified a novel missense mutation R74H in the
transcription factor gene HSF4 in a Chinese cataract family and expand the
spectrum of HSF4 mutations causing cataract.

PMID: 16876512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2006;(172):153-69.

HSFs in development.

Morange M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie, Unité de Génétique Moléculaire, Ens, Paris, France.
morange@biologie.ens.fr

Heat shock transcription factors, as well as heat shock proteins, are involved in
different steps in differentiation and development, in addition to their role in 
adaptation to stress. This has already been demonstrated in the case of the
single heat shock factor present in Drosophila. Over the last 6 years, similar
observations have accumulated from the progressive inactivation of the different 
hsf genes in mammals, the use of double-null animals, and the slow
characterization of their complex phenotypes. Although these studies are not yet 
complete, the data so far can be used to draw some conclusions. All hsf genes
contribute to development in mammals and to normal functions at the adult stage, 
by controlling the expression of Hsp and non-Hsp genes. Reproduction, the immune 
response and aging are the processes that are the most deeply affected. An
attractive hypothesis would be that these new functions have been recruited
during evolution in order to coordinate these processes: HSFs may occupy a
central place in the trade off that organisms make between reproduction and
maintenance, in response to the variations in the environment.

PMID: 16610359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2006;(172):139-52.

Heat shock response: lessons from mouse knockouts.

Christians ES(1), Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR5547, Toulouse, France.
Elisabeth.Christians@cict.fr

Organisms are endowed with integrated regulatory networks that transduce and
amplify incoming signals into effective responses, ultimately imparting cell
death and/or survival pathways. As a conserved cytoprotective mechanism from
bacteria to humans, the heat shock response has been established as a paradigm
for inducible gene expression, stimulating the interests of biologists and
clinicians alike to tackle fundamental questions related to the molecular
switches, lineage-specific requirements, unique and/or redundant roles, and even 
efforts to harness the response therapeutically. Gene targeting studies in mice
confirm HSF1 as a master regulator required for cell growth, embryonic
development, and reproduction. For example, sterility of Hsf1-null female but not
null male mice established strict requirements for maternal HSF1 expression in
the oocyte. Yet Hsf2 knockouts by three independent laboratories have not fully
clarified the role of mammalian HSF2 for normal development, fertility, and
postnatal neuronal function. In contrast, Hsf4 knockouts have provided a
consistent demonstration for HSF4's critical role during lens formation. In the
future, molecular analysis of HSF knockout mice will bring new insights to HSF
interactions, foster better understanding of gene regulation at the genome level,
lead to a better integration of the HSF pathway in life beyond heat shock, the
classical laboratory challenge.

PMID: 16610358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Physiol Genomics. 2006 May 16;25(3):493-501. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Thermoprotection of synaptic transmission in a Drosophila heat shock factor
mutant is accompanied by increased expression of Hsp83 and DnaJ-1.

Neal SJ(1), Karunanithi S, Best A, So AK, Tanguay RM, Atwood HL, Westwood JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.

In Drosophila larvae, acquired synaptic thermotolerance after heat shock has
previously been shown to correlate with the induction of heat shock proteins
(Hsps) including HSP70. We tested the hypothesis that synaptic thermotolerance
would be significantly diminished in a temperature-sensitive strain (Drosophila
heat shock factor mutant hsf4), which has been reported not to be able to produce
inducible Hsps in response to heat shock. Contrary to our hypothesis,
considerable thermoprotection was still observed at hsf4 larval synapses after
heat shock. To investigate the cause of this thermoprotection, we conducted DNA
microarray experiments to identify heat-induced transcript changes in these
organisms. Transcripts of the hsp83, dnaJ-1 (hsp40), and
glutathione-S-transferase gstE1 genes were significantly upregulated in hsf4
larvae after heat shock. In addition, increases in the levels of Hsp83 and DnaJ-1
proteins but not in the inducible form of Hsp70 were detected by Western blot
analysis. The mode of heat shock administration differentially affected the
relative transcript and translational changes for these chaperones. These results
indicate that the compensatory upregulation of constitutively expressed Hsps, in 
the absence of the synthesis of the major inducible Hsp, Hsp70, could still
provide substantial thermoprotection to both synapses and the whole organism.

PMID: 16595740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Genomics. 2006 Jul;88(1):44-51. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Early transposable element insertion in intron 9 of the Hsf4 gene results in
autosomal recessive cataracts in lop11 and ldis1 mice.

Talamas E(1), Jackson L, Koeberl M, Jackson T, McElwee JL, Hawes NL, Chang B,
Jablonski MM, Sidjanin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye Institute, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Lens opacity 11 (lop11) is an autosomal recessive mouse cataract mutation that
arose spontaneously in the RIIIS/J strain. At 3 weeks of age mice exhibit total
cataracts with vacuoles. The lop11 locus was mapped to mouse chromosome 8.
Analysis of the mouse genome for the lop11 critical region identified Hsf4 as a
candidate gene. Molecular evaluation of Hsf4 revealed an early transposable
element (ETn) in intron 9 inserted 61 bp upstream of the intron/exon junction.
The same mutation was also identified in a previously mapped cataract mutant,
ldis1. The ETn insertion altered splicing and expression of the Hsf4 gene,
resulting in the truncated Hsf4 protein. In humans, mutations in HSF4 have been
associated with both autosomal dominant and recessive cataracts. The lop11 mouse 
is an excellent resource for evaluating the role of Hsf4 in transparency of the
lens.

PMCID: PMC1509100
PMID: 16595169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3282-94.

Association and regulation of heat shock transcription factor 4b with both
extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase and
dual-specificity tyrosine phosphatase DUSP26.

Hu Y(1), Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Chaperone Biology/Radiobiology Program, Medical College of Georgia, 
1120 15th Street, CB2803, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The heat shock transcription factors (Hsfs) activate the stress-inducible
expression of heat shock proteins (Hsps) and other molecular chaperones in
response to stress and, therefore, play an essential role in protein
disaggregation and protein folding. In humans, missense mutation in the hsf4 gene
causes cataract, and mice bearing a targeted disruption of the hsf4 gene exhibit 
defects in lens fiber cell differentiation and early cataract formation. Here, we
show that Hsf4b is a direct target of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase 
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) and that phosphorylation of Hsf4b by
ERK leads to increased ability of Hsf4b to bind DNA. Surprisingly, Hsf4b also
interacts with an ERK-specific dual-specificity tyrosine phosphatase named DUSP26
identified from a yeast two-hybrid screen. While activated ERK phosphorylates
Hsf4b, DUSP26 controls the activity of ERK, leading to
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of Hsf4b, altering its ability to bind DNA.
Therefore, DUSP26 interaction with Hsf4b places this transcription factor within 
a regulatory circuit in the MAP kinase signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC1446944
PMID: 16581800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Aug 15;98(6):1528-42.

Heat shock transcription factor (Hsf)-4b recruits Brg1 during the G1 phase of the
cell cycle and regulates the expression of heat shock proteins.

Tu N(1), Hu Y, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Chaperone Biology/Radiobiology Program, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Human brahma-related gene 1(Brg1) is a subunit of the switching/sucrose
non-fermenting (SWI/SNF) chromatin-remodeling complex and regulates transcription
during cell growth and differentiation and has been found to be mutated in many
types of human cancers. Mammalian heat shock factor 1 (Hsf1), which binds
conserved sequences on the promoter of the hsp70 gene when cells are exposed to
various stress stimuli, utilizes Brg1-SWI/SNF complexes and stimulates
transcription in vitro at the level of initiation and elongation. In contrast to 
the stress-inducibility of Hsf1, in vitro transcribed/translated Hsf4b binds to
the heat shock element (HSE) constitutively and loses its ability to bind HSEs
following stress. The regulation of Hsf4b transcriptional activity in vivo
remains unclear. Here, we present evidence that Hsf4b recruits Brg1 complexes to 
the promoters of heat shock proteins (HSPs) under physiological growth
conditions. Furthermore, in an asynchronous cell population, the association of
Hsf4b with Brg1 complexes is regulated in response to activation/inactivation of 
the extracellular signal regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling pathway.
Since Brg1 is also the target of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and
other protein kinases and it is hyperphosphorylated and inactivated during the
G2/M phase of the cell cycle, we tested whether the association of Hsf4b with
Brg1 complexes is altered during the cell cycle. The results indicate that
association of Hsf4b with Brg1 complexes is undetectable during G2/M; however, an
Hsf4b interaction with Brg1 complexes is evident at 1-3 h after progression of
cells into G1, where chromatin structure is presumed to be more accessible to
transcriptional regulatory proteins. At this time, Hsf4b exhibits increased
DNA-binding activity and is detectable on promoters of multiple Hsps. To
determine the unique role of Hsf4b in stimulating the expression of Hsps during
the cell cycle, experiments were conducted with mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs)
deficient in individual Hsfs. The results indicate that in the absence of Hsf1
and Hsf2, Hsf4b expression in cells leads to increased ability of Hsf4b to bind
HSE during G1, leading to enhanced synthesis of inducible Hsp70.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16552721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4931-7. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Maintenance of olfactory neurogenesis requires HSF1, a major heat shock
transcription factor in mice.

Takaki E(1), Fujimoto M, Sugahara K, Nakahari T, Yonemura S, Tanaka Y, Hayashida 
N, Inouye S, Takemoto T, Yamashita H, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) play roles not only in heat shock
response but also in development of the reproductive organs, brain, and lens.
Here, we analyzed sensory organs and found abnormalities of the olfactory
epithelium in adult HSF1-null mice, which is developmentally related to the lens.
The olfactory epithelium was normal until postnatal 3 weeks but was not
maintained later than 4 weeks in HSF1-null mice. The olfactory epithelium was
atrophied with increased cell death of olfactory sensory neurons. Analysis of the
epithelium revealed that induction of HSP expression and reduction of LIF
expression are lacking in adult HSF1-null mice. We found that DNA binding
activity of HSF1 is induced in the olfactory epithelium later than 4 weeks and
that HSF1 binds directly to Lif gene and inhibits its expression. HSF4 has
opposing effects on LIF expression and olfactory neurogenesis. These data
indicate that HSF1 is required for the precise expression of Hsp and cytokine
genes that is obligatory for maintenance of olfactory neurogenesis in adult mice 
and suggest that stress-related processes are involved in its maintenance.

PMID: 16306048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;117(5):452-9. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Locus heterogeneity in autosomal recessive congenital cataracts: linkage to 9q
and germline HSF4 mutations.

Forshew T(1), Johnson CA, Khaliq S, Pasha S, Willis C, Abbasi R, Tee L, Smith U, 
Trembath RC, Mehdi SQ, Moore AT, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

Isolated (non-syndromic) congenital cataract may be inherited as an autosomal
dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked recessive trait. Considerable progress
has been made in identifying genes and loci for dominantly inherited cataract,
but the molecular basis for autosomal recessive disease is less well defined.
Hence we undertook genetic linkage studies in four consanguineous Pakistani
families with non-syndromic autosomal recessive congenital cataracts. In two
families linkage to a 38 cM region 9q13-q22 was detected. Although a locus for
recessive congenital cataracts had not been mapped previously to this region, the
target interval encompasses the candidate region autosomal recessive adult-onset 
pulverulent cataracts (CAAR). The CAAR was mapped previously to 9q13-q22, and may
therefore be allelic to non-syndromic autosomal recessive congenital cataracts.
The other two families did not demonstrate linkage to 9q, but both had a region
of homozygosity at 16q22 containing the heat shock transcription factor 4 (HSF4) 
gene. The HSF4 mutations have been reported in four families with autosomal
dominant cataracts and, recently, in a single kindred with autosomal recessive
congenital cataract. Mutation analysis of HSF4 revealed homozygous mutations
(p.Arg175Pro and c.595_599delGGGCC, respectively) in the two families. These
findings confirm that mutations in HSF4 may result in both autosomal dominant and
autosomal recessive congenital cataract, and highlight the locus heterogeneity in
autosomal recessive congenital cataract.

PMID: 15959809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genesis. 2004 Dec;40(4):205-17.

Unique contribution of heat shock transcription factor 4 in ocular lens
development and fiber cell differentiation.

Min JN(1), Zhang Y, Moskophidis D, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Radiology, Medical
College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912-3175, USA.

Mammalian ocular lens development results via a differentiation program that is
highly regulated by tissue-specific transcription factors. Central to this is the
terminal differentiation of fiber cells, which develop from epithelial cells on
the anterior surface of the lens, accompanied by a change in cell shape and
expression of structural proteins (such as membrane proteins MP19, MIP26,
connexin 43, 46, and 50, cytoskeletal proteins CP49, CP115, and alpha, beta, and 
gamma crystallins), creating a transparent, refractive index gradient in the
lens. Mutations in genes controlling eye development and in lens structural
protein genes are associated with multiple ocular developmental disorders,
including cataracts and other opacities of the lens. Here we show that heat shock
transcription factor 4 (HSF4) expression in the developing lens is required for
correct lens development and that inactivation of hsf4 leads to early postnatal
cataract formation with primary effects specific to terminal fiber cell
differentiation. These data suggest that HSF4 acts as a critical transcription
factor for lens-specific target gene expression, in particular regulating the
small 25 kDa heat shock protein that acts as a modifier for lens opacity and
cataract development. Thus, HSF4 fulfills a central role in controlling spatial
and temporal expression of genes critical for correct development and function of
the lens.

PMID: 15593327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 27;23(21):4297-306. Epub 2004 Oct 14.

HSF4 is required for normal cell growth and differentiation during mouse lens
development.

Fujimoto M(1), Izu H, Seki K, Fukuda K, Nishida T, Yamada S, Kato K, Yonemura S, 
Inouye S, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

The heat shock transcription factor (HSF) family consists of three members in
mammals and regulates expression of heat shock genes via a heat shock element.
HSF1 and HSF2 are required for some developmental processes, but it is unclear
how they regulate these processes. To elucidate the mechanisms of developmental
regulation by HSFs, we generated mice in which the HSF4 gene is mutated.
HSF4-null mice had cataract with abnormal lens fiber cells containing
inclusion-like structures, probably due to decreased expression of
gamma-crystallin, which maintains protein stability. Furthermore, we found
increased proliferation and premature differentiation of the mutant lens
epithelial cells, which is associated with increased expression of growth
factors, FGF-1, FGF-4, and FGF-7. Unexpectedly, HSF1 competed with HSF4 for the
expression of FGFs not only in the lens but also in other tissues. These findings
reveal the lens-specific role of HSF4, which activates gamma-crystallin genes,
and also indicate that HSF1 and HSF4 are involved in regulating expression of
growth factor genes, which are essential for cell growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC524399
PMID: 15483628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):44497-503. Epub 2004 Aug 12.

Developmentally dictated expression of heat shock factors: exclusive expression
of HSF4 in the postnatal lens and its specific interaction with alphaB-crystallin
heat shock promoter.

Somasundaram T(1), Bhat SP.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095-7000, USA.

The molecular cascade of stress response in higher eukaryotes commences in the
cytoplasm with the trimerization of the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), followed by
its transport to the nucleus, where it binds to the heat shock element leading to
the activation of transcription from the down-stream gene(s). This
well-established paradigm has been mostly studied in cultured cells. The
developmental and tissue-specific control of the heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs) and their interactions with heat shock promoters remain unexplored. We
report here that in the rat lens, among the three mammalian HSFs, expression of
HSF1 and HSF2 is largely fetal, whereas the expression of HSF4 is predominantly
postnatal. Similar pattern of expression of HSF1 and HSF4 is seen in fetal and
adult human lenses. This stage-specific inverse relationship between the
expression of HSF1/2 and HSF4 suggests tissue-specific management of stress
depending on the presence or absence of specific HSF(s). In addition to real-time
PCR and immunoblotting, gel mobility shift assays, coupled with specific
antibodies and HSE probes, derived from three different heat shock promoters,
establish that there is no HSF1 or HSF2 binding activity in the postnatal lens
nuclear extracts. Using this unique, developmentally modulated in vivo system, we
demonstrate 1) specific patterns of HSF4 binding to heat shock elements derived
from alphaB-crystallin, Hsp70, and Hsp82 promoters and 2) that it is HSF4 and not
HSF1 or HSF2 that interacts with the canonical heat shock element of the
alphaB-crystallin gene.

PMID: 15308659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Aug;45(8):2716-21.

A homozygous splice mutation in the HSF4 gene is associated with an autosomal
recessive congenital cataract.

Smaoui N(1), Beltaief O, BenHamed S, M'Rad R, Maazoul F, Ouertani A, Chaabouni H,
Hejtmancik JF.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

PURPOSE: To map the locus and identify the gene causing autosomal recessive
congenital cataracts in a large consanguineous Tunisian family.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from blood samples from a large Tunisian family with
an autosomal recessive, congenital, total white cataract. A genome-wide scan was 
performed with microsatellite markers. All exons and the splice sites of the HSF4
gene were sequenced in all members of the Tunisian family and in control
individuals. RT-PCR was used to detect different transcripts of the HSF4 gene in 
the human lens. The transcripts were cloned in a TA cloning vector and sequenced.
RESULTS: Two-point linkage analyses showed linkage to markers on 16q22 with a
maximum lod score of 17.78 at theta = 0.01 with D16S3043. Haplotype analysis
refined the critical region to a 1.8-cM (4.8-Mb) interval, flanked by D16S3031
and D16S3095. This region contains HSF4, some mutations of which cause the
autosomal dominant Marner cataract. Sequencing of HSF4 showed a homozygous
mutation in the 5' splice site of intron 12 (c.1327+4A-->G), which causes the
skipping of exon 12. A more detailed study of the transcripts resulting from
alternative splicing of the HSF4 gene in the lens is also reported, showing the
major transcript HSF4b.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report describing association of an autosomal
recessive cataract with the HSF4 locus on 16q21-q22.1 and the first description
of HSF4 splice variants in the lens showing that HSF4b is the major transcript.

PMID: 15277496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Seikagaku. 2004 May;76(5):419-28.

[Physiological roles of heat shock transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujimoto M(1), Inouye S, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yamaguchi University School 
of Medicine, Minami-Kogushi 1-1-1, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505, Japan.

PMID: 15212230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):8005-14.

Heat shock transcription factor 2 is not essential for embryonic development,
fertility, or adult cognitive and psychomotor function in mice.

McMillan DR(1), Christians E, Forster M, Xiao X, Connell P, Plumier JC, Zuo X,
Richardson J, Morgan S, Benjamin IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine. Pediatrics. Pathology. Division of Cell and 
Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas,
Dallas, Texas 75235, USA.

Members of the heat shock factor (HSF) family are evolutionarily conserved
regulators that share a highly homologous DNA-binding domain. In mammals, HSF1 is
the main factor controlling the stress-inducible expression of Hsp genes while
the functions of HSF2 and HSF4 are less clear. Based on its developmental profile
of expression, it was hypothesized that HSF2 may play an essential role in brain 
and heart development, spermatogenesis, and erythroid differentiation. To
directly assess this hypothesis and better understand the underlying mechanisms
that require HSF2, we generated Hsf2 knockout mice. Here, we report that
Hsf2(-/-) mice are viable and fertile and exhibit normal life span and behavioral
functions. We conclude that HSF2, most probably because its physiological roles
are integrated into a redundant network of gene regulation and function, is
dispensable for normal development, fertility, and postnatal psychomotor
function.

PMCID: PMC134743
PMID: 12391166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nat Genet. 2002 Jul;31(3):276-8. Epub 2002 Jun 24.

Mutant DNA-binding domain of HSF4 is associated with autosomal dominant lamellar 
and Marner cataract.

Bu L(1), Jin Y, Shi Y, Chu R, Ban A, Eiberg H, Andres L, Jiang H, Zheng G, Qian
M, Cui B, Xia Y, Liu J, Hu L, Zhao G, Hayden MR, Kong X.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Research Center of Biotechnology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200233, People's Republic of
China.

Congenital cataracts cause 10-30% of all blindness in children, with one-third of
cases estimated to have a genetic cause. Lamellar cataract is the most common
type of infantile cataract. We carried out whole-genome linkage analysis of
Chinese individuals with lamellar cataract, and found that the disorder is
associated with inheritance of a 5.11-cM locus on chromosome 16. This locus
coincides with one previously described for Marner cataract. We screened
individuals of three Chinese families for mutations in HSF4 (a gene at this locus
that encodes heat-shock transcription factor 4) and discovered that in each
family, a distinct missense mutation, predicted to affect the DNA-binding domain 
of the protein, segregates with the disorder. We also discovered an association
between a missense mutation and Marner cataract in an extensive Danish family. We
suggest that HSF4 is critical to lens development.

PMID: 12089525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Periodontal Res. 2001 Dec;36(6):390-7.

Differential gene expression in neutrophils from patients with generalized
aggressive periodontitis.

Kubota T(1), Morozumi T, Shimizu K, Sugita N, Kobayashi T, Yoshie H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Niigata University,
Niigata, Japan.

Differential gene expression was investigated in neutrophils stimulated with
N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine using RNA fingerprinting by arbitrarily
primed polymerase chain reaction (RAP-PCR). The cells were isolated from 3 groups
of subjects: patients with generalized aggressive periodontitis (Aggressive-P. n 
= 6), generalized chronic periodontitis (Chronic-P, n = 6) and healthy controls
(H, n = 8). Our results show that 37 genes were upregulated. while 27 genes were 
down-regulated in all Aggressive-P neutrophils by using RAP-PCR with 45 primer
pairs. Reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed that mRNA levels were
significantly different (p<0.05) for heat shock transcription factor 4b (HSF4b)
gene. Kruppel-like zinc finger transcription factor 9 (Zf9) and muskelin genes.
HSF4b was greater in neutrophils from Aggressive-P compared to groups H and
Chronic-P. Zf9 and muskelin genes were lower in Aggressive-P compared to the H
groups, but no significant difference was noted compared to the Chronic-P group. 
The control genes, IL-1beta and VEGF genes, were expressed at a significantly
higher level in Aggressive-P and Chronic-P than H (p<.01, p<0.05). In conclusion,
the RAP-PCR technique used in this study enabled us to identify 3 Aggressive-P
related genes, which had not been reported previously. Neutrophil functions in
Aggressive-P patients are suggested to be altered by regulatory factors of the
immune system including HSF4b (transcription factor), Zf9 (activator of TGF-beta)
and muskelin (cellular adhesion).

PMID: 11762875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(21):7163-71.

Stress-specific activation and repression of heat shock factors 1 and 2.

Mathew A(1), Mathur SK, Jolly C, Fox SG, Kim S, Morimoto RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Rice
Institute for Biomedical Research, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois
60208, USA.

Vertebrate cells express a family of heat shock transcription factors (HSF1 to
HSF4) that coordinate the inducible regulation of heat shock genes in response to
diverse signals. HSF1 is potent and activated rapidly though transiently by heat 
shock, whereas HSF2 is a less active transcriptional regulator but can retain its
DNA binding properties for extended periods. Consequently, the differential
activation of HSF1 and HSF2 by various stresses may be critical for cells to
survive repeated and diverse stress challenges and to provide a mechanism for
more precise regulation of heat shock gene expression. Here we show, using a
novel DNA binding and detection assay, that HSF1 and HSF2 are coactivated to
different levels in response to a range of conditions that cause cell stress.
Above a low basal activity of both HSFs, heat shock preferentially activates
HSF1, whereas the amino acid analogue azetidine or the proteasome inhibitor MG132
coactivates both HSFs to different levels and hemin preferentially induces HSF2. 
Unexpectedly, we also found that heat shock has dramatic adverse effects on HSF2 
that lead to its reversible inactivation coincident with relocalization from the 
nucleus. The reversible inactivation of HSF2 is specific to heat shock and does
not occur with other stressors or in cells expressing high levels of heat shock
proteins. These results reveal that HSF2 activity is negatively regulated by heat
and suggest a role for heat shock proteins in the positive regulation of HSF2.

PMCID: PMC99891
PMID: 11585899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Cell Biochem. 2001;82(4):692-703.

Heat shock factor-4 (HSF-4a) is a repressor of HSF-1 mediated transcription.

Zhang Y(1), Frejtag W, Dai R, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and Department of Radiology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) regulate the expression of heat shock
proteins and other molecular chaperones that are involved in cellular processes
from higher order assembly to protein degradation and apoptosis. Among the human 
HSFs, HSF-4 is expressed as at least two splice variants. One isoform (HSF-4b)
possesses a transcriptional activation domain, but this region is absent in the
other isoform (HSF-4a). We have recently shown that the HSF-4a isoform represses 
basal transcription from heterologous promoters both in vitro and in vivo. Here
we show that HSF-4a and HSF-4b have dramatically different effects on
HSF-1-containing nuclear bodies, which form after heat shock. While the
expression of HSF-4b colocalizes with nuclear granules, the expression of HSF-4a 
prevents their formation. In addition, there is a concurrent reduction of HSF-1
in the nucleus, and there is reduction in its DNA binding activity and in
HSE-dependent transcription of a reporter gene. To better understand the
mechanism by which HSF-4a represses transcription, we inducibly expressed HSF-4a 
in cells and found that HSF-4a binds to the heat shock element (HSE) during
attenuation of the heat shock response. Thus HSF-4a is an active repressor of
HSF-1-mediated transcription. This repressor function makes the HSF-4a isoform
unique within the HSF family.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11500947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. FASEB J. 2001 May;15(7):1118-31.

Roles of the heat shock transcription factors in regulation of the heat shock
response and beyond.

Pirkkala L(1), Nykänen P, Sistonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Finland.

The heat shock response, characterized by increased expression of heat shock
proteins (Hsps) is induced by exposure of cells and tissues to extreme conditions
that cause acute or chronic stress. Hsps function as molecular chaperones in
regulating cellular homeostasis and promoting survival. If the stress is too
severe, a signal that leads to programmed cell death, apoptosis, is activated,
thereby providing a finely tuned balance between survival and death. In addition 
to extracellular stimuli, several nonstressful conditions induce Hsps during
normal cellular growth and development. The enhanced heat shock gene expression
in response to various stimuli is regulated by heat shock transcription factors
(HSFs). After the discovery of the family of HSFs (i.e., murine and human HSF1,
2, and 4 and a unique avian HSF3), the functional relevance of distinct HSFs is
now emerging. HSF1, an HSF prototype, and HSF3 are responsible for heat-induced
Hsp expression, whereas HSF2 is refractory to classical stressors. HSF4 is
expressed in a tissue-specific manner; similar to HSF1 and HSF2, alternatively
spliced isoforms add further complexity to its regulation. Recently developed
powerful genetic models have provided evidence for both cooperative and specific 
functions of HSFs that expand beyond the heat shock response. Certain specialized
functions of HSFs may even include regulation of novel target genes in response
to distinct stimuli.

PMID: 11344080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 4;276(18):14685-94. Epub 2001 Feb 2.

Heat shock factor-4 (HSF-4a) represses basal transcription through interaction
with TFIIF.

Frejtag W(1), Zhang Y, Dai R, Anderson MG, Mivechi NF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and Department of Radiology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) regulate the expression of heat shock
proteins (hsps), which are critical for normal cellular proliferation and
differentiation. One of the HSFs, HSF-4, contains two alternative splice
variants, one of which possesses transcriptional repressor properties in vivo.
This repressor isoform inhibits basal transcription of hsps 27 and 90 in tissue
culture cells. The molecular mechanisms of HSF-4a isoform-mediated
transcriptional repression is unknown. Here, we present evidence that HSF-4a
inhibits basal transcription in vivo when it is artificially targeted to basal
promoters via the DNA-binding domain of the yeast transcription factor, GAL4. By 
using a highly purified, reconstituted in vitro transcription system, we show
that HSF-4a represses basal transcription at an early step during preinitiation
complex assembly, as pre-assembled preinitiation complexes are refractory to the 
inhibitory effect on transcription. This repression occurs by the HSF-4a isoform,
but not by the HSF-4b isoform, which we show is capable of activating
transcription from a heat shock element-driven promoter in vitro. The repression 
of basal transcription by HSF-4a occurs through interaction with the basal
transcription factor TFIIF. TFIIF interacts with a segment of HSF-4a that is
required for the trimerization of HSF-4a, and deletion of this segment no longer 
inhibits basal transcription. These studies suggest that HSF-4a inhibits basal
transcription both in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, this is the first report
identifying an interaction between a transcriptional repressor with the basal
transcription factor TFIIF.

PMID: 11278480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hum Reprod. 2001 Apr;16(4):676-82.

Effects of human hydrosalpinx fluid on in-vitro murine fertilization.

de Vantéry Arrighi C(1), Lucas H, El-Mowafi D, Campana A, Chardonnens D.

Author information: 
(1)Clinique de Stérilité et d'Endocrinologie Gynécologique, Département de
Gynécologie et d'Obstétrique, Maternité, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Genève,
Geneva, Switzerland. Corrine.deVantery@heuge.ch

Patients with hydrosalpinges show a decrease of both fertility and clinical
outcome of IVF and embryo transfer treatment. Several reports have demonstrated
the negative effects of hydrosalpinx fluid (HSF) on embryo development and
implantation. The aim of this study was to determine whether human HSF, collected
from infertile patients, might exhibit a deleterious effect on gametes and
fertilization using a murine IVF system. Murine gametes were co-incubated during 
IVF until first cleavage with human HSF diluted to 50% from four patients
(HSF1-4). It was demonstrated that HSF affected fertilization, as determined by
the count of the 2-cell embryos. Pre-incubation of spermatozoa with HSF during
capacitation significantly lowered the percentage of 2-cell embryos (P < 0.05).
While HSF1-3 had no significant effect on motility and viability of spermatozoa, 
HSF4 almost completely affected their survival. In contrast, pre-incubation of
ovulated oocytes surrounded by their cumulus cells with HSF before IVF did not
impede first cleavage. Taken together, these results suggest that HSF has a
cytotoxic effect on spermatozoa and/or impairs the fertilization process,
probably by altering capacitation/acrosome reaction and/or ligand(s)-receptor(s) 
interactions. Hydrosalpinges may be partly associated with sterility through HSF 
inhibitory effects on fertilization.

PMID: 11278217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1999 Jun;4(2):86-93.

New aspects in the vertebrate heat shock factor system: Hsf3 and Hsf4.

Nakai A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Japan. nakai@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

PMCID: PMC312923
PMID: 10547058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 24;274(39):27845-56.

The mammalian HSF4 gene generates both an activator and a repressor of heat shock
genes by alternative splicing.

Tanabe M(1), Sasai N, Nagata K, Liu XD, Liu PC, Thiele DJ, Nakai A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan.

The expression of heat shock genes is controlled at the level of transcription by
members of the heat shock transcription factor family in vertebrates. HSF4 is a
mammalian factor characterized by its lack of a suppression domain that modulates
formation of DNA-binding homotrimer. Here, we have determined the exon structure 
of the human HSF4 gene and identified a major new isoform, HSF4b, derived by
alternative RNA splicing events, in addition to a previously reported HSF4a
isoform. In mouse tissues HSF4b mRNA was more abundant than HSF4a as examined by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and its protein was detected in 
the brain and lung. Although both mouse HSF4a and HSF4b form trimers in the
absence of stress, these two isoforms exhibit different transcriptional activity;
HSF4a acts as an inhibitor of the constitutive expression of heat shock genes,
and hHSF4b acts as a transcriptional activator. Furthermore HSF4b but not HSF4a
complements the viability defect of yeast cells lacking HSF. Moreover, heat shock
and other stresses stimulate transcription of target genes by HSF4b in both yeast
and mammalian cells. These results suggest that differential splicing of HSF4
mRNA gives rise to both an inhibitor and activator of tissue-specific heat shock 
gene expression.

PMID: 10488131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Chronobiol Int. 1999 Jul;16(4):519-25.

Heat-induced degradation of PER and TIM in Drosophila bearing a conditional
allele of the heat shock transcription factor gene.

Sidote D(1), Edery I.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.

Heat pulses elicit dramatic and rapid decreases in the levels of the D.
melanogaster period (per) and timeless (tim) proteins (i.e., PER and TIM). To
investigate the possible role of the heat shock pathway in this response, we used
Drosophila bearing a conditional allele of the hsf gene (termed hsf4), which
encodes the heat shock transcription factor (HSF). At all times in a daily cycle,
heat-induced decreases in the levels of PER and TIM were similar in wild-type and
hsf4 mutant flies. The results strongly suggest that the heat shock pathway
contributes little, if any, to the response of the Drosophila circadian clock to 
heat signals.

PMID: 10442244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Gen Genet. 1998 May;258(3):269-78.

HSF3, a new heat shock factor from Arabidopsis thaliana, derepresses the heat
shock response and confers thermotolerance when overexpressed in transgenic
plants.

Prändl R(1), Hinderhofer K, Eggers-Schumacher G, Schöffl F.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Allgemeine Genetik, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen,
Germany.

Organisms synthesize heat shock proteins (HSPs) in response to sublethal heat
stress and concomitantly acquire increased tolerance against a subsequent,
otherwise lethal, heat shock. Heat shock factor (HSF) is essential for the
transcription of many HSP genes. We report the isolation of two HSF genes, HSF3
and HSF4, from an Arabidopsis cDNA library. Transgenic Arabidopsis plants were
generated containing constructs that allow expression of HSF3 and HSF4 or the
respective translational beta-glucuronidase (GUS) fusions. Overexpression of HSF3
or HSF3-GUS, but not of HSF4 or HSF4-GUS, causes HSP synthesis at the
non-heat-shock temperature of 25 degrees C in transgenic Arabidopsis. In
transgenic plants bearing HSF3/HSF3-GUS, transcription of several heat shock
genes is derepressed. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays suggest that
derepression of the heat shock response is mediated by HSF3/HSF3-GUS functioning 
as transcription factor. HSF3/HSF3-GUS-overexpressing Arabidopsis plants show an 
increase in basal thermotolerance, indicating the importance of HSFs and
HSF-regulated genes as determinants of thermoprotective processes. Plants
transgenic for HSF3/HSF3-GUS exhibit no other obvious phenotypic alterations.
Derepression of HSF activity upon overexpression suggests the titration of a
negative regulator of HSF3 or an intrinsic constitutive activity of HSF3. We
assume that stable overexpression of HSFs may be applied to other organisms as a 
means of derepressing the heat shock response.

PMID: 9645433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):469-81.

HSF4, a new member of the human heat shock factor family which lacks properties
of a transcriptional activator.

Nakai A(1), Tanabe M, Kawazoe Y, Inazawa J, Morimoto RI, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Kyoto University, Japan. nakai@chest.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Heat shock transcription factors (HSFs) mediate the inducible transcriptional
response of genes that encode heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones. In
vertebrates, three related HSF genes (HSF1 to -3) and the respective gene
products (HSFs) have been characterized. We report the cloning and
characterization of human HSF4 (hHSF4), a novel member of the hHSF family that
shares properties with other members of the HSF family yet appears to be
functionally distinct. hHSF4 lacks the carboxyl-terminal hydrophobic repeat which
is shared among all vertebrate HSFs and has been suggested to be involved in the 
negative regulation of DNA binding activity. hHSF4 is preferentially expressed in
the human heart, brain, skeletal muscle, and pancreas. Transient transfection of 
hHSF4 in HeLa cells, which do not express hHSF4, results in a constitutively
active DNA binding trimer which, unlike other members of the HSF family, lacks
the properties of a transcriptional activator. Constitutive overexpression of
hHSF4 in HeLa cells results in reduced expression of the endogenous hsp70, hsp90,
and hsp27 genes. hHSF4 represents a novel hHSF that exhibits tissue-specific
expression and functions to repress the expression of genes encoding heat shock
proteins and molecular chaperones.

PMCID: PMC231772
PMID: 8972228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Apr 10;224(1):110-5.

TIMP-2 growth-stimulatory activity: a concentration- and cell type-specific
response in the presence of insulin.

Nemeth JA(1), Rafe A, Steiner M, Goolsby CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

In addition to proteinase-inhibitory activities, growth-stimulatory activities
have been described for all three known members of the tissue inhibitors of the
metalloproteinase (TIMP) family, TIMP-1, TIMP-2, and ChIMP-3, believed to be the 
chicken homologue of TIMP-3. However, the mechanism by which the TIMPs stimulate 
cell growth is unclear. In this report we have demonstrated that rTIMP-2 was
growth-stimulatory for human foreskin fibroblasts (HSF4, HSF43, HS68), lung
adenocarcinoma cells (A549), human melanoma cells (WM115), and the Burkitt's
lymphoma cell line RAMOS, and this stimulatory response was
concentration-dependent, with the greatest stimulation occurring a 10-30 pM
rTIMP-2 in [3H]thymidine incorporation assays and at 20-100 pM in cell growth
assays. Normal human colon (18Co) and lung (37Lu) fibroblasts showed no response 
to rTIMP-2. [3H]Thymidine incorporation was inhibited by rTIMP-2 treatment in the
nonadherent cell line HL60. These studies also demonstrated that for the cell
types tested, TIMP-2 alone was insufficient for a growth stimulatory response
requiring, at a minimum, the presence of insulin. In the absence of any
"co-factor(s)," such as insulin, TIMP-2 treatment was inhibitory.

PMID: 8612674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Exp Cell Res. 1993 Aug;207(2):376-82.

TIMP-2, a growth-stimulatory protein from SV40-transformed human fibroblasts.

Nemeth JA(1), Goolsby CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School/VA Lakeside
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

The mechanisms by which the early genes of simian virus 40 (SV40) transform human
cells are unclear; however, this is clearly a multistep process involving a
number of cellular and genetic changes. An early change following expression of
the SV40 genes is growth under reduced serum conditions, which could be
consistent with the production of autocrine/paracrine growth factors. HSF4-T12 is
a human fibroblast cell line produced by transfection of primary cells with the
genes for large T and small t antigens. A progressive stepwise transformation was
observed with in vitro culture, eventually resulting in a tumorigenic cell line. 
Serum-free defined medium conditioned by HSF4-T12 was able to stimulate growth of
normal human fibroblasts as determined by growth curve and [3H]-thymidine
incorporation assays. Purification of this activity by heparin affinity
chromatography and nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis resulted in a
single band of approximately 21 kDa on a nonreducing, denaturing gel. A partial
14-amino acid sequence was found to share 100% homology with a region of tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP-2). Western blot analysis with
anti-TIMP-2 antiserum confirmed this identification, and addition of this same
antiserum to HSF4-T12-conditioned medium resulted in inhibition of stimulatory
activity.

PMID: 8393803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cytometry. 1991;12(5):438-44.

Flow cytometric measurement of p53 protein expression and DNA content in
paraffin-embedded tissue from bronchial carcinomas.

Mørkve O(1), Laerum OD.

Author information: 
(1)Gade Institute, Department of Pathology, Haukeland Hospital, University of
Bergen, Norway.

The nuclear protein p53 has been measured in archival lung cancer biopsies. The
monoclonal antibody PAb 1801, which recognizes human p53, was used. After
immunostaining, the nuclei prepared from paraffin-embedded tissue were stained
with propidium iodide for simultaneous measurement of DNA content; 17 of 24 lung 
cancers were p53 positive. The S-phase fraction in positive tumors was 22.9 +/-
6.4%, as compared to 13.6 +/- 6.1% in negative tumors (P less than 0.02). In ten 
of the positive tumors (two small cell carcinomas and eight non-small cell
carcinomas), the p53 expression varied through cell cycle, whereas in seven
tumors (five small cell carcinomas and two non-small cell carcinomas), no such
variation of p53 expression was observed. Freezing the nuclear suspensions did
not substantially reduce the p53 signals. Control experiments with the
SV40-transformed human foreskin fibroblast cell line HSF4-T12 showed that the
enzymatic digestion utilized to dissociate paraffin-embedded tissue did not
significantly reduce p53 fluorescence. Immunohistochemical staining of biopsy
specimens indicated that only cancer cells were overexpressing p53. In
conclusion, using the monoclonal antibody PAb 1801, p53 is detectable in cell
nuclei prepared from paraffin-embedded bronchial carcinoma biopsies. P53 positive
tumors have increased proliferative activity compared to p53 negative tumors.
Furthermore, the lack of cell cycle variation of p53 in small cell carcinomas
indicates that this pattern may be related to high-grade malignancy.

PMID: 1935458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cytometry. 1991;12(8):748-56.

Viral and cellular oncogene expression during progressive malignant
transformation of SV40 transformed human fibroblasts.

Goolsby CL(1), Steiner M, Nemeth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School/VA Lakeside
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

In vitro investigation of the multistep neoplastic progression which occurs
during transformation of human cells has been hindered by resistance of human
cells to both immortalization and tumorigenicity (Mut. Res. 199; 273, 1988).
Previously our laboratory established a cell line, HSF4-T12, by transfection of
normal human foreskin fibroblasts with the plasmid pSV3-neo which contains the
early genes of simian virus 40 (SV40). A multistep progression in karyotypic
alterations and transformed phenotype occurred resulting in a neoplastic cell
line that was immortal, transformed, and tumorigenic. We have examined changes in
the SV40 proteins, large T (T-antigen) and small t (t-antigen) antigens, and in
the cellular protein, p53, during progressive transformation of these cells.
Total viral protein expression relative to total cellular protein increased
following immortalization of HSF4-T12 as did the ratio of T-antigen to t-antigen.
Interestingly, no significant change in DNA content accompanied immortalization. 
However, during the progressive in vitro transformation of HSF4-T12 which
occurred primarily post-immortalization, DNA index increased to 1.6 but only
small additional increases in T-antigen expression were seen. No consistent or
critical role for t-antigen in development of the tumorigenic phenotype was found
in this system.

PMID: 1665408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1990 Dec;50(2):231-48.

Karyotype evolution in a simian virus 40-transformed tumorigenic human cell line.

Goolsby CL(1), Wiley JE, Steiner M, Bartholdi MF, Cram LS, Kraemer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School/VA Lakeside
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

Normal human foreskin fibroblasts (HSF4) were transfected using the pSV3-neo
plasmid. A pool of 10 G418-resistant colonies, HSF4-T12, showed a progressive
increase in the expression of a number of in vitro transformation markers with
passage in culture and became immortalized. Although no tumors were formed when
cells were injected subcutaneously into nude mice, this cell line produced
progressive tumors when cells were injected into preimplanted Gelfoam sponges in 
the mice. When these tumors were cultured in vitro and subsequently injected
subcutaneously, progressive tumors were produced with median latency periods as
short as 4 weeks. Three phases of cytogenetic change could be distinguished. At
early passages after transfection. HSF4-T12 exhibited many random chromosomal
changes. At a time just after immortalization, both flow karyotype and G-banded
analyses showed the appearance of balanced clonal rearrangements. These included 
t(2;4), t(2;14), t(3;?), 6p-, i(6p), 8p-, t(14;15), i(15), and t(18;?). These
clonal rearrangements were stable with passage in culture, and less variability
from cell to cell was noted. The only consistent chromosomal loss observed was
-Y. Analysis of three independent tumors showed characteristic loss of
chromosomal material rather than balanced chromosomal rearrangements. Frequent
loss of 6q and chromosomes #13, 15, 20, and Y was noted.

PMID: 2176127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


