
1. Haematologica. 2016 Mar 18. pii: haematol.2015.138701. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunohistochemical detection of Inhibitor of DNA binding 3 mutational variants
in mature aggressive B-cell lymphoma.

Szczepanowski M(1), Masqué-Soler N(2), Schlesner M(3), Haake A(4), Richter J(4), 
Wagener R(4), Burkhardt B(5), Kreuz M(6), Siebert R(7), Icgc Mmml-Seq Consortium 
IM(8), Klapper W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, UKSH, University of Kiel;
m.szczepanowski@path.uni-kiel.de. (2)Institute of Pathology, UKSH, University of 
Kiel; (3)Division Theoretical Bioinformatics, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg; (4)Institute of Human Genetics, UKSH, University of Kiel; (5)NHL-BFM 
Study Center and Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Muenster;
(6)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of 
Leipzig; (7)Institute of Human Genetics, UKSH, University of Kie; (8)ICGC
MMML-Seq Consortium; (9)Institute of Pathology, UKSH, University of Kie.

PMID: 26992947  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Immunol. 2016 Apr 1;196(7):3159-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502400. Epub 2016
Feb 29.

POU2AF1 Functions in the Human Airway Epithelium To Regulate Expression of Host
Defense Genes.

Zhou H(1), Brekman A(2), Zuo WL(2), Ou X(2), Shaykhiev R(2), Agosto-Perez FJ(2), 
Wang R(2), Walters MS(2), Salit J(2), Strulovici-Barel Y(2), Staudt MR(2), Kaner 
RJ(3), Mezey JG(4), Crystal RG(5), Wang G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Sichuan 610041, China; Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065; (2)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065; (3)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065; Division of Pulmonary and Critical
Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
NY 10065; and. (4)Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
New York, NY 10065; Department of Biological Statistics and Computational
Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, NY 14853. (5)Department of Genetic
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065; Division of
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065; and geneticmedicine@med.cornell.edu.

In the process of seeking novel lung host defense regulators by analyzing
genome-wide RNA sequence data from normal human airway epithelium, we detected
expression of POU domain class 2-associating factor 1 (POU2AF1), a known
transcription cofactor previously thought to be expressed only in lymphocytes.
Lymphocyte contamination of human airway epithelial samples obtained by
bronchoscopy and brushing was excluded by immunohistochemistry staining, the
observation of upregulation of POU2AF1 in purified airway basal stem/progenitor
cells undergoing differentiation, and analysis of differentiating single basal
cell clones. Lentivirus-mediated upregulation of POU2AF1 in airway basal cells
induced upregulation of host defense genes, including MX1, IFIT3, IFITM, and
known POU2AF1 downstream genes HLA-DRA, ID2, ID3, IL6, and BCL6. Interestingly,
expression of these genes paralleled changes of POU2AF1 expression during airway 
epithelium differentiation in vitro, suggesting POU2AF1 helps to maintain a host 
defense tone even in pathogen-free condition. Cigarette smoke, a known risk
factor for airway infection, suppressed POU2AF1 expression both in vivo in humans
and in vitro in human airway epithelial cultures, accompanied by deregulation of 
POU2AF1 downstream genes. Finally, enhancing POU2AF1 expression in human airway
epithelium attenuated the suppression of host defense genes by smoking. Together,
these findings suggest a novel function of POU2AF1 as a potential regulator of
host defense genes in the human airway epithelium.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4799774 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26927796  [PubMed - in process]


3. Life Sci. 2016 Feb 26. pii: S0024-3205(16)30142-4. doi:
10.1016/j.lfs.2016.02.092. [Epub ahead of print]

Alterations in histone deacetylase 8 lead to cell migration and poor prognosis in
breast cancer.

Hsieh CL(1), Ma HP(2), Su CM(3), Chang YJ(4), Hung WY(5), Ho YS(6), Huang WJ(7), 
Line RK(8).

Author information: 
(1)Professional Master Program in Pharmaceutics and Biotechnology, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Emergency Department, Shuang Ho Hospital,
New Taipei City 235, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Emergency Medicine, School of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC. (3)Graduate
Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC; Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University Shuang 
Ho Hospital, Taipei 235, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine,
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC. (6)Graduate Institute of Biomedical 
Technology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110,
Taiwan, ROC. (7)Graduate Institute of Pharmacognosy, Ph.D. Program for the
Clinical Drug Discovery from Botanical Herbs, Taipei Medical University, Taipei
110, Taiwan, ROC. (8)Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoproteomics, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate 
Institute of Pharmacognosy, Ph.D. Program for the Clinical Drug Discovery from
Botanical Herbs, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic
address: linruokai@tmu.edu.tw.

AIMS: Alterations in histone proteins can lead to breast tumorigenesis. Selective
histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) inhibitors with fewer adverse effects have been
developed. A more comprehensive study of alterations and its mechanisms in HDAC8 
is required. In this study, we investigated mechanisms of dysregulation of HDAC8 
expression and its biological role and pathways in breast cancer.
MAIN METHODS: Alterations in HDAC8 were analyzed in Taiwanese breast cancer
patients; and in tissue samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data set that
were derived from Western countries. Knockdown by si-HDAC8, treatment with the
HDAC8-specific inhibitor PCI-34051, SRB assays, wound healing, Transwell
migration assays, Illumina BeadArray™ arrays and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA)
were performed in breast cancer cells.
KEY FINDINGS: HDAC8 mRNA expression was upregulated in paired breast cancer
tissue from Taiwanese patients and in paired breast cancer tissues from the TCGA 
data set. Hypomethylation of promoter regions was significantly correlated with
HDAC8 mRNA overexpression in 588 breast cancer patients from the TCGA data set
and was associated with poor prognosis in early-stage breast cancer. HDAC8 mRNA
overexpression was associated with late stages and tumor progression. Wound
healing and Transwell migration assays revealed that knockdown by si-HDAC8 or
PCI-34051 treatment significantly inhibited breast cancer cell migration.
Knockdown by si-HDAC8, Illumina BeadArray™ arrays and IPA found that ID3 and
PTP4A2 pathways were regulated by HDAC8 in cancer cell migration.
SIGNIFICANCE: Hypomethylation of the HDAC8 promoter is correlated with HDAC8
overexpression and breast cancer progression and is a potential prognosis marker 
and drug target.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26926079  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Cell Cycle. 2016 Feb 26:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Metformin Attenuates Transforming Growth Factor Beta (TGF-ß) Mediated Oncogenesis
in Mesenchymal Stem-like/Claudin-low Triple Negative Breast Cancer.

Wahdan-Alaswad R(1), Harrell JC(2), Fan Z(1), Edgerton SM(1), Liu B(1), Thor
AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology , University of Colorado , Anschutz Medical Campus
Mail Stop B216, 12631 East 17th Ave, Room 2215A, Aurora , CO 80045 , United
States of America. (2)b Department of Pathology , Virginia Commonwealth
University , 1101 E Marshall St., PO Box 980662, Richmond VA 23298.

Mesenchymal stem-like/claudin-low (MSL/CL) breast cancers are highly aggressive, 
express low cell-cell adhesion cluster containing claudins (CLDN3/CLDN4/CLDN7)
with enrichment of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), immunomodulatory, 
and transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) genes. We examined the biological,
molecular and prognostic impact of TGF-ß upregulation and/or inhibition using in 
vivo and in vitro methods. Using publically available breast cancer gene
expression databases, we show that upregulation and enrichment of a TGF-ß gene
signature is most frequent in MSL/CL breast cancers and is associated with a
worse outcome. Using several MSL/CL breast cancer cell lines, we show that TGF-ß 
elicits significant increases in cellular proliferation, migration, invasion, and
motility, whereas these effects can be abrogated by a specific inhibitor against 
TGF-ß receptor I and the anti-diabetic agent metformin, alone or in combination. 
Prior reports from our lab show that TNBC is exquisitely sensitive to metformin
treatment. Mechanistically, metformin blocks endogenous activation of Smad2 and
Smad3 and dampens TGF-ß-mediated activation of Smad2, Smad3, and ID1 both at the 
transcriptional and translational level. We report the use of ID1 and ID3 as
clinical surrogate markers, where high expression of these TGF-ß target genes was
correlated to poor prognosis in claudin-low patients. Given TGF-ß's role in
tumorigenesis and immunomodulation, blockade of this pathway using direct kinase 
inhibitors or more broadly acting inhibitors may dampen or abolish
pro-carcinogenic and metastatic signaling in patients with MCL/CL TNBC. Metformin
therapy (with or without other agents) may be a heretofore unrecognized approach 
to reduce the oncogenic activities associated with TGF-ß mediated oncogenesis.

PMID: 26919310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi. 2015 Oct;35(10):2930-9.

Applying Attenuated Total Reflection-Mid-Infrared (ATR-MIR) Spectroscopy to
Detect Hairtail Surimi in Mixed Surimi and Their Surimi Products.

You ZH, Liu ZH, Gong CY, Yang XL, Cheng F.

ATR-MIR spectroscopic analysis was used to classify sliver carp surimi and surimi
products adulterated with different levels of hairtail surimi. Five chemometric
methods, including SIMCA (soft independent modeling class of analogies), KNN
(K-nearest neighbor), SVR (support vector machines regression), PLSDA (partial
least squares discriminate analysis) and ID3 (interative dicremiser version 3)
Decision tree were used to build the classifying models. And the performances of 
the models were compared. Results showed that for both cooked and uncooked mixed 
surimi samples, better classifications were obtained using SIMCA model, the
percentage of the correct classification reached 96.59% and 96.43%, and the
corresponding RMSECV were 0.185 7 and 0.189 8, r value were 0.988 0 and 0.994 1
respectively. The results of this study demonstrated for the first time that
ATR-MIR spectroscopy combined with chemometrics method can be used to classify
sliver carp surimi and surimi products adulterated with different levels of
hairtail surimi.

PMID: 26904846  [PubMed]


6. Br J Haematol. 2016 Apr;173(1):137-44. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13925. Epub 2016 Feb 16.

Genetic differences between paediatric and adult Burkitt lymphomas.

Havelange V(1), Pepermans X(2), Ameye G(2), Théate I(3), Callet-Bauchu E(4),
Barin C(5), Penther D(6), Lippert E(7), Michaux L(8), Mugneret F(9), Dastugue
N(10), Raphaël M(11), Vikkula M(12), Poirel HA(1,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc - Université
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Centre for Human Genetics, Cliniques
universitaires Saint-Luc - Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Department of Pathology, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Laboratoire central d'Hématologie,
CHU Lyon-Sud, Pierre-Bénite, France. (5)Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU
Bretonneau, Tours, France. (6)Laboratoire de génétique oncologique, Centre Henri 
Becquerel, Rouen, France. (7)Laboratoire d'hématologie, CHU Bordeaux, Pessac,
France. (8)Centrum voor menselijke erfelijkheid, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium. (9)Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France.
(10)Génétique des hémopathies, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France. (11)Anatomie et 
cytologie pathologiques, CHU Bicêtre -Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
INSERM U802, Université Paris-Sud 11, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (12)Human
Molecular Genetics (GEHU), de Duve Institute - Université catholique de Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium.

Dysregulation of MYC is the genetic hallmark of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) but it is
encountered in other aggressive mature B-cell lymphomas. MYC dysregulation needs 
other cooperating events for BL development. We aimed to characterize these
events and assess the differences between adult and paediatric BLs that may
explain the different outcomes in these two populations. We analysed patterns of 
genetic aberrations in a series of 24 BLs: 11 adults and 13 children. We looked
for genomic imbalances (copy number variations), copy-neutral loss of
heterozygosity (CN-LOH) and mutations in TP53, CDKN2A, ID3 (exon 1), TCF3
(exon17) and CCND3 (exon 6). Young patients displayed more frequent 13q31.3q32.1 
amplification, 7q32q36 gain and 5q23.3 CN-LOH, while 17p13 and 18q21.3 CN-LOH
were only detected in adult BLs. ID3 mutations were present in all adult samples,
but only in 42% of childhood cases. CCND3 and ID3 double-hit mutations, as well
as 18q21 CN-LOH, seemed to be associated with poorer outcome. For the first time,
we report different genetic anomalies between adult and paediatric BLs,
suggesting age-related heterogeneity in Burkitt lymphomagenesis. This may explain
the poorer prognosis of adult BLs. Additional studies are needed to confirm these
results in the setting of clinical trials.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26887776  [PubMed - in process]


7. Biomaterials. 2016 Apr;86:21-32. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2016.01.071. Epub
2016 Feb 2.

Tissue segregation restores the induction of bone formation by the mammalian
transforming growth factor-ß3 in calvarial defects of the non-human primate Papio
ursinus.

Ripamonti U(1), Klar RM(2), Parak R(3), Dickens C(4), Dix-Peek T(4), Duarte R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bone Research Laboratory, School of Oral Health Sciences, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. Electronic
address: ugo.ripamonti@wits.ac.za. (2)Bone Research Laboratory, School of Oral
Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand,
Johannesburg, South Africa; Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratories, School
of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. (3)Bone Research Laboratory, School of
Oral Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa; Department of Oral Biological
Sciences, School of Oral Health Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. (4)Molecular and Cellular
Biology Laboratories, School of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

A diffusion molecular hypothesis from the dura and/or the leptomeninges below
that would control the induction of calvarial membranous bone formation by the
recombinant human transforming growth factor-ß3 (hTGF-ß3) was investigated.
Coral-derived calcium carbonate-based macroporous constructs (25 mm diameter;
3.5/4 mm thickness) with limited hydrothermal conversion to hydroxyapatite (7%
HA/CC) were inserted into forty calvarial defects created in 10 adult Chacma
baboons Papio ursinus. In 20 defects, an impermeable nylon foil membrane
(SupraFOIL(®)) was inserted between the cut endocranial bone and the underlying
dura mater. Twenty of the macroporous constructs were preloaded with hTGF-ß3
(125 µg in 1000 µl 20 mM sodium succinate, 4% mannitol pH4.0), 10 of which were
implanted into defects segregated by the SupraFOIL(®) membrane, and 10 into
non-segregated defects. Tissues were harvested on day 90, processed for
decalcified and undecalcified histology and quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Segregated untreated macroporous specimens showed a
reduction of bone formation across the macroporous spaces compared to
non-segregated constructs. qRT-PCR of segregated untreated specimens showed down 
regulation of osteogenic protein-1 (OP-1), osteocalcin (OC), bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (BMP-2), RUNX-2 and inhibitor of DNA binding-2 and -3 (ID2,ID3) and up 
regulation of TGF-ß3, a molecular signalling pathway inhibiting the induction of 
membranous bone formation. Non-segregated hTGF-ß3/treated constructs also showed 
non-osteogenic expression profiles when compared to non-segregated untreated
specimens. Segregated hTGF-ß3/treated 7% HA/CC constructs showed significantly
greater induction of bone formation across the macroporous spaces and, compared
to non-segregated hTGF-ß3/treated constructs, showed up regulation of OP-1, OC,
BMP-2, RUNX-2, ID2 and ID3. Similar up-regulated expression profiles were seen
for untreated non-segregated constructs. TGF-ß signalling via ID genes creates
permissive or refractory micro-environments that regulate the induction of
calvarial bone formation which is controlled by the exogenous hTGF-ß3 upon
segregation of the calvarial defects. The dura is the common regulator of the
induction of calvarial bone formation modulated by the presence or absence of the
SupraFOIL(®) membrane with or without hTGF-ß3.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26874889  [PubMed - in process]


8. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Apr;36(4):682-91. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.116.307166. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Protective Role for B-1b B Cells and IgM in Obesity-Associated Inflammation,
Glucose Intolerance, and Insulin Resistance.

Harmon DB(1), Srikakulapu P(1), Kaplan JL(1), Oldham SN(1), McSkimming C(1),
Garmey JC(1), Perry HM(1), Kirby JL(1), Prohaska TA(1), Gonen A(1), Hallowell
P(1), Schirmer B(1), Tsimikas S(1), Taylor AM(1), Witztum JL(1), McNamara CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Center (D.B.H., P.S., J.L.K., S.N.O., C.M.S.,
J.C.G., H.M.P., C.A.M.), Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and
Genetics (D.B.H.), Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine
(P.S., A.M.T., C.A.M.), Department of Pathology (J.L.K., H.M.P.), Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine (J.L.K.), Department of
Surgery (P.H., B.S.), Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research (C.A.M.),
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics (C.A.M.), University of
Virginia, Charlottesville; and Department of Medicine, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla (T.A.P., A.G., S.T., J.L.W.). (2)From the Cardiovascular
Research Center (D.B.H., P.S., J.L.K., S.N.O., C.M.S., J.C.G., H.M.P., C.A.M.),
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Genetics (D.B.H.), Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine (P.S., A.M.T., C.A.M.),
Department of Pathology (J.L.K., H.M.P.), Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism, Department of Medicine (J.L.K.), Department of Surgery (P.H., B.S.), 
Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research (C.A.M.), Department of Molecular
Physiology and Biological Physics (C.A.M.), University of Virginia,
Charlottesville; and Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, 
La Jolla (T.A.P., A.G., S.T., J.L.W.). cam8c@virginia.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Little is known about the role(s) B cells play in obesity-induced
metabolic dysfunction. This study used a mouse with B-cell-specific deletion of
Id3 (Id3(Bcell KO)) to identify B-cell functions involved in the metabolic
consequences of obesity.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Diet-induced obese Id3(Bcell KO) mice demonstrated
attenuated inflammation and insulin resistance in visceral adipose tissue (VAT), 
and improved systemic glucose tolerance. VAT in Id3(Bcell KO) mice had increased 
B-1b B cells and elevated IgM natural antibodies to oxidation-specific epitopes. 
B-1b B cells reduced cytokine production in VAT M1 macrophages, and adoptively
transferred B-1b B cells trafficked to VAT and produced natural antibodies for
the duration of 13-week studies. B-1b B cells null for Id3 demonstrated increased
proliferation, established larger populations in Rag1(-/-) VAT, and attenuated
diet-induced glucose intolerance and VAT insulin resistance in Rag1(-/-) hosts.
However, transfer of B-1b B cells unable to secrete IgM had no effect on glucose 
tolerance. In an obese human population, results provided the first evidence that
B-1 cells are enriched in human VAT and IgM antibodies to oxidation-specific
epitopes inversely correlated with inflammation and insulin resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: NAb-producing B-1b B cells are increased in Id3(Bcell KO) mice and
attenuate adipose tissue inflammation and glucose intolerance in diet-induced
obese mice. Additional findings are the first to identify VAT as a reservoir for 
human B-1 cells and to link anti-inflammatory IgM antibodies with reduced
inflammation and improved metabolic phenotype in obese humans.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4808436 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26868208  [PubMed - in process]


9. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 11;6:20841. doi: 10.1038/srep20841.

ITF2357 transactivates Id3 and regulate TGFß/BMP7 signaling pathways to attenuate
corneal fibrosis.

Lim RR(1,)(2), Tan A(3,)(4), Liu YC(3,)(5), Barathi VA(3,)(6,)(7), Mohan
RR(1,)(8,)(9), Mehta JS(3,)(4,)(5), Chaurasia SS(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Immunology and Angiogenesis Lab, Department of Veterinary Medicine
&Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. (2)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
(3)Singapore Eye Research Institute, 20 College Road, 169856, Singapore.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, A*Star, Biopolis, Singapore.
(5)Singapore National Eye Centre, 11 Third Hospital Avenue, 168751, Singapore.
(6)Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Academic Clinical Program, Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School, 8 College Rd, 169857, Singapore. (7)Department of Ophthalmology, 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Harry S. Truman Memorial Veteran Hospital, Columbia, MO 65201, USA. (9)Mason
Eye Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Corneal fibrosis is often seen in patients with ocular trauma and infection that 
compromises corneal transparency resulting in vision loss. Treatment strategies
including NSAIDs, steroids, MMC and corneal transplants have shown tremendous
success but with several side effects and cellular toxicity. Histone deacetylase 
inhibitors (HDACi) have been shown to inhibit corneal fibrosis via TGFß signaling
pathway. In this study, we investigated safety, efficacy and mechanism of action 
of a HDACi, ITF2357 in TGFß-stimulated in vitro primary human cornea stromal
fibroblasts (pHCSFs) and in vivo in a photorefractive keratectomy-treated rabbit 
model of corneal fibrosis. We found that in vivo ITF2357 decreased collagen I,
collagen IV, fibronectin, integrin aVß3 expression with a reduction in corneal
haze. In addition, ITF2357 reduced myofibroblast formation, suppressed
phosphorylation of Smad proteins in TGFß pathway and inhibited key responsive
protein, P4HA1 involved in pro-collagen synthesis. Treatment of pHCSFs with
ITF2357 activated BMP7 levels and expressed all the members of inhibitor of
differentiation proteins (Id1-Id4), however, it failed to rescue TGFß-driven
transdifferentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts in the presence of siRNA
specific to Id3. We conclude that ITF2357 is a potential anti-fibrotic drug that 
exerts its action via activation of Id3, a downstream target of TGFß/BMP7
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4750002
PMID: 26865052  [PubMed - in process]


10. Leukemia. 2016 Feb 3. doi: 10.1038/leu.2016.3. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting vasculogenesis to prevent progression in multiple myeloma.

Moschetta M(1,)(2), Mishima Y(1), Kawano Y(1), Manier S(1), Paiva B(3), Palomera 
L(4), Aljawai Y(1), Calcinotto A(5), Unitt C(6), Sahin I(1), Sacco A(1), Glavey
S(1), Shi J(7), Reagan MR(1,)(8), Prosper F(3), Bellone M(5), Chesi M(9),
Bergsagel LP(9), Vacca A(2), Roccaro AM(1,)(10), Ghobrial IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA. (2)University of Bari Medical School, Bari, Italy. (3)Clinica
Universidad de Navarra, Centro de Investigaciones Medicas Aplicadas (CIMA),
Pamplona, Spain. (4)Hospital Clinico Universitario Lozano Blesa, Zaragoza. Spain.
(5)Cellular Immunology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano,
Italy. (6)Dana Farber/Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. (8)Maine Medical
Center Research Institute, Scarborough, ME, USA. (9)Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA. (10)Spedali Civili di Brescia, Centro Ricerca
Emato-oncologica AIL (CREA), Department of Hematology, Brescia, Italy.

The role of endothelial progenitor cell (EPC)-mediated vasculogenesis in
hematological malignancies is not well explored. Here, we showed that EPCs are
mobilized from the bone marrow (BM) to the peripheral blood at early stages of
multiple myeloma (MM); and recruited to MM cell-colonized BM niches. Using
EPC-defective ID1+/- ID3-/- mice, we found that MM tumor progression is dependent
on EPC trafficking. By performing RNA-sequencing studies, we confirmed that
endothelial cells can enhance proliferation and favor cell-cycle progression only
in MM clones that are smoldering-like and have dependency on endothelial cells
for tumor growth. We further confirmed that angiogenic dependency occurs early
and not late during tumor progression in MM. By using a VEGFR2 antibody with
anti-vasculogenic activity, we demonstrated that early targeting of EPCs delays
tumor progression, while using the same agent at late stages of tumor progression
is ineffective. Thus, although there is significant angiogenesis in myeloma, the 
dependency of the tumor cells on EPCs and vasculogenesis may actually precede
this step. Manipulating vasculogenesis at an early stage of disease may be
examined in clinical trials in patients with smoldering MM, and other
hematological malignancies with precursor conditions.Leukemia advance online
publication, 11 March 2016; doi:10.1038/leu.2016.3.

PMID: 26859080  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Gene. 2016 May 1;581(2):95-106. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.01.015. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Osteogenic potential of human adipose-tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells
cultured on 3D-printed porous structured titanium.

Lewallen EA(1), Jones DL(2), Dudakovic A(1), Thaler R(1), Paradise CR(1), Kremers
HM(3), Abdel MP(1), Kakar S(1), Dietz AB(4), Cohen RC(5), Lewallen DG(6), van
Wijnen AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physiology,
Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 
First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (5)Stryker
Orthopedics, 325 Corporate Drive, Mahwah, NJ 07430, USA. (6)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
Electronic address: lewallen.david@mayo.edu. (7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Physiology, Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo 
Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address:
vanwijnen.andre@mayo.edu.

Integration of porous metal prosthetics, which restore form and function of
irreversibly damaged joints, into remaining healthy bone is critical for implant 
success. We investigated the biological properties of adipose-tissue-derived
mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (AMSCs) and addressed their potential to alter the
in vitro microenvironment of implants. We employed human AMSCs as a practical
source for musculoskeletal applications because these cells can be obtained in
large quantities, are multipotent, and have trophic paracrine functions. AMSCs
were cultured on surgical-grade porous titanium disks as a model for orthopedic
implants. We monitored cell/substrate attachment, cell proliferation,
multipotency, and differentiation phenotypes of AMSCs upon osteogenic induction. 
High-resolution scanning electron microscopy and histology revealed that AMSCs
adhere to the porous metallic surface. Compared to standard tissue culture
plastic, AMSCs grown in the porous titanium microenvironment showed differences
in temporal expression for genes involved in cell cycle progression (CCNB2,
HIST2H4), extracellular matrix production (COL1A1, COL3A1), mesenchymal lineage
identity (ACTA2, CD248, CD44), osteoblastic transcription factors (DLX3, DLX5,
ID3), and epigenetic regulators (EZH1, EZH2). We conclude that metal orthopedic
implants can be effectively seeded with clinical-grade stem/stromal cells to
create a pre-conditioned implant.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774799  [PubMed - in process]


12. Am J Clin Pathol. 2016 Jan;145(1):116-27. doi: 10.1093/ajcp/aqv011.

Clonality Analysis of Immunoglobulin Gene Rearrangement by Next-Generation
Sequencing in Endemic Burkitt Lymphoma Suggests Antigen Drive Activation of BCR
as Opposed to Sporadic Burkitt Lymphoma.

Amato T(1), Abate F(2), Piccaluga P(3), Iacono M(4), Fallerini C(1), Renieri
A(1), De Falco G(1), Ambrosio MR(1), Mourmouras V(1), Ogwang M(5), Calbi V(5),
Rabadan R(2), Hummel M(6), Pileri S(3), Leoncini L(7), Bellan C(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy. (2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY. (3)Hematopathology Section, Department of 
Experimental, Diagnostic, and Experimental Medicine (DIMES), S. Orsola-Malpighi
Hospital, Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna, Italy. (4)Roche Tissue 
Diagnostic & Sequencing, Roche Diagnostic S.P.A. Monza (MB), Italy. (5)Lacor
Hospital, Gulu, Uganda. (6)Institut Fur Pathologie, Campus Benjamin Franklin,
Charitè, Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. (7)From the Department of Medical 
Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy lorenzo.leoncini@dbm.unisi.it.

OBJECTIVES: Recent studies using next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis
disclosed the importance of the intrinsic activation of the B-cell receptor (BCR)
pathway in the pathogenesis of sporadic Burkitt lymphoma (sBL) due to mutations
of TCF3/ID3 genes. Since no definitive data are available on the genetic
landscape of endemic Burkitt (eBL), we first assessed the mutation frequency of
TCF3/ID3 in eBL compared with sBL and subsequently the somatic hypermutation
status of the BCR to answer whether an extrinsic activation of BCR signaling
could also be demonstrated in Burkitt lymphoma.
METHODS: We assessed the mutations of TCF3/ID3 by RNAseq and the BCR status by
NGS analysis of the immunoglobulin genes (IGs).
RESULTS: We detected mutations of TCF3/ID3 in about 30% of the eBL cases. This
rate is significantly lower than that detected in sBL (64%). The NGS analysis of 
IGs revealed intraclonal diversity, suggesting an active targeted somatic
hypermutation process in eBL compared with sBL.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the view that the antigenic pressure plays a 
key role in the pathogenetic pathways of eBL, which may be partially distinct
from those driving sBL development.

© American Society for Clinical Pathology, 2016.

PMID: 26712879  [PubMed - in process]


13. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Dec 19;146:145-153. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.12.003. [Epub
ahead of print]

Characterization of Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins in human cornea.

Mohan RR(1), Morgan BR(2), Anumanthan G(2), Sharma A(2), Chaurasia SS(3), Rieger 
FG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Harry S. Truman Memorial Veterans' Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of 
Ophthalmology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA; Mason Eye
Institute, School of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
Electronic address: MohanR@health.missouri.edu. (2)Harry S. Truman Memorial
Veterans' Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA. (4)Harry S. Truman Memorial
Veterans' Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA; Mason Eye Institute, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins are DNA-binding transcription factors 
involved in cellular proliferation, migration, inflammation, angiogenesis and
fibrosis. However, their expression and role in the cornea is unknown. The
present study was undertaken to characterize the expression of Id proteins and
their interactions with the pro-fibrotic cytokine Transforming Growth Factor ß1
(TGFß1) and anti-fibrotic cytokine, bone morphogenic protein 7 (BMP7) in human
cornea. Human donor corneas procured from Eye Bank were used. Id proteins were
localized in human corneal sections using immunofluorescence. Primary cultures of
human corneal fibroblasts (HCF) were established and treated with either TGFß1
(5 ng/ml) or BMP7 (10 ng/ml) for 24 h in serum free medium. Expression of Id's in
response to TGFß1, BMP7 and TGFß1 + BMP7 was analyzed by quantitative real time
PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blot analysis. Id1 and Id2 proteins were ubiquitously
expressed in the epithelial cells and stromal keratocytes in human cornea. The
Id1 was localized to the basal epithelial cells as seen by immunohistochemistry. 
HCF expressed all known mammalian Id genes (Id1-Id4). In addition, Id1 and Id2
are selectively expressed in HCF. Treatment of human recombinant TGFß1 (5 ng/ml) 
to serum-starved HCF showed a significant increase in Id genes (Id1, Id2 and Id4)
at 2 h time point compared to BMP7 treatment, which showed time dependent
increase in the expression of Id1-Id3 at 24-48 h. Combined treatment with
TGFß1 + BMP7 to HCF showed a significant increase in Id1 transcript and an
increasing trend in Id3 and Id4 expression. The results of this study suggest
that Id family of genes (Id1-Id4) are localized in the human cornea and expressed
in the corneal fibroblasts. Also, Id's were differentially regulated with TGFß1
and/or BMP7 in a time dependent manner and might serve as a therapeutic target in
corneal fibrosis.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26712606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Mol Metab. 2015 Aug 12;4(11):779-94. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2015.07.010.
eCollection 2015.

Adipocyte progenitor cells initiate monocyte chemoattractant protein-1-mediated
macrophage accumulation in visceral adipose tissue.

Kaplan JL(1), Marshall MA(2), C McSkimming C(2), Harmon DB(3), Garmey JC(2),
Oldham SN(2), Hallowell P(4), McNamara CA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States ; Department of Pathology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States. (2)Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular
Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States.
(3)Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States ; Department of Biochemistry, Molecular
Biology, and Genetics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United
States. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA,
United States. (5)Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States ; Department of Medicine, Division
of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United
States ; Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, United States ; Department of Molecular Physiology and
Biological Physics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Macrophages are important producers of obesity-induced MCP-1; however,
initial obesity-induced increases in MCP-1 production precede M1 macrophage
accumulation in visceral adipose tissue (VAT). The initial cellular source of
obesity-induced MCP-1 in vivo is currently unknown. Preliminary reports based on 
in vitro studies of preadipocyte cell lines and adherent stroma-vascular fraction
cells suggest that resident stromal cells express MCP-1. In the past several
years, elegant methods of identifying adipocyte progenitor cells (AdPCs) have
become available, making it possible to study these cells in vivo. We have
previously published that global deletion of transcription factor Inhibitor of
Differentiation 3 (Id3) attenuates high fat diet-induced obesity, but it is
unclear if Id3 plays a role in diet-induced MCP-1 production. We sought to
determine the initial cellular source of MCP-1 and identify molecular regulators 
mediating MCP-1 production.
METHODS: Id3 (+/+) and Id3 (-/-) mice were fed either a standard chow or HFD for 
varying lengths of time. Flow cytometry, semi-quantitative real-time PCR, ELISAs 
and adoptive transfers were used to assess the importance of AdPCs during
diet-induced obesity. Flow cytometry was also performed on a cohort of 14
patients undergoing bariatric surgery.
RESULTS: Flow cytometry identified committed CD45(-)CD31 (-)
Ter119(-)CD29(+)CD34(+)Sca-1(+)CD24(-) adipocyte progenitor cells as producers of
high levels of MCP-1 in VAT. High-fat diet increased AdPC numbers, an effect
dependent on Id3. Loss of Id3 increased p21(Cip1) levels and attenuated AdPC
proliferation, resulting in reduced MCP-1 and M1 macrophage accumulation in VAT, 
compared to Id3 (+/+) littermate controls. AdPC rescue by adoptive transfer of
50,000 Id3 (+/+) AdPCs into Id3 (-/-) recipient mice increased MCP-1 levels and
M1 macrophage number in VAT. Additionally, flow cytometry identified
MCP-1-producing CD45(-)CD31(-)CD34(+)CD44(+)CD90(+) AdPCs in human omental and
subcutaneous adipose tissue, with a higher percentage in omental adipose.
Furthermore, high surface expression of CD44 marked abundant MCP-1 producers,
only in visceral adipose tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the first in vivo evidence, to our knowledge,
that committed AdPCs in VAT are the initial source of obesity-induced MCP-1 and
identifies the helix-loop-helix transcription factor Id3 as a critical regulator 
of p21(Cip1) expression, AdPC proliferation, MCP-1 expression and M1 macrophage
accumulation in VAT. Inhibition of Id3 and AdPC expansion, as well as CD44
expression in human AdPCs, may serve as unique therapeutic targets for the
regulation of adipose tissue inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4632113
PMID: 26629403  [PubMed]


15. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2015 Dec;34(12):1200-11. doi: 10.1177/0960327115600364.

Identification of gene expression signature for cigarette smoke exposure
response--from man to mouse.

Martin F(1), Talikka M(1), Hoeng J(2), Peitsch MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Philip Morris International Research and Development, Neuchatel, Switzerland. 
(2)Philip Morris International Research and Development, Neuchatel, Switzerland
julia.hoeng@pmi.com.

Gene expression profiling data can be used in toxicology to assess both the level
and impact of toxicant exposure, aligned with a vision of 21st century
toxicology. Here, we present a whole blood-derived gene signature that can
distinguish current smokers from either nonsmokers or former smokers with high
specificity and sensitivity. Such a signature that can be measured in a surrogate
tissue (whole blood) may help in monitoring smoking exposure as well as
discontinuation of exposure when the primarily impacted tissue (e.g., lung) is
not readily accessible. The signature consisted of LRRN3, SASH1, PALLD, RGL1,
TNFRSF17, CDKN1C, IGJ, RRM2, ID3, SERPING1, and FUCA1. Several members of this
signature have been previously described in the context of smoking. The signature
translated well across species and could distinguish mice that were exposed to
cigarette smoke from ones exposed to air only or had been withdrawn from
cigarette smoke exposure. Finally, the small signature of only 11 genes could be 
converted into a polymerase chain reaction-based assay that could serve as a
marker to monitor compliance with a smoking abstinence protocol.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26614807  [PubMed - in process]


16. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Nov 10;5(5):716-27.

Induced Developmental Arrest of Early Hematopoietic Progenitors Leads to the
Generation of Leukocyte Stem Cells.

Tomokatsu I, Masuda K, Huijskens MJ, Satoh R, Kakugawa K, Agata Y, Miyai T,
Germeraad WT, Katsura Y, Kawamoto H.

Self-renewal potential and multipotency are hallmarks of a stem cell. It is
generally accepted that acquisition of such stemness requires rejuvenation of
somatic cells through reprogramming of their genetic and epigenetic status.We
show here that a simple block of cell differentiation is sufficient to induce and
maintain stem cells. By overexpression of the transcriptional inhibitor ID3 in
murine hematopoietic progenitor cells and cultivation under B cell induction
conditions, the cells undergo developmental arrest and enter a self-renewal
cycle. These cells can be maintained in vitro almost indefinitely, and the
long-term cultured cells exhibit robust multi-lineage reconstitution when
transferred into irradiated mice. These cells can be cloned and re-expanded with 
50% plating efficiency, indicating that virtually all cells are self-renewing.
Equivalent progenitors were produced from human cord blood stem cells, and these 
will ultimately be useful as a source of cells for immune cell therapy.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4649263
PMID: 26607950  [PubMed - in process]


17. Br J Haematol. 2016 Feb;172(3):428-38. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13849. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

The presence of genomic imbalances is associated with poor outcome in patients
with burkitt lymphoma treated with dose-intensive chemotherapy including
rituximab.

Forero-Castro M(1,)(2), Robledo C(1), Lumbreras E(1), Benito R(1),
Hernández-Sánchez JM(1), Hernández-Sánchez M(1), García JL(3), Corchete-Sánchez
LA(4), Tormo M(5), Barba P(6), Menárguez J(7), Ribera J(8), Grande C(9), Escoda
L(10), Olivier C(11), Carrillo E(12), García de Coca A(13), Ribera JM(8),
Hernández-Rivas JM(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Centre, IBSAL, IBMCC, University of Salamanca, CSIC,
Salamanca, Spain. (2)School of Biological Sciences (GEBIMOL), Pedagogical and
Technological University of Colombia (UPTC), Colombia, IN, USA. (3)Studies
Institute of Health Sciences of Castilla and León (IESCYL), Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Haematology Department, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Haematology Department, Clinical University Hospital of Valencia, Valencia,
Spain. (6)Haematology Department, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Pathology Department, Gregorio Marañón Hospital, Madrid, Spain. (8)Clinical
Haematology Department ICO-Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Jose Carreras Research
Institute, Badalona, Spain. (9)Haematology Department, University Hospital
October 12, Madrid, Spain. (10)Haematology Department, University Hospital of
Tarragona Joan XXIII, Tarragona, Spain. (11)Haematology Department, General
Hospital of Segovia, Segovia, Spain. (12)Haematology Department, University
Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain. (13)Haematology Department, Clinical
University Hospital of Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.

The introduction of Rituximab has improved the outcome and survival rates of
Burkitt lymphoma (BL). However, early relapse and refractoriness are current
limitations of BL treatment and new biological factors affecting the outcome of
these patients have not been explored. This study aimed to identify the presence 
of genomic changes that could predict the response to new therapies in BL. Forty 
adolescent and adult BL patients treated with the Dose-Intensive Chemotherapy
Including Rituximab (Burkimab) protocol (Spanish Programme for the Study and
Treatment of Haematological Malignancies; PETHEMA) were analysed using
array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). In addition, the presence of
TP53, TCF3 (E2A), ID3 and GNA13 mutations was assessed by next-generation
sequencing (NGS). Ninety-seven per cent of the patients harboured genomic
imbalances. Losses on 11q, 13q, 15q or 17p were associated with a poor response
to Burkimab therapy (P = 0·038), shorter progression-free survival (PFS;
P = 0·007) and overall survival (OS; P = 0·009). The integrative analysis of
array-CGH and NGS showed that 26·3% (5/19) and 36·8% (7/19) of patients carried
alterations in the TP53 and TCF3 genes, respectively. TP53 alterations were
associated with shorter PFS (P = 0·011) while TCF3 alterations were associated
with shorter OS (P = 0·032). Genetic studies could be used for risk
stratification of BL patients treated with the Burkimab protocol.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26567765  [PubMed - in process]


18. IUBMB Life. 2015 Nov;67(11):880-7. doi: 10.1002/iub.1443. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Epigenetic role of CCAAT box-binding transcription factor NF-Y on ID gene family 
in human embryonic carcinoma cells.

Moeinvaziri F(1,)(2), Shahhoseini M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of
Developmental Biology, University of Science and Culture, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

Nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) is a histone substitute protein that specifically binds
to the CCAAT box of the target genes and thereby promotes their regulation. NF-Y 
transcription factor, with defined CCAAT element-binding activities, target a
gene family that encodes a group of basic helix-loop-helix ID factors (ID1-ID4), 
with or without CCAAT box at their promoter region. In this study, the
expressions of NF-Y in mRNA and protein level were evaluated in a human embryonic
carcinoma cell line, named NTera2, before and after 7 days induction of
differentiation. We also looked into expression levels of ID genes in NTera2
cells during differentiation because of their critical role in development. By
using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with real-time polymerase chain
reaction, NF-Y incorporation and acetylation/dimethylation of histone H3 at
lysine 9 (H3K9ac/me2) was quantitatively evaluated on the regulatory regions of
considered genes to monitor the changes in epigenetic markers at ID gene
promoters throughout differentiation. The results demonstrated a marked
down-regulation of ID1, ID2, and ID3 genes, parallel to a loss of NF-Y binding to
the promoters of these genes. The data show that although the genes encoding NF-Y
complex remained expressed at mRNA level, NF-YC is lost at the protein level
onset of differentiation. Additionally, the epigenetic marks of H3K9ac and
H3K9me2 at the target gene promoters decreased and increased, respectively, after
1 day of differentiation. It is suggested that, in the absence of NF-Y binding,
the corresponding regions adopt a heterochromatic nature, whereas when NF-Y comes
back after 7 days of differentiation, the ID1-3 promoters become again converted 
into active chromatin. The ID4 gene, lacking a CCAAT box, behaves differently and
does not show any incorporation. This experiment implies for the first time that 
the presence of NF-Y transcription factor plays a pivotal role in transcriptional
regulation of ID genes in development. © 2015 IUBMB Life, 67(11):880-887, 2015.

© 2015 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26509926  [PubMed - in process]


19. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Oct;19(19):3635-42.

Identifying the biomarkers of multiple sclerosis based on non-coding RNA
signature.

Sheng WH(1), Sheng KT, Zhao YX, Li H, Zhou JL, Yao HY, Li XH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, China. lixiaoredh@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: miRNAs are key regulators in multiple sclerosis. To gain a better
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of multiple sclerosis, differentially
expressed microRNAs (DE-miRNAs) and genes (DEGs) were analyzed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The miRNA expression profile GSE43590 including 11 samples
of peripheral blood T-cells from relapsing-remitting MS patients and 9 normal
samples as well as gene expression profile GSE52139 including 8 periplaque
samples and 8 normal samples were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. Then, 
DE-miRNAs and DEGs were identified using limma. Moreover, the target genes of
DE-miRNAs were screened. Additionally, the integrated regulatory network of DEGs,
DE-miRNAs and targets was constructed using Cytoscape. What's more, the
functional modules were also screened using MINE in Cytoscape. Lastly, the
functional annotation of genes in modules was conducted using DAVID.
RESULTS: A total of 2394 DEGs were screened in 8 periplaque samples.
Additionally, 296 DE-miRNAs were identified in the 11 samples of peripheral blood
T-cells from relapsing-remitting MS patients. Besides, 6 functional modules (A-F)
were screened. Among them, has-miR-197 could target HNF4A. What's more, HNF4A
could interact with CYP3A4. Additionally, has-miR-125b could target ID1 and ID3. 
Besides, ID1 could interact with THBS1. Furthermore, functional enrichment showed
that CYP3A4 was significantly related to vitamin metabolic process. For the
pathway enrichment, ID1 and ID3 were significantly enriched in TGF-beta signaling
pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Some important DE-miRNAs (such as has-miR-197and has-miR-125b) might
be crucial for MS by regulating the expressions of their target genes.

PMID: 26502853  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Oct 15;11(10):e1005158. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005158.
eCollection 2015.

Distinct Viral and Mutational Spectrum of Endemic Burkitt Lymphoma.

Abate F(1), Ambrosio MR(2), Mundo L(2), Laginestra MA(3), Fuligni F(3), Rossi
M(3), Zairis S(4), Gazaneo S(2), De Falco G(5), Lazzi S(2), Bellan C(2), Rocca
BJ(2), Amato T(2), Marasco E(3), Etebari M(3), Ogwang M(6), Calbi V(6), Ndede
I(7), Patel K(7), Chumba D(7), Piccaluga PP(3), Pileri S(8), Leoncini L(9),
Rabadan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of Biomedical 
Informatics, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York,
New York, United States of America. (2)Department of Medical Biotechnologies,
Section of Pathology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (3)Department of
Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), S. Orsola-Malpighi
Hospital, Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna, Italy. (4)Department of
Systems Biology, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New
York, New York, United States of America. (5)Department of Medical
Biotechnologies, Section of Pathology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; School 
of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London,
United Kingdom. (6)Lacor Hospital, Gulu, Uganda. (7)Moi University, Eldoret,
Kenya. (8)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine (DIMES),
S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna,
Italy; Unit of Haematopathology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan and
Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna, Italy. (9)Department of Medical
Biotechnologies, Section of Pathology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy;
Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), S.
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University School of Medicine, Bologna, Italy.

Endemic Burkitt lymphoma (eBL) is primarily found in children in equatorial
regions and represents the first historical example of a virus-associated human
malignancy. Although Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection and MYC translocations
are hallmarks of the disease, it is unclear whether other factors may contribute 
to its development. We performed RNA-Seq on 20 eBL cases from Uganda and showed
that the mutational and viral landscape of eBL is more complex than previously
reported. First, we found the presence of other herpesviridae family members in 8
cases (40%), in particular human herpesvirus 5 and human herpesvirus 8 and
confirmed their presence by immunohistochemistry in the adjacent non-neoplastic
tissue. Second, we identified a distinct latency program in EBV involving lytic
genes in association with TCF3 activity. Third, by comparing the eBL mutational
landscape with published data on sporadic Burkitt lymphoma (sBL), we detected
lower frequencies of mutations in MYC, ID3, TCF3 and TP53, and a higher frequency
of mutation in ARID1A in eBL samples. Recurrent mutations in two genes not
previously associated with eBL were identified in 20% of tumors: RHOA and cyclin 
F (CCNF). We also observed that polyviral samples showed lower numbers of somatic
mutations in common altered genes in comparison to sBL specimens, suggesting dual
mechanisms of transformation, mutation versus virus driven in sBL and eBL
respectively.

PMCID: PMC4607508
PMID: 26468873  [PubMed - in process]


21. Appl Clin Inform. 2015 Aug 12;6(3):506-20. doi: 10.4338/ACI-2015-03-RA-0036.
eCollection 2015.

Machine Learning Techniques for Prediction of Early Childhood Obesity.

Dugan TM(1), Mukhopadhyay S(2), Carroll A(3), Downs S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University , Children's Health Services Research, Indianapolis, IN,
United States ; Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis , Computer
Science, Indianapolis, IN, United States. (2)Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis , Computer Science, Indianapolis, IN, United States. (3)Indiana
University , Children's Health Services Research, Indianapolis, IN, United
States.

OBJECTIVES: This paper aims to predict childhood obesity after age two, using
only data collected prior to the second birthday by a clinical decision support
system called CHICA.
METHODS: Analyses of six different machine learning methods: RandomTree,
RandomForest, J48, ID3, Naïve Bayes, and Bayes trained on CHICA data show that an
accurate, sensitive model can be created.
RESULTS: Of the methods analyzed, the ID3 model trained on the CHICA dataset
proved the best overall performance with accuracy of 85% and sensitivity of 89%. 
Additionally, the ID3 model had a positive predictive value of 84% and a negative
predictive value of 88%. The structure of the tree also gives insight into the
strongest predictors of future obesity in children. Many of the strongest
predictors seen in the ID3 modeling of the CHICA dataset have been independently 
validated in the literature as correlated with obesity, thereby supporting the
validity of the model.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that data from a production clinical
decision support system can be used to build an accurate machine learning model
to predict obesity in children after age two.

PMCID: PMC4586339 [Available on 2016-08-12]
PMID: 26448795  [PubMed - in process]


22. EMBO J. 2015 Nov 12;34(22):2804-19. doi: 10.15252/embj.201591118. Epub 2015 Oct
5.

The balance of Id3 and E47 determines neural stem/precursor cell differentiation 
into astrocytes.

Bohrer C(1), Pfurr S(1), Mammadzada K(1), Schildge S(1), Plappert L(1), Hils
M(2), Pous L(1), Rauch KS(2), Dumit VI(3), Pfeifer D(4), Dengjel J(3), Kirsch
M(5), Schachtrup K(6), Schachtrup C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (2)Faculty
of Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany Center for Chronic
Immunodeficiency (CCI), University Medical Center Freiburg, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center,
Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), ZBSA Center for Biological
Systems Analysis, BIOSS Center for Biological Signalling Studies, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (4)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, University Medical Center Freiburg, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany. (5)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (6)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI),
University Medical Center Freiburg, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany christian.schachtrup@anat.uni-freiburg.de.

Adult neural stem/precursor cells (NSPCs) of the subventricular zone (SVZ) are an
endogenous source for neuronal replacement in CNS disease. However, adult
neurogenesis is compromised after brain injury in favor of a glial cell fate,
which is mainly attributed to changes in the NSPC environment. Yet, it is unknown
how this unfavorable extracellular environment translates into a transcriptional 
program altering NSPC differentiation. Here, we show that genetic depletion of
the transcriptional regulator Id3 decreased the number of astrocytes generated
from SVZ-derived adult NSPCs in the cortical lesion area after traumatic brain
injury. Cortical brain injury resulted in rapid BMP-2 and Id3 up-regulation in
the SVZ stem cell niche. Id3(-/-) adult NSPCs failed to differentiate into
BMP-2-induced astrocytes, while NSPCs deficient for the Id3-controlled
transcription factor E47 readily differentiated into astrocytes in the absence of
BMP-2. Mechanistically, E47 repressed the expression of several
astrocyte-specific genes in adult NSPCs. These results identify Id3 as the
BMP-2-induced transcriptional regulator, promoting adult NSPC differentiation
into astrocytes upon CNS injury and reveal a molecular link between environmental
changes and NSPC differentiation in the CNS after injury.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4682650 [Available on 2016-11-12]
PMID: 26438726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1316-25. doi: 10.1038/ng.3413. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

DNA methylome analysis in Burkitt and follicular lymphomas identifies
differentially methylated regions linked to somatic mutation and transcriptional 
control.

Kretzmer H(1,)(2,)(3), Bernhart SH(1,)(2,)(3), Wang W(4), Haake A(5), Weniger
MA(6), Bergmann AK(5,)(7), Betts MJ(8), Carrillo-de-Santa-Pau E(9), Doose
G(1,)(2,)(3), Gutwein J(5), Richter J(5), Hovestadt V(4), Huang B(10), Rico D(9),
Jühling F(1,)(2,)(3), Kolarova J(5), Lu Q(8), Otto C(1,)(2,)(3), Wagener R(5),
Arnolds J(11), Burkhardt B(12), Claviez A(7), Drexler HG(13), Eberth S(13,)(14), 
Eils R(10,)(15), Flicek P(16), Haas S(17), Hummel M(18), Karsch D(19), Kerstens
HH(20), Klapper W(21), Kreuz M(22), Lawerenz C(10), Lenze D(18), Loeffler M(22), 
López C(5), MacLeod RA(13), Martens JH(20), Kulis M(20), Martín-Subero JI(23),
Möller P(24), Nagel I(5), Picelli S(4), Vater I(5), Rohde M(25), Rosenstiel
P(26), Rosolowski M(22), Russell RB(8), Schilhabel M(26), Schlesner M(10),
Stadler PF(1,)(2,)(3,)(27,)(28,)(29), Szczepanowski M(20), Trümper L(14),
Stunnenberg HG(20); ICGC MMML-Seq project; BLUEPRINT project, Küppers R(6),
Ammerpohl O(5), Lichter P(4), Siebert R(5), Hoffmann S(1,)(2,)(3), Radlwimmer
B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Transcriptome Bioinformatics, Research Center for Civilization Diseases
(LIFE), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (2)Interdisciplinary Center for 
Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (3)Bioinformatics Group,
Department of Computer Science, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Institute of Human Genetics, Christian Albrechts
University, Kiel, Germany. (6)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research),
University of Duisburg-Essen, Kiel, Germany. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (8)Cell
Networks, Bioquant, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (9)Structural 
Biology and BioComputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (10)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (12)Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(13)Leibniz Institut, German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures
(DSMZ), Braunschweig, Germany. (14)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Georg
Augusts University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (15)Institute of Pharmacy
and Molecular Biotechnology, Bioquant, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany. (16)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics
Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK. (17)Friedrich
Ebert Hospital Neumünster, Clinics for Haematology, Oncology and Nephrology,
Neumünster, Germany. (18)Institute of Pathology, Charité, University Medicine
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (19)Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine II, University Medical Centre, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(20)Department of Molecular Biology, Radboud University, Faculty of Science,
Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (21)Hematopathology Section, Christian Albrechts
University, Kiel, Germany. (22)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and 
Epidemiology (IMISE), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (23)Departamento
de Anatomía Patológica, Farmacología y Microbiología, Universitat de Barcelona,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain. (24)Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty of the Ulm University, Ulm,
Germany. (25)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Giessen,
Giessen, Germany. (26)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian
Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany. (27)RNomics Group, Fraunhofer Institute for 
Cell Therapy and Immunology (IZI), Leipzig, Germany. (28)Santa Fe Institute,
Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. (29)Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in Sciences, 
Leipzig, Germany.

Although Burkitt lymphomas and follicular lymphomas both have features of
germinal center B cells, they are biologically and clinically quite distinct.
Here we performed whole-genome bisulfite, genome and transcriptome sequencing in 
13 IG-MYC translocation-positive Burkitt lymphoma, nine BCL2
translocation-positive follicular lymphoma and four normal germinal center B cell
samples. Comparison of Burkitt and follicular lymphoma samples showed
differential methylation of intragenic regions that strongly correlated with
expression of associated genes, for example, genes active in germinal center
dark-zone and light-zone B cells. Integrative pathway analyses of regions
differentially methylated in Burkitt and follicular lymphomas implicated DNA
methylation as cooperating with somatic mutation of sphingosine phosphate
signaling, as well as the TCF3-ID3 and SWI/SNF complexes, in a large fraction of 
Burkitt lymphomas. Taken together, our results demonstrate a tight connection
between somatic mutation, DNA methylation and transcriptional control in key B
cell pathways deregulated differentially in Burkitt lymphoma and other germinal
center B cell lymphomas.

PMID: 26437030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Gene Ther. 2015 Sep;22(9):431-7. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2015.38. Epub 2015 Sep
18.

Effects of upregulation of Id3 in human lung adenocarcinoma cells on
proliferation, apoptosis, mobility and tumorigenicity.

Chen FF(1), Liu Y(1), Wang F(1), Pang XJ(1), Zhu CD(1), Xu M(1), Yu W(1), Li
XJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Laboratory Science, Jinling Hospital, School of
Medicine, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Analytical Chemistry for Life Science, Department of Chemistry, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China.

The inhibitor of DNA-binding/differentiation 3 (Id3) protein is a
helix-loop-helix transcription factor and may have an important role in cell
proliferation and differentiation. This study was to evaluate the effects of
upregulation of Id3 in human lung adenocarcinoma cells on proliferation,
apoptosis, mobility and tumorigenicity. Short interference RNA suppression of Id3
(miRId3) in A549 cells was used to investigate the functional role(s) of Id3.
Next, we used in vitro wound-healing assay and trans-well assay to study the
effects of overexpressed Id3 on migration and invasion of A549 cells.
Furthermore, to explore the influence of overexpressed Id3 on in vivo
tumorigenesis, adenoviruses containing Id3 gene (Ad-Id3) and empty vector
(Ad-LacZ) were generated. Co-transfection of pcDNA/miRId3 and pEGFP/Id3 into A549
cells reversed the Id3-induced cell proliferation inhibition and apoptosis. Upon 
Id3 transfection, A549 cells displayed decreased migratory and invasive
capabilities, however, co-transfection of miRId3 and Id3 into A549 cells reversed
the Id3-induced inhibitions of migratory and invasive capabilities. Three groups 
of nude mice were inoculated with Ad-LacZ, Ad-Id3 transfectants and untransfected
A549 cells, respectively. Twenty-eight days after inoculation, tumors induced by 
Ad-Id3 transfectants grew much more slowly compared with Ad-LacZ transfectants
and control group. This study provides for the first time both in vitro and in
vivo proofs that forced expression of Id3 in lung adenocarcinoma cells reduces
tumor growth rate and may be a potential target for tumor suppression.

PMID: 26384138  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Leukoc Biol. 2016 Feb;99(2):321-31. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2A0715-297R. Epub 2015 Sep
17.

Analysis of IgM antibody production and repertoire in a mouse model of Sjögren's 
syndrome.

Kramer JM(1), Holodick NE(2), Vizconde TC(2), Raman I(2), Yan M(2), Li QZ(2),
Gaile DP(2), Rothstein TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Center for Oncology and Cell Biology, The Feinstein Institute for Medical
Research, Manhasset, New York, USA; Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology,
Department of Dental Medicine, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, New Hyde Park, 
New York, USA; Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, and
Department of Biostatistics, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo,
New York, USA; Department of Dental Medicine and Medicine, Hofstra North
Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, New York, USA; and Microarray Core
Facility, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA
jkramer@buffalo.edu. (2)*Center for Oncology and Cell Biology, The Feinstein
Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, USA; Division of Oral and
Maxillofacial Pathology, Department of Dental Medicine, Long Island Jewish
Medical Center, New Hyde Park, New York, USA; Department of Oral Biology, School 
of Dental Medicine, and Department of Biostatistics, State University of New York
at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA; Department of Dental Medicine and Medicine,
Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, New York, USA; and
Microarray Core Facility, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

This study tested the hypothesis that B cells from salivary tissue are distinct
in terms of proliferative capacity, immunoglobulin M secretion, repertoire, and
autoantibody enrichment in Sjögren's syndrome. We sorted purified B cells from
the spleen, cervical lymph nodes, and submandibular glands of a primary Sjögren's
syndrome mouse model (Id3(-/-)). Enzyme-linked immunospot and proliferation
assays were performed with stimulated B cells. We single-cell sorted B cells from
the spleen, cervical lymph nodes, and submandibular gland tissue from Sjögren's
syndrome mice and sequenced immunoglobulin M heavy-chain variable regions.
Finally, autoantigen arrays were performed using immunoglobulin M derived from
sera, cervical lymph nodes, spleens, and submandibular gland tissue of Id3(-/-)
animals. Results suggest B cells from salivary tissue of Sjögren's syndrome mice 
are similar to those from secondary immune sites in terms of proliferative and
secretory capacity. However, differences in repertoire usage, heavy chain
complementarity-determining region 3 length, mutational frequency, and N region
addition were observed among B cells derived from submandibular gland, cervical
lymph node, and spleen tissue. Moreover, autoantigen array data show
immunoglobulin M from salivary B cells have enriched specificity for Ro
(Sjögren's syndrome A) and La (Sjögren's syndrome B). All together, these data
suggest salivary B cells have unique repertoire characteristics that likely
influence autoantigen binding and contribute to Sjögren's syndrome disease in a
tissue-specific manner.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4718196 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26382297  [PubMed - in process]


26. Nat Immunol. 2015 Oct;16(10):1077-84. doi: 10.1038/ni.3252. Epub 2015 Aug 31.

The DNA-binding inhibitor Id3 regulates IL-9 production in CD4(+) T cells.

Nakatsukasa H(1), Zhang D(1,)(2), Maruyama T(1), Chen H(1), Cui K(3), Ishikawa
M(4), Deng L(1), Zanvit P(1), Tu E(1), Jin W(1), Abbatiello B(1), Goldberg N(1), 
Chen Q(2), Sun L(5), Zhao K(3), Chen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunology Section, Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China
Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. (3)Systems Biology
Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (4)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology,
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (5)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology,
The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing,
China.

The molecular mechanisms by which signaling via transforming growth factor-ß
(TGF-ß) and interleukin 4 (IL-4) control the differentiation of CD4(+)
IL-9-producing helper T cells (TH9 cells) remain incompletely understood. We
found here that the DNA-binding inhibitor Id3 regulated TH9 differentiation, as
deletion of Id3 increased IL-9 production from CD4(+) T cells. Mechanistically,
TGF-ß1 and IL-4 downregulated Id3 expression, and this process required the
kinase TAK1. A reduction in Id3 expression enhanced binding of the transcription 
factors E2A and GATA-3 to the Il9 promoter region, which promoted Il9
transcription. Notably, Id3-mediated control of TH9 differentiation regulated
anti-tumor immunity in an experimental melanoma-bearing model in vivo and also in
human CD4(+) T cells in vitro. Thus, our study reveals a previously unrecognized 
TAK1-Id3-E2A-GATA-3 pathway that regulates TH9 differentiation.

PMID: 26322481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncol Rep. 2015 Oct;34(4):1853-74. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4159. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Curcumin alters gene expression-associated DNA damage, cell cycle, cell survival 
and cell migration and invasion in NCI-H460 human lung cancer cells in vitro.

Chiang IT(1), Wang WS(2), Liu HC(3), Yang ST(4), Tang NY(5), Chung JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, National Yang-Ming University Hospital,
Yilan 260, Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Yang-Ming 
University Hospital, Yilan 260, Taiwan, R.O.C. (3)Department of Biological
Science and Technology, China Medical University, Taichung 404, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(4)Department of Radiology, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung 404,
Taiwan, R.O.C. (5)Graduate Institute of Chinese Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung 404, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer mortality and new cases are on the
increase worldwide. However, the treatment of lung cancer remains unsatisfactory.
Curcumin has been shown to induce cell death in many human cancer cells,
including human lung cancer cells. However, the effects of curcumin on genetic
mechanisms associated with these actions remain unclear. Curcumin (2 µM) was
added to NCI-H460 human lung cancer cells and the cells were incubated for 24 h. 
Total RNA was extracted from isolated cells for cDNA synthesis, labeling,
microarray hybridization and flour-labeled cDNA hybridized on chip. Localized
concentrations of fluorescent molecules were detected and quantified using
Expression Console software (Affymetrix) with default RMA parameters. GeneGo
software was used for the key genes involved and their possible interaction
pathways. The results showed that ~170 genes were significantly upregulated and
577 genes were significantly downregulated in curcumin-treated cells.
Specifically, the up- and downregulated genes included CCNE2, associated with DNA
damage; ID3, associated with cell survival and 146 genes with a >2- to 3-fold
change including the TP53INP1 gene, associated with DNA damage; CDC6, CDCA5,
TAKMIP2, CDK14, CDK5, CDCA76, CDC25A, CDC5L and SKP2, associated with cell cycle;
the CARD6, ID1 and ID2 genes, associated with cell survival and the BRMS1L,
associated with cell migration and invasion. Additionally, 59 downregulated genes
exhibited a >4-fold change, including the DDIT3 gene, associated with DNA damage;
while 97 genes had a >3- to 4-fold change including the DDIT4 gene, associated
with DNA damage; the CCPG1 gene, associated with cell cycle and 321 genes with a 
>2- to 3-fold including the GADD45A and CGREF1 genes, associated with DNA damage;
the CCPG1 gene, associated with cell cycle, the TNFRSF10B, GAS5, TSSC1 and
TNFRSF11B gene, associated with cell survival and the ARHAP29 and CADM2 genes,
associated with cell migration and invasion. In conclusion, gene alterations
provide information regarding the cytotoxic mechanism of curcumin at the genetic 
level and provide additional biomarkers or targets for the treatment of human
lung cancer.

PMID: 26238775  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Immunol. 2015 Sep 1;195(5):2103-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402607. Epub 2015
Jul 31.

Id3 Controls Cell Death of 2B4+ Virus-Specific CD8+ T Cells in Chronic Viral
Infection.

Menner AJ(1), Rauch KS(1), Aichele P(2), Pircher H(2), Schachtrup C(3),
Schachtrup K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center and University 
of Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg,
79106 Freiburg, Germany; (2)Center for Microbiology and Hygiene, Institute for
Immunology, University Medical Center and University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg,
Germany; and. (3)Department of Molecular Embryology, Institute of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (4)Center for
Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center and University of Freiburg,
79106 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 79106
Freiburg, Germany; kristina.schachtrup@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Sustained Ag persistence in chronic infection results in a deregulated CD8(+) T
cell response that is characterized by T cell exhaustion and cell death of
Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells. Yet, the underlying transcriptional mechanisms
regulating CD8(+) T cell exhaustion and cell death are poorly defined. Using the 
experimental mouse model of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection, we
demonstrate that the transcriptional regulator Id3 controls cell death of
virus-specific CD8(+) T cells in chronic infection. By comparing acute and
chronic infection, we showed that Id3 (-) virus-specific CD8(+) T cells were less
abundant, whereas the absolute numbers of Id3 (+) virus-specific CD8(+) T cells
were equal in chronic and acute infection. Phenotypically, Id3 (-) and Id3 (+)
cells most prominently differed with regard to expression of the surface receptor
2B4; although Id3 (-) cells were 2B4(+), almost all Id3 (+) cells lacked
expression of 2B4. Lineage-tracing experiments showed that cells initially
expressing Id3 differentiated into Id3 (-)2B4(+) cells; in turn, these cells were
terminally differentiated and highly susceptible to cell death under conditions
of persisting Ag. Enforced Id3 expression specifically increased the persistence 
of 2B4(+) virus-specific CD8(+) T cells by decreasing susceptibility to Fas/Fas
ligand-mediated cell death. Thus, our findings reveal that the transcriptional
regulator Id3 promotes the survival of virus-specific CD8(+) T cells in chronic
infection and suggest that targeting Id3 might be beneficial for preventing cell 
death of CD8(+) T cells in chronic infection or for promoting cell death of
uncontrolled, hyperactive CD8(+) T cells to prevent immunopathology.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26232435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 4;290(36):21925-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.644864. Epub 2015
Jul 20.

The Proto-oncogene Transcription Factor Ets1 Regulates Neural Crest Development
through Histone Deacetylase 1 to Mediate Output of Bone Morphogenetic Protein
Signaling.

Wang C(1), Kam RK(1), Shi W(2), Xia Y(3), Chen X(4), Cao Y(5), Sun J(6), Du Y(7),
Lu G(3), Chen Z(7), Chan WY(3), Chan SO(3), Deng Y(8), Zhao H(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biomedical Sciences and. (2)Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong, China. (3)From the School of Biomedical Sciences and 
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
518057, China. (4)Advanced Biomedical Computing Center, NCI, National Institutes 
of Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702. (5)Model Animal Research Center of Nanjing 
University and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Model Animals for Disease 
Study, 12 Xuefu Road, Pukou High-Tech Zone, Nanjing 210061, China.
(6)Translational Cancer Research and Stem Cell Center, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Lund University, Medicon Village, 22381 Lund, Sweden, and. (7)Shanghai 
Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Renji
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 845 Lingshan Road,
Shanghai 200135, China. (8)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Cell Microenvironment,
Department of Biology, South University of Science and Technology of China,
Shenzhen 518055, China. (9)From the School of Biomedical Sciences and Shenzhen
Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518057, China, 
zhaohui@cuhk.edu.hk.

The neural crest (NC) is a transient, migratory cell population that
differentiates into a large variety of tissues including craniofacial cartilage, 
melanocytes, and peripheral nervous system. NC is initially induced at the border
of neural plate and non-neural ectoderm by balanced regulation of multiple
signaling pathways among which an intermediate bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling is essential for NC formation. ets1, a proto-oncogene playing important
roles in tumor invasion, has also been implicated in delamination of NC cells. In
this study, we investigated Ets1 function in NC formation using Xenopus.
Overexpression of ets1 repressed NC formation through down-regulation of BMP
signaling. Moreover, ets1 repressed the BMP-responsive gene id3 that is essential
for NC formation. Conversely, overexpression of id3 can partially rescue the
phenotype of NC inhibition induced by ectopic ets1. Mechanistically, we found
that Ets1 binds to id3 promoter as well as histone deacetylase 1, suggesting that
Ets1 recruits histone deacetylase 1 to the promoter of id3, thereby inducing
histone deacetylation of the id3 promoter. Thus, our studies indicate that Ets1
regulates NC formation through attenuating BMP signaling epigenetically.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4571947 [Available on 2016-09-04]
PMID: 26198637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Sep;54(9):555-64. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22268. Epub
2015 Jul 14.

The PCBP1 gene encoding poly(rC) binding protein I is recurrently mutated in
Burkitt lymphoma.

Wagener R(1), Aukema SM(1), Schlesner M(2), Haake A(1), Burkhardt B(3), Claviez
A(4), Drexler HG(5), Hummel M(6), Kreuz M(7), Loeffler M(7), Rosolowski M(7),
López C(1), Möller P(8), Richter J(1), Rohde M(9), Betts MJ(10), Russell RB(10), 
Bernhart SH(11), Hoffmann S(11), Rosenstiel P(12), Schilhabel M(12),
Szczepanowski M(13), Trümper L(14), Klapper W(13), Siebert R(1); ICGC
MMML-Seq-Project; "Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphomas" Network Project
of the Deutsche Krebshilfe.

Collaborators: Richter G, Siebert R, Wagner S, Haake A, Richter J, Eils R,
Lawerenz C, Radomski S, Scholz I, Borst C, Burkhardt B, Claviez A, Dreyling M,
Eberth S, Einsele H, Frickhofen N, Haas S, Hansmann ML, Karsch D, Kneba M,
Lisfeld J, Mantovani-Löffler L, Rohde M, Stadler C, Staib P, Stilgenbauer S, Ott 
G, Trümper L, Zenz T, Hansmann ML, Kube D, Küppers R, Weniger M, Haas S, Hummel
M, Klapper W, Kostezka U, Lenze D, Möller P, Rosenwald A, Szczepanowski M,
Ammerpohl O, Aukema SM, Binder V, Borkhardt A, Haake A, Hezaveh K, Hoell J, Leich
E, Lichter P, Lopez C, Nagel I, Pischimariov J, Radlwimmer B, Richter J,
Rosenstiel P, Rosenwald A, Schilhabel M, Schreiber S, Vater I, Wagner R, Siebert 
R, Bernhart SH, Binder H, Brors B, Doose G, Eils J, Eils R, Hoffmann S, Hopp L,
Kretzmer H, Kreuz M, Korbel J, Langenberger D, Loeffler M, Radomski S, Rosolowski
M, Schlesner M, Stadler PF, Sungalee S, Barth TF, Bernd HW, Cogliatti SB, Feller 
AC, Hansmann ML, Hummel M, Klapper W, Lenze D, Möller P, Müller-Hermelink HK, Ott
G, Rosenwald A, Stein H, Szczepanowski M, Wacker HH, Barth TF, Behrmann P, Daniel
P, Dierlammm J, Haralambieva E, Harder L, Holterhus PM, Küppers R, Kube D,
Lichter P, Martín-Subero JI, Möller P, Murga-Peñas EM, Ott G, Pott C, Pscherer A,
Rosenwald A, Schwaenen C, Siebert R, Trautmann H, Vockerodt M, Wessendorf S,
Bentink S, Berger H, Hasenclever D, Kreuz M, Loeffler M, Rosolowski M, Spang R,
Stürzenhofecker B, Trümper L, Wehner M, Loeffler M, Siebert R, Stein H, Trümper
L.

The genetic hallmark of Burkitt lymphoma is the translocation t(8;14)(q24;q32),
or one of its light chain variants, resulting in IG-MYC juxtaposition. However,
these translocations alone are insufficient to drive lymphomagenesis, which
requires additional genetic changes for malignant transformation. Recent studies 
of Burkitt lymphoma using next generation sequencing approaches have identified
various recurrently mutated genes including ID3, TCF3, CCND3, and TP53. Here, by 
using similar approaches, we show that PCBP1 is a recurrently mutated gene in
Burkitt lymphoma. By whole-genome sequencing, we identified somatic mutations in 
PCBP1 in 3/17 (18%) Burkitt lymphomas. We confirmed the recurrence of PCBP1
mutations by Sanger sequencing in an independent validation cohort, finding
mutations in 3/28 (11%) Burkitt lymphomas and in 6/16 (38%) Burkitt lymphoma cell
lines. PCBP1 is an intron-less gene encoding the 356 amino acid poly(rC) binding 
protein 1, which contains three K-Homology (KH) domains and two nuclear
localization signals. The mutations predominantly (10/12, 83%) affect the KH III 
domain, either by complete domain loss or amino acid changes. Thus, these changes
are predicted to alter the various functions of PCBP1, including nuclear
trafficking and pre-mRNA splicing. Remarkably, all six primary Burkitt lymphomas 
with a PCBP1 mutation expressed MUM1/IRF4, which is otherwise detected in around 
20-40% of Burkitt lymphomas. We conclude that PCBP1 mutations are recurrent in
Burkitt lymphomas and might contribute, in cooperation with other mutations, to
its pathogenesis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26173642  [PubMed - in process]


31. Neurophotonics. 2014 Jul;1(1):011014. doi: 10.1117/1.NPh.1.1.011014. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Characterization of the BAC Id3-enhanced green fluorescent protein transgenic
mouse line for in vivo imaging of astrocytes.

Lamantia C(1), Tremblay ME(1), Majewska A(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Rochester , Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Rochester,
New York 14642, United States.

Astrocytes are highly ramified glial cells with critical roles in brain
physiology and pathology. Recently, breakthroughs in imaging technology have
expanded our understanding of astrocyte function in vivo. The in vivo study of
astrocytic dynamics, however, is limited by the tools available to label
astrocytes and their processes. Here, we characterize the bacterial artificial
chromosome transgenic Id3-EGFP knock-in mouse to establish its usefulness for in 
vivo imaging of astrocyte processes. Using fixed brain sections, we observed
enhanced green fluorescent protein expression in astrocytes and blood vessel
walls throughout the brain, although the extent and cell type specificity of
expression depended on the brain area and developmental age. Using in vivo
two-photon imaging, we visualized astrocytes in cortical layers 1-3 in both thin 
skull and window preparations. In adult animals, astrocytic cell bodies and fine 
processes could be followed over many hours. Our results suggest that Id3 mice
could be used for in vivo imaging of astrocytes and blood vessels in development 
and adulthood.

PMCID: PMC4478958
PMID: 26157970  [PubMed]


32. FASEB J. 2015 Oct;29(10):4299-312. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-272955. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

Bone morphogenetic protein signaling promotes morphogenesis of blood vessels,
wound epidermis, and actinotrichia during fin regeneration in zebrafish.

Thorimbert V(1), König D(1), Marro J(1), Ruggiero F(1), Jazwinska A(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland; and
Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle-École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France. (2)*Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland;
and Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle-École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon,
France anna.jazwinska@unifr.ch.

Zebrafish fin regeneration involves initial formation of the wound epidermis and 
the blastema, followed by tissue morphogenesis. The mechanisms coordinating
differentiation of distinct tissues of the regenerate are poorly understood.
Here, we applied pharmacologic and transgenic approaches to address the role of
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling during fin restoration. To map the BMP
transcriptional activity, we analyzed the expression of the evolutionarily
conserved direct phospho-Smad1 target gene, id1, and its homologs id2a and id3.
This analysis revealed the BMP activity in the distal blastema, wound epidermis, 
osteoblasts, and blood vessels of the regenerate. Blocking the BMP function with 
a selective chemical inhibitor of BMP type I receptors, DMH1, suppressed id1 and 
id3 expression and arrested regeneration after blastema formation. We identified 
several previously uncharacterized functions of BMP during fin regeneration.
Specifically, BMP signaling is required for remodeling of plexus into structured 
blood vessels in the rapidly growing regenerate. It organizes the wound
epithelium by triggering wnt5b expression and promoting Collagen XIV-A deposition
into the basement membrane. BMP represents the first known signaling that induces
actinotrichia formation in the regenerate. Our data reveal a multifaceted role of
BMP for coordinated morphogenesis of distinct tissues during regeneration of a
complex vertebrate appendage.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26148971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Cancer. 2015 Dec 15;137(12):2803-14. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29671. Epub 2015 Jul 
16.

Inflammation-induced S100A8 activates Id3 and promotes colorectal tumorigenesis.

Zhang X(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Ai F(1,)(5), Li X(1,)(5), She X(6), Li N(1,)(5), Tang
A(1,)(5), Qin Z(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Ye Q(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Tian L(1,)(5), Li
G(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), Shen S(1,)(5), Ma J(2,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (2)Cancer Research Institute, Central South
University, Changsha, China. (3)The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School 
of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health; Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer
Invasion, Ministry of Education, Changsha, China. (5)Hunan Key Laboratory of
Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Changsha, China. (6)Department of
Pathology, the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
China.

The aberrant expression of S100A8 and S100A9 is linked to nonresolving
inflammation and ultimately to carcinogenesis, whereas the underlying mechanism
that allows inflammation to progress to specific cancer types remains unknown.
Here, we report that S100A8 was induced by inflammation and then promoted
colorectal tumorigenesis downstream by activating Id3 (inhibitor of
differentiation 3). Using gene expression profiling and immunohistochemistry, we 
found that both S100A8 and S100A9 were upregulated in the chemically-induced
colitis-associated cancer mouse model and in human colorectal cancer specimens.
Furthermore, we showed that S100A8 and S100A9 acted as chemoattractant proteins
by recruiting macrophages, promoting the proliferation and invasion of colon
cancer cell, as well as spurring the cycle that culminates in the acceleration of
cancer metastasis in a nude mouse model. S100A8 regulated colon cancer cell cycle
and proliferation by inducing Id3 expression while inhibiting p21. Id3 expression
was regulated by Smad5, which was directly phosphorylated by Akt1. Our study
revealed a novel mechanism in which inflammation-induced S100A8 promoted
colorectal tumorigenesis by acting upstream to activate the Akt1-Smad5-Id3 axis.

© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 26135667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Gene Expr Patterns. 2015 Sep-Nov;19(1-2):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.05.004.
Epub 2015 Jun 21.

Differential expression of id genes and their potential regulator znf238 in
zebrafish adult neural progenitor cells and neurons suggests distinct functions
in adult neurogenesis.

Diotel N(1), Beil T(2), Strähle U(2), Rastegar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus Nord, Institute of Toxicology and
Genetics, Karlsruhe, Germany; Inserm, UMR 1188 Diabète athérothrombose Thérapies 
Réunion Océan Indien (DéTROI), Plateforme CYROI, Sainte-Clotilde, F-97490,
France; Université de La Réunion, UMR 1188, Sainte-Clotilde, F-97490, France.
Electronic address: nicolas.diotel@univ-reunion.fr. (2)Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Campus Nord, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe,
Germany. (3)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus Nord, Institute of
Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe, Germany. Electronic address:
Sepand.Rastegar@kit.edu.

Teleost fish display a remarkable ability to generate new neurons and to repair
brain lesions during adulthood. They are, therefore, a very popular model to
investigate the molecular mechanisms of constitutive and induced neurogenesis in 
adult vertebrates. In this study, we investigated the expression patterns of
inhibitor of DNA binding (id) genes and of their potential transcriptional
repressor, znf238, in the whole brain of adult zebrafish. We show that while id1 
is exclusively expressed in ventricular cells in the whole brain, id2a, id3 and
id4 genes are expressed in broader areas. Interestingly, znf238 was also detected
in these regions, its expression overlapping with id2a, id3 and id4 expression.
Further detailed characterization of the id-expressing cells demonstrated that
(a) id1 is expressed in type 1 and type 2 neural progenitors as previously
published, (b) id2a in type 1, 2 and 3 neural progenitors, (c) id3 in type 3
neural progenitors and (d) id4 in postmitotic neurons. Our data provide a
detailed map of id and znf238 expression in the brain of adult zebrafish,
supplying a framework for studies of id genes function during adult neurogenesis 
and brain regeneration in the zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26107416  [PubMed - in process]


35. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 17;117(3):e28-39. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.306044. Epub
2015 Jun 16.

B-1b Cells Secrete Atheroprotective IgM and Attenuate Atherosclerosis.

Rosenfeld SM(1), Perry HM(1), Gonen A(1), Prohaska TA(1), Srikakulapu P(1),
Grewal S(1), Das D(1), McSkimming C(1), Taylor AM(1), Tsimikas S(1), Bender
TP(1), Witztum JL(1), McNamara CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Center (S.M.R., H.M.P., P.S., S.G., D.D.,
C.M., C.A.M.), Department of Pathology (S.M.R., H.M.P.), Department of Medicine, 
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine (A.M.T., C.A.M.), and Beirne B. Carter Center
for Immunology Research (T.P.B., C.A.M.), University of Virginia,
Charlottesville; and Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and
Metabolism (A.G., T.A.P., J.L.W.) and Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology (S.T.), University of California San Diego, La Jolla. (2)From the
Cardiovascular Research Center (S.M.R., H.M.P., P.S., S.G., D.D., C.M., C.A.M.), 
Department of Pathology (S.M.R., H.M.P.), Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine (A.M.T., C.A.M.), and Beirne B. Carter Center for
Immunology Research (T.P.B., C.A.M.), University of Virginia, Charlottesville;
and Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism (A.G.,
T.A.P., J.L.W.) and Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology (S.T.),
University of California San Diego, La Jolla. cam8c@virginia.edu.

RATIONALE: B cells contribute to atherosclerosis through subset-specific
mechanisms. Whereas some controversy exists about the role of B-2 cells, B-1a
cells are atheroprotective because of secretion of atheroprotective IgM
antibodies independent of antigen. B-1b cells, a unique subset of B-1 cells that 
respond specifically to T-cell-independent antigens, have not been studied within
the context of atherosclerosis.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether B-1b cells produce atheroprotective IgM
antibodies and function to protect against diet-induced atherosclerosis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrate that B-1b cells are sufficient to produce IgM
antibodies against oxidation-specific epitopes on low-density lipoprotein both in
vitro and in vivo. In addition, we demonstrate that B-1b cells provide
atheroprotection after adoptive transfer into B- and T-cell deficient
(Rag1(-/-)Apoe(-/-)) hosts. We implicate inhibitor of differentiation 3 (Id3) in 
the regulation of B-1b cells as B-cell-specific Id3 knockout mice
(Id3(BKO)Apoe(-/-)) have increased numbers of B-1b cells systemically, increased 
titers of oxidation-specific epitope-reactive IgM antibodies, and significantly
reduced diet-induced atherosclerosis when compared with Id3(WT)Apoe(-/-)
controls. Finally, we report that the presence of a homozygous single nucleotide 
polymorphism in ID3 in humans that attenuates Id3 function is associated with an 
increased percentage of circulating B-1 cells and
anti-malondialdehyde-low-density lipoprotein IgM suggesting clinical relevance.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide novel evidence that B-1b cells produce
atheroprotective oxidation-specific epitope-reactive IgM antibodies and protect
against atherosclerosis in mice and suggest that similar mechanisms may occur in 
humans.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4527334 [Available on 2016-07-17]
PMID: 26082558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 May 30;17:147. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0639-9.

Yes-associated protein (YAP) is a negative regulator of chondrogenesis in
mesenchymal stem cells.

Karystinou A(1), Roelofs AJ(2), Neve A(3,)(4), Cantatore FP(5), Wackerhage H(6), 
De Bari C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Programme, Institute of Medical Sciences, University 
of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.
alexandrakarystinou@hotmail.com. (2)Musculoskeletal Research Programme, Institute
of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD,
UK. a.roelofs@abdn.ac.uk. (3)Musculoskeletal Research Programme, Institute of
Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, AB25 2ZD, UK.
anna.neve@unifg.it. (4)Rheumatology Clinic, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University of Foggia, Via Napoli 25, 71122, Foggia, Italy.
anna.neve@unifg.it. (5)Rheumatology Clinic, Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University of Foggia, Via Napoli 25, 71122, Foggia, Italy.
francescopaolo.cantatore@unifg.it. (6)Musculoskeletal Research Programme,
Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen,
AB25 2ZD, UK. h.wackerhage@abdn.ac.uk. (7)Musculoskeletal Research Programme,
Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen,
AB25 2ZD, UK. c.debari@abdn.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: The control of differentiation of mesenchymal stromal/stem cells
(MSCs) is crucial for tissue engineering strategies employing MSCs. The purpose
of this study was to investigate whether the transcriptional co-factor
Yes-associated protein (YAP) regulates chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs.
METHODS: Expression of total YAP, its paralogue transcriptional co-activator with
PDZ-binding motif (TAZ), and individual YAP transcript variants during in vitro
chondrogenesis of human MSCs was determined by quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). YAP expression was confirmed by western
blotting. To determine the effect of high YAP activity on chondrogenesis,
C3H10T1/2 MSC-like cells were transduced with human (h)YAP and treated in
micromass with bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2). Chondrogenic differentiation
was assessed by alcian blue staining and expression of chondrocyte-lineage genes.
BMP signalling was determined by detection of pSmad1,5,8 by western blotting and 
expression of BMP target genes by quantitative RT-PCR. Finally, YAP and pYAP were
detected in mouse embryo hindlimbs by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: YAP, but not TAZ, was downregulated during in vitro chondrogenesis of
human MSCs. One of the YAP transcript variants, however, was upregulated in
high-density micromass culture. Overexpression of hYAP in murine C3H10T1/2 MSCs
inhibited chondrogenic differentiation. High YAP activity in these cells
decreased Smad1,5,8 phosphorylation and expression of the BMP target genes
Inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation (Id)1, Id2 and Id3 in response to BMP-2.
In developing mouse limbs, Yap was nuclear in the perichondrium while mostly
phosphorylated and cytosolic in cells of the cartilage anlage, suggesting
downregulation of Yap co-transcriptional activity during physiological
chondrogenesis in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that YAP is a negative regulator of
chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs. Downregulation of YAP is required for
chondrogenesis through derepression of chondrogenic signalling. Therapeutic
targeting of YAP to promote cartilage repair and prevent secondary osteoarthritis
is an exciting prospect in rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4449558
PMID: 26025096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Discov Med. 2015 Apr;19(105):311-25.

BMP4 promotes human Sertoli cell proliferation via Smad1/5 and ID2/3 pathway and 
its abnormality is associated with azoospermia.

Hai Y(1), Sun M(1), Niu M(1), Yuan Q(1), Guo Y(1), Li Z(2), He Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem
Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200127, China. (2)Department of Urology, Ren Ji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute of
Andrology, Shanghai Human Sperm Bank, Shanghai 200001, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell
Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200127, China; Department of Urology, Ren Ji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute of
Andrology, Shanghai Human Sperm Bank, Shanghai 200001, China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai 200127,
China; and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai 200025,
China.

Sertoli cell plays critical roles in regulating testis development and
spermatogenesis. Any change in the number or biological functions of Sertoli
cells can affect the normal formation of spermatozoa. However, the roles and
molecular mechanisms of factors in controlling the fate determinations of human
Sertoli cells and underlying male infertility remain unknown. Here we have for
the first time explored the function and signaling pathway of BMP4 in regulating 
adult human Sertoli cells and their association with non-obstructive azoospermia 
(NOA) patients. Immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry revealed that BMP4
and its multiple receptors were present in human Sertoli cells. Cell
proliferation and BrdU incorporation assays showed that BMP4 promoted DNA
synthesis and proliferation of Sertoli cells. In contrast, BMP4 antagonist noggin
and BMP4 knockdown reduced the division of Sertoli cells. Moreover, BMP4
knockdown inhibited the synthesis of FGF2, SCF, zonula occludens 1, and claudin
11 but enhanced p27kip1 transcription. BMP4 activated Smad1/5 phosphorylation and
upregulated ID2 and ID3 transcription, whereas noggin counteracted these
increases. Significantly, tissue arrays disclosed that overexpression of BMP4 may
be associated with Sertoli cell-only syndrome and maturation arrest in
spermatogonia or spermatocytes. BMP4 was identified as the first autocrine factor
that regulates the proliferation and protein synthesis of human Sertoli cells via
Smad1/5 and ID2/3 and its abnormality is associated with human non-obstructive
azoospermia patients. This study thus provides novel insights into molecular
mechanism underlying adult human Sertoli cell growth and offers new targets for
gene therapy of male infertility.

PMID: 25977194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec;230(12):2881-90. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25038.

Control of the Normal and Pathological Development of Neural Stem and Progenitor 
Cells by the PC3/Tis21/Btg2 and Btg1 Genes.

Micheli L(1), Ceccarelli M(1), Farioli-Vecchioli S(1), Tirone F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, National Research Council,
Fondazione S.Lucia, Rome, Italy.

The PC3/Tis21/Btg2 and Btg1 genes are transcriptional cofactors belonging to the 
Btg/Tob family, which regulate the development of several cell types, including
neural precursors. We summarize here the actions of these genes on neural
precursors in the adult neurogenic niches and the cognitive defects associated
when their expression is altered. We consider also recent findings implicating
them in neural and non-neural tumors, since common developmental mechanisms are
involved. PC3/Tis21 is required for the regulation of the maturation of stem and 
progenitor cells in the adult dentate gyrus and subventricular zone (SVZ), by
controlling both their exit from the cell cycle and the ensuing terminal
differentiation. Such actions are effected by regulating the expression of
several genes, including cyclin D1, BMP4, Id3. In cerebellar precursors, however,
PC3/Tis21 regulates chiefly their migration rather than proliferation or
differentiation, with important implications for the onset of medulloblastoma,
the cerebellar tumor. In fact PC3/Tis21 is a medulloblastoma-suppressor, as its
overexpression in cerebellar precursors inhibits this tumor; PC3/Tis21 shows
anti-tumor activity also in non-neural tumors. Btg1 presents a different
functional profile, as it controls proliferation in adult stem/progenitor cells
of dentate gyrus and SVZ, where is required to maintain their self-renewal and
quiescence, but is apparently devoid of a direct control of their terminal
differentiation or migration. Notably, physical exercise in Btg1-null mice
rescues the loss of proliferative capability occurring in older stem cells. Both 
genes could be further investigated as therapeutical targets, namely, Btg1 in the
process of aging and PC3/Tis21 as a tumor-suppressor.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25967096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 3;462(3):208-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.04.117. Epub 2015 May 5.

BTG/Tob family members Tob1 and Tob2 inhibit proliferation of mouse embryonic
stem cells via Id3 mRNA degradation.

Chen Y(1), Wang C(1), Wu J(2), Li L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China; Peking University Stem
Cell Research Center, China National Center for International Research, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China; SARI Center for Stem
Cell and Nanomedicine, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200120, China. (2)SARI Center for Stem Cell
and Nanomedicine, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200120, China. (3)Department of Cell Biology,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, China; Peking University Stem Cell Research Center, China
National Center for International Research, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China; SARI Center for Stem Cell and Nanomedicine,
Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai 200120, China. Electronic address: lils@sari.ac.cn.

The mammalian BTG/Tob family is a group of proteins with anti-proliferative
ability, and there are six members including BTG1, BTG2/PC3/Tis21, BTG3/ANA,
BTG4/PC3B, Tob1/Tob and Tob2. Among them, Tob subfamily members, specifically
Tob1/Tob and Tob2, have the most extensive C-terminal regions. As previously
reported, overexpression of BTG/Tob proteins is associated with the inhibition of
G1 to S-phase cell cycle progression and decreased cell proliferation in a
variety of cell types. Tob subfamily proteins have similar anti-proliferative
effects on cell cycle progression in cultured tumor cells. An important
unresolved question is whether or not they have function in rapidly proliferating
cells, such as embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Tob1 and Tob2 were expressed
ubiquitously in mouse ESCs (mESCs), suggesting a possible role in early embryonic
development and mESCs. To address the above question and explore the possible
functions of the Tob subfamily in ESCs, we established ESCs from different
genotypic knockout inner cell mass (ICM). We found that Tob1(-/-), Tob2(-/-), and
Tob1/2 double knockout (DKO, Tob1(-/-) & Tob2(-/-)) ESCs grew faster than wild
type (WT) ESCs without losing pluripotency, and we provide a possible mechanistic
explanation for these observations: Tob1 and Tob2 inhibit the cell cycle via
degradation of Id3 mRNA, which is a set of directly targeted genes of BMP4
signaling in mESCs that play critical roles in the maintenance of ESC properties.
Together, our data suggest that BTG/Tob family protein Tob1 and Tob2 regulation
cell proliferation does not compromise the basic properties of mESCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25951976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 May;14(5):1192-201. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0836.
Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Endostatin has ATPase activity, which mediates its antiangiogenic and antitumor
activities.

Wang S(1), Lu XA(1), Liu P(2), Fu Y(1), Jia L(1), Zhan S(2), Luo Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)The National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Protein Therapeutics,
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Beijing Key
Laboratory for Protein Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, China. Cancer Biology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. (2)The National Engineering Laboratory for
Anti-tumor Protein Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China. (3)The National Engineering Laboratory for Anti-tumor Protein
Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
Beijing Key Laboratory for Protein Therapeutics, School of Life Sciences,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Cancer Biology Laboratory, School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. yluo@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Endostatin is an endogenous angiogenesis inhibitor with broad-spectrum antitumor 
activities. Although the molecular mechanisms of endostatin have been extensively
explored, the intrinsic biochemical characteristics of endostatin are not
completely understood. Here, we revealed for the first time that endostatin
embedded novel ATPase activity. Moreover, mutagenesis study showed that the
ATPase activity of endostatin mutants positively correlated with effects on
endothelial cell activities and tumor growth. E-M, an endostatin mutant with
higher ATPase activity than that of wild-type (WT) endostatin, significantly
increased endostatin-mediated inhibitory effects on endothelial cell
proliferation, migration, tube formation, and adhesion. In vivo study showed that
E-M displayed enhanced antitumor effects compared with WT. On the other hand,
K96A, K96R, and E176A, endostatin mutants with lower ATPase activities than that 
of WT, showed reduced or comparable effects on targeting both in vitro
endothelial cell activities and in vivo tumor angiogenesis and tumor growth.
Furthermore, endostatin and its mutants exhibited distinct abilities in
regulations of gene expression (Id1, Id3), cell signaling (Erk, p38, and Src
phosphorylation), and intracellular ATP levels. Collectively, our study
demonstrates that endostatin has novel ATPase activity, which mediates its
antiangiogenic and antitumor activities, suggesting that construction of
endostatin analogues with high ATPase activity may provide a new direction for
the development of more potent antiangiogenic drugs.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25788476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochimie. 2015 May;112:139-50. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.03.006. Epub 2015 Mar 
13.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) acts as an inhibitor of ID-1, -2 and -3 and 
promotes basic helix loop helix (bHLH) E47 DNA binding and transcriptional
activity.

Sharma P(1), Chinaranagari S(1), Chaudhary J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta
University, 223 James P. Brawley Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA, 30314, USA. (2)Center for
Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta University, 223 James 
P. Brawley Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA, 30314, USA. Electronic address:
jchaudhary@cau.edu.

The four known ID proteins (ID1-4, Inhibitor of Differentiation) share a
homologous helix loop helix (HLH) domain and act as dominant negative regulators 
of basic-HLH transcription factors. ID proteins also interact with many non-bHLH 
proteins in complex networks. The expression of ID proteins is increasingly
observed in many cancers. Whereas ID-1, ID-2 and ID-3, are generally considered
as tumor promoters, ID4 on the contrary has emerged as a tumor suppressor. In
this study we demonstrate that ID4 heterodimerizes with ID-1, -2 and -3 and
promote bHLH DNA binding, essentially acting as an inhibitor of inhibitors of
differentiation proteins. Interaction of ID4 was observed with ID1, ID2 and ID3
that was dependent on intact HLH domain of ID4. Interaction with bHLH protein E47
required almost 3 fold higher concentration of ID4 as compared to ID1.
Furthermore, inhibition of E47 DNA binding by ID1 was restored by ID4 in an EMSA 
binding assay. ID4 and ID1 were also colocalized in prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP. The alpha helix forming alanine stretch N-terminal, unique to HLH ID4
domain was required for optimum interaction. Ectopic expression of ID4 in DU145
prostate cancer line promoted E47 dependent expression of CDKNI p21. Thus
counteracting the biological activities of ID-1, -2 and -3 by forming inactive
heterodimers appears to be a novel mechanism of action of ID4. These results
could have far reaching consequences in developing strategies to target ID
proteins for cancer therapy and understanding biologically relevant
ID-interactions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4402281 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25778840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2015 Jul;29(7):305-10. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21699. Epub 2015
Mar 16.

Microcystin-LR Alters the Gene Transcription and Activities of Iodothyronine
Deiodinases in the Hepatic Cells of Grass Carp (Ctenopharyngodon Idella).

Liu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Tang R(4,)(5,)(6), Yin X(1,)(2,)(3), Tong N(1,)(2,)(3), Li
D(7,)(8,)(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070,
People's Republic of China. (2)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation
Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan, 430070,
People's Republic of China. (4)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China. tangrong@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(5)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei Province,
Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China. tangrong@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (6)Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan, 430070,
People's Republic of China. tangrong@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (7)College of Fisheries,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China.
ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (8)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center
of Hubei Province, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China.
ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (9)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry
of Agriculture, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China. ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. 
(10)Life Science College, Hunan University of Arts and Science, Changde, 415000, 
People's Republic of China. ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

This study investigated the gene transcription and activities of iodothyronine
deiodinases in the hepatic cell line of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella)
exposed in vitro to 1, 10, 100, and 1000 µg /L microcystin-LR (MC-LR) for either 
24 or 48 h. The cell viabilities were not significantly affected by MC-LR
exposure. The mRNA expressions of type I iodothyronine deiodinase (ID1) and type 
<U+2161> iodothyronine deiodinase (ID2) reduced after the exposure to MC-LR. However,
MC-LR exposure led to the increase in the mRNA expression of type <U+2162> iodothyronine
deiodinase (ID3). Moreover, significant ID1 and ID2 activities decline were also 
observed in the hepatic cell line of grass carp exposed to MC-LR, and the
activity of ID3 increased significantly in the MC-LR treated groups. The results 
suggested that MC-LR could alter the gene transcription or activities of IDs in
the hepatic cell line of grass carp.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25778693  [PubMed - in process]


43. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 16;6:6431. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7431.

ERK phosphorylation and miR-181a expression modulate activation of human memory
TH17 cells.

Mele F(1), Basso C(1), Leoni C(1), Aschenbrenner D(1), Becattini S(2), Latorre
D(1), Lanzavecchia A(2), Sallusto F(1), Monticelli S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, via
Vincenzo Vela 6, CH-6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland. (2)1] Institute for Research in
Biomedicine, Università della Svizzera italiana, via Vincenzo Vela 6, CH-6500
Bellinzona, Switzerland [2] Institute of Microbiology, ETH Zurich,
Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

T helper (TH) cell polarization during priming is modulated by a number of
signals, but whether polarization to a given phenotype also influences recall
responses of memory TH cells is relatively unknown. Here we show that miR-181a is
selectively induced in both human and mouse naive T cells differentiating into
the TH17, but not TH1 or TH2 subset. In human memory TH17 cells, miR-181a
regulates responses to cognate antigens through modulation of ERK
phosphorylation. By enhancing the signalling cascade from the T-cell receptor,
such molecular network reduces the threshold of TH17 cell activation. Moreover,
at a late time point, the same network induces a self-regulatory mechanism
dependent on ID3, a negative regulator of transcription factors that control RORC
expression, thus modulating TH17 activity. Our results demonstrate that the
phenotype acquired by TH cells during priming contributes to their threshold of
activation to secondary antigenic stimulations, thus influencing memory
responses.

PMID: 25775432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Med. 2015 Jun;4(6):914-24. doi: 10.1002/cam4.427. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

Id3 induces an Elk-1-caspase-8-dependent apoptotic pathway in squamous carcinoma 
cells.

Chen YS(1), Aubee J(1), DiVito KA(1), Zhou H(1), Zhang W(1), Chou FP(2),
Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Rosenthal DS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University, Washington, District of Columbia, 20057. (2)Institute of Biochemistry
and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(3)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington,
District of Columbia, 20057.

Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA-binding (Id) proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors. The Id protein family (Id1-Id4) mediates tissue
homeostasis by regulating cellular processes including differentiation,
proliferation, and apoptosis. Ids typically function as dominant negative HLH
proteins, which bind other HLH proteins and sequester them away from DNA promoter
regions. Previously, we have found that Id3 induced apoptosis in immortalized
human keratinocytes upon UVB exposure, consistent with its role as a tumor
suppressor. To investigate the role of Id3 in malignant squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) cells (A431), a tetracycline-regulated inducible system was used to induce 
Id3 in cell culture and mouse xenograft models. We found that upon Id3 induction,
there was a decrease in cell number under low serum conditions, as well as in
soft agar. Microarray, RT-PCR, immunoblot, siRNA, and inhibitor studies revealed 
that Id3 induced expression of Elk-1, an E-twenty-six (ETS)-domain transcription 
factor, inducing procaspase-8 expression and activation. Id3 deletion mutants
revealed that 80 C-terminal amino acids, including the HLH, are important for
Id3-induced apoptosis. In a mouse xenograft model, Id3 induction decreased tumor 
size by 30%. Using immunofluorescent analysis, we determined that the tumor size 
decrease was also mediated through apoptosis. Furthermore, we show that Id3
synergizes with 5-FU and cisplatin therapies for nonmelanoma skin cancer cells.
Our studies have shown a molecular mechanism by which Id3 induces apoptosis in
SCC, and this information can potentially be used to develop new treatments for
SCC patients.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4472214
PMID: 25693514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;35(8):1462-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01084-14. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

ShcA regulates thymocyte proliferation through specific transcription factors and
a c-Abl-dependent signaling axis.

Trampont PC(1), Zhang L(1), Giles AJ(1), Walk SF(1), Gu JJ(2), Pendergast AM(2), 
Ravichandran KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology and Center for Cell 
Clearance, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA. 
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer
Biology and Center for Cell Clearance, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA Ravi@virginia.edu.

Signaling via the pre-T-cell receptor (pre-TCR), along with associated signals
from Notch and chemokine receptors, regulates the ß-selection checkpoint that
operates on CD4(-) CD8(-) doubly negative (DN) thymocytes. Since many
hematopoietic malignancies arise at the immature developmental stages of
lymphocytes, understanding the signal integration and how specific signaling
molecules and distal transcription factors regulate cellular outcomes is of
importance. Here, a series of molecular and genetic approaches revealed that the 
ShcA adapter protein critically influences proliferation and differentiation
during ß-selection. We found that ShcA functions downstream of the pre-TCR and
p56(Lck) and show that ShcA is important for extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK)-dependent upregulation of transcription factors early growth factor 
1 (Egr1) and Egr3 in immature thymocytes and, in turn, of the expression and
function of the Id3 and E2A helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins. ShcA also
contributes to pre-TCR-mediated induction of c-Myc and additional cell cycle
regulators. Moreover, using an unbiased Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast) screen, 
we identified c-Abl as a binding partner of phosphorylated ShcA and demonstrated 
the relevance of the ShcA-c-Abl interaction in immature thymocytes. Collectively,
these data identify multiple modes by which ShcA can fine-tune the development of
early thymocytes, including a previously unappreciated ShcA-c-Abl axis that
regulates thymocyte proliferation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4372706
PMID: 25691660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Genes Dev. 2015 Feb 15;29(4):409-25. doi: 10.1101/gad.255331.114.

The E-Id protein axis modulates the activities of the PI3K-AKT-mTORC1-Hif1a and
c-myc/p19Arf pathways to suppress innate variant TFH cell development, thymocyte 
expansion, and lymphomagenesis.

Miyazaki M(1), Miyazaki K(1), Chen S(1), Chandra V(1), Wagatsuma K(2), Agata
Y(2), Rodewald HR(3), Saito R(4), Chang AN(5), Varki N(6), Kawamoto H(7), Murre
C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA; (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Shiga University of Medical School, Shiga 520-2192, Japan; (3)Division
of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany; (4)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA; (5)Center for Computational Biology, Institute for 
Genomic Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093, USA; (6)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA; (7)Department of Immunology, Institute for Frontier
Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (8)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093, USA; murre@biomail.ucsd.edu.

It is now well established that the E and Id protein axis regulates multiple
steps in lymphocyte development. However, it remains unknown how E and Id
proteins mechanistically enforce and maintain the naïve T-cell fate. Here we show
that Id2 and Id3 suppressed the development and expansion of innate variant
follicular helper T (TFH) cells. Innate variant TFH cells required major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-like signaling and were associated with 
germinal center B cells. We found that Id2 and Id3 induced Foxo1 and Foxp1
expression to antagonize the activation of a TFH transcription signature. We show
that Id2 and Id3 acted upstream of the Hif1a/Foxo/AKT/mTORC1 pathway as well as
the c-myc/p19Arf module to control cellular expansion. We found that mice
depleted for Id2 and Id3 expression developed colitis and aß T-cell lymphomas.
Lymphomas depleted for Id2 and Id3 expression displayed elevated levels of c-myc,
whereas p19Arf abundance declined. Transcription signatures of Id2- and
Id3-depleted lymphomas revealed similarities to genetic deficiencies associated
with Burkitt lymphoma. We propose that, in response to antigen receptor and/or
cytokine signaling, the E-Id protein axis modulates the activities of the
PI3K-AKT-mTORC1-Hif1a and c-myc/p19Arf pathways to control cellular expansion and
homeostatic proliferation.

© 2015 Miyazaki et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4335296
PMID: 25691468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Microvasc Res. 2015 Mar;98:126-38. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2015.01.006. Epub 2015 Feb 
7.

ID3 contributes to the acquisition of molecular stem cell-like signature in
microvascular endothelial cells: its implication for understanding microvascular 
diseases.

Das JK(1), Voelkel NF(2), Felty Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health Florida International
University, Miami, FL, USA. (2)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine Division and 
Victoria Johnson Center for Obstructive Lung Diseases, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA, USA. (3)Department of Environmental & Occupational
Health Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA. Electronic address:
Feltyq@fiu.edu.

While significant progress has been made to advance our knowledge of
microvascular lesion formation, yet the investigation of how stem-like cells may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of microvascular diseases is still in its infancy.
We assessed whether the inhibitor of DNA binding and differentiation 3 (ID3)
contributes to the acquisition of a molecular stem cell-like signature in
microvascular endothelial cells. The effects of stable ID3 overexpression and
SU5416 treatment - a chemical inducer of microvascular lesions, had on the
stemness signature were determined by flow cytometry, immunoblot, and
immunohistochemistry. Continuous ID3 expression produced a molecular stemness
signature consisting of CD133(+) VEGFR3(+) CD34(+) cells. Cells exposed to SU5416
showed positive protein expression of ID3, VEGFR3, CD34 and increased expression 
of pluripotent transcription factors Oct-4 and Sox-2. ID3 overexpressing cells
supported the formation of a 3-D microvascular lesion co-cultured with smooth
muscle cells. In addition, in vivo microvascular lesions from SuHx rodent model
showed an increased expression of ID3, VEGFR3, and Pyk2 similar to SU5416 treated
human endothelial cells. Further investigations into how normal and stem-like
cells utilize ID3 may open up new avenues for a better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms which are underlying the pathological development of
microvascular diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4361266
PMID: 25665868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Toxins (Basel). 2015 Jan 30;7(2):337-52. doi: 10.3390/toxins7020337.

Subacute microcystin-LR exposure alters the metabolism of thyroid hormones in
juvenile zebrafish (Danio Rerio).

Liu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Tang R(4,)(5,)(6), Li D(7,)(8,)(9,)(10), Hu Q(11,)(12,)(13),
Wang Y(14).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
liuzidong0202@163.com. (2)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center 
of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China. liuzidong0202@163.com. (3)Key Laboratory 
of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China.
liuzidong0202@163.com. (4)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan 430070, China. tangrong@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (5)Freshwater Aquaculture
Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China.
tangrong@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (6)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding,
Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China. tangrong@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(7)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (8)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center
of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China. ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (9)Key Laboratory
of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China.
ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (10)Life Science College, Hunan University of Arts and
Science, Changde 415000, China. ldp@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (11)College of Fisheries,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
huqinggw@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (12)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation
Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China. huqinggw@webmail.hzau.edu.cn.
(13)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 
430070, China. huqinggw@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (14)College of Fisheries, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. wyingale@gmail.com.

Microcystin-LR (MC-LR) has been detected extensively in the aquatic environment
and has the potential to disturb the thyroid endocrine system. However, limited
information is available on the effects of subacute MC-LR exposure on fish
thyroid hormone (TH) metabolism. In the present study, juvenile zebrafish (Danio 
rerio) were exposed to MC-LR at environmentally relevant concentrations (0, 1, 5,
and 25 µg/L) for 28 days. Whole-body TH content and thyroid follicle histology
were used as direct endpoints to assess thyroid disruption. The activities of
iodothyronine deiodinases (IDs) and the transcription of selected genes
associated with TH synthesis were also investigated to study the underlying
mechanisms of endocrine disruption. Exposure of zebrafish to MC-LR significantly 
increased whole-body thyroxine (T4) content but decreased whole-body
triiodothyronine (T3) content. We also observed hypertrophy and hyperplasia of
the thyroid follicle epithelial cells, as well as up-regulation of
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), thyroid
peroxidase (TPO), and transthyretin (TTR) genes. The decreases in ID1 and ID2
activities coupled with an increase in ID3 activity were observed in MC-LR
treatment groups. These results demonstrate that exposure to MC-LR at
environmental concentrations results in the disturbance of TH homeostasis by
disrupting the synthesis and conversion of THs.

PMCID: PMC4344627
PMID: 25647779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cancer. 2015 Feb 3;14:30. doi: 10.1186/s12943-014-0286-9.

ID helix-loop-helix proteins as determinants of cell survival in B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells in vitro.

Weiler S(1), Ademokun JA(2), Norton JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex, CO4
3SQ, UK. Sarah.Weiler@ibbl.lu. (2)Department of Haematology, Ipswich Hospital NHS
Trust, Heath Road, Ipswich, Suffolk, IP4 5PD, UK.
Debo.Ademokun@ipswichhospital.nhs.uk. (3)School of Biological Sciences,
University of Essex, Colchester, Essex, CO4 3SQ, UK. jnorton@essex.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Members of the inhibitor of DNA-binding (ID) family of
helix-loop-helix proteins have been causally implicated in the pathogenesis of
several types of B-cell lineage malignancy, either on the basis of mutation or by
altered expression. B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia encompasses a
heterogeneous group of disorders and is the commonest leukaemia type in the
Western world. In this study, we have investigated the pathobiological functions 
of the ID2 and ID3 proteins in this disease with an emphasis on their role in
regulating leukemic cell death/survival.
METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis of microarray gene expression data was used to
investigate expression of ID2/ID3 in leukemic versus normal B cells, their
association with clinical course of disease and molecular sub-type and to
reconstruct a gene regulatory network using the 'maximum information coefficient'
(MIC) for target gene inference. In vitro cultured primary leukemia cells, either
in isolation or co-cultured with accessory vascular endothelial cells, were used 
to investigate ID2/ID3 protein expression by western blotting and to assess the
cytotoxic response of different drugs (fludarabine, chlorambucil, ethacrynic
acid) by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay.
ID2/ID3 protein levels in primary leukemia cells and in MEC1 cells were
manipulated by transduction with siRNA reagents.
RESULTS: Datamining showed that the expression profiles of ID2 and ID3 are
associated with distinct pathobiological features of disease and implicated both 
genes in regulating cell death/survival by targeting multiple non-overlapping
sets of apoptosis effecter genes. Consistent with microarray data, the overall
pattern of ID2/ID3 protein expression in relation to cell death/survival
responses of primary leukemia cells was suggestive of a pro-survival function for
both ID proteins. This was confirmed by siRNA knock-down experiments in MEC1
cells and in primary leukemia cells, but with variability in the dependence of
leukemic cells from different patients on ID protein expression for cell
survival. Vascular endothelial cells rescued leukemia cells from spontaneous and 
cytotoxic drug-induced cell death at least in part, via an ID protein-coupled
redox-dependent mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides evidence for a pro-survival function of the
ID2/ID3 proteins in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells and also highlights these 
proteins as potential determinants of the pathobiology of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC4320821
PMID: 25644253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Diabetologia. 2015 Apr;58(4):758-70. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3503-1. Epub 2015
Jan 31.

Inhibitor of differentiation proteins protect against oxidative stress by
regulating the antioxidant-mitochondrial response in mouse beta cells.

Bensellam M(1), Montgomery MK, Luzuriaga J, Chan JY, Laybutt DR.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Oxidative stress is implicated in beta cell glucotoxicity in
type 2 diabetes. Inhibitor of differentiation (ID) proteins are transcriptional
regulators induced by hyperglycaemia in islets, but the mechanisms involved and
their role in beta cells are not clear. Here we investigated whether or not
oxidative stress regulates ID levels in beta cells and the role of ID proteins in
beta cells during oxidative stress.
METHODS: MIN6 cells were cultured in H2O2 or ribose to induce oxidative stress.
ID1, ID3 and small MAF proteins (MAFF, MAFG and MAFK) were inhibited using small 
interfering RNA. Isolated islets from Id1(-/-), Id3(-/-) and diabetic db/db mice 
were used.
RESULTS: ID1-4 expression was upregulated in vivo in the islets of diabetic db/db
mice and stimulated in vitro by ribose and H2O2. Id1/3 inhibition reduced the
expression of multiple antioxidant genes and potentiated oxidative stress-induced
apoptosis. This finding was associated with increased levels of intracellular
reactive oxygen species, altered mitochondrial morphology and reduced expression 
of Tfam, which encodes a mitochondrial transcription factor, and respiratory
chain components. Id1/3 inhibition also reduced the expression of small MAF
transcription factors (MafF, MafG and MafK), interacting partners of nuclear
factor, erythroid 2-like 2 (NFE2L2), master regulator of the antioxidant
response. Inhibition of small MAFs reduced the expression of antioxidant genes
and potentiated oxidative stress-induced apoptosis, thus recapitulating the
effects of Id1/3 inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study identifies IDs as a novel family of
oxidative stress-responsive proteins in beta cells. IDs are crucial regulators of
the adaptive antioxidant-mitochondrial response that promotes beta cell survival 
during oxidative stress through a novel link to the NFE2L2-small MAF pathway.

PMID: 25636209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Mar 15;191(6):693-703. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201410-1802OC.

Sex affects bone morphogenetic protein type II receptor signaling in pulmonary
artery smooth muscle cells.

Mair KM(1), Yang XD, Long L, White K, Wallace E, Ewart MA, Docherty CK, Morrell
NW, MacLean MR.

Author information: 
(1)1 College of Medical and Veterinary Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
United Kingdom; and.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Mar 15;191(6):612-3.

RATIONALE: Major pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) registries report a
greater incidence of PAH in women; mutations in the bone morphogenic protein type
II receptor (BMPR-II) occur in approximately 80% of patients with heritable PAH
(hPAH).
OBJECTIVES: We addressed the hypothesis that women may be predisposed to PAH due 
to normally reduced basal BMPR-II signaling in human pulmonary artery smooth
muscle cells (hPASMCs).
METHODS: We examined the BMPR-II signaling pathway in hPASMCs derived from men
and women with no underlying cardiovascular disease (non-PAH hPASMCs). We also
determined the development of pulmonary hypertension in male and female mice
deficient in Smad1.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Platelet-derived growth factor, estrogen, and
serotonin induced proliferation only in non-PAH female hPASMCs. Female non-PAH
hPASMCs exhibited reduced messenger RNA and protein expression of BMPR-II, the
signaling intermediary Smad1, and the downstream genes, inhibitors of DNA binding
proteins, Id1 and Id3. Induction of phospho-Smad1/5/8 and Id protein by BMP4 was 
also reduced in female hPASMCs. BMP4 induced proliferation in female, but not
male, hPASMCs. However, small interfering RNA silencing of Smad1 invoked
proliferative responses to BMP4 in male hPASMCs. In male hPASMCs, estrogen
decreased messenger RNA and protein expression of Id genes. The estrogen
metabolite 4-hydroxyestradiol decreased phospho-Smad1/5/8 and Id expression in
female hPASMCs while increasing these in males commensurate with a decreased
proliferative effect in male hPASMCs. Female Smad1(+/-) mice developed pulmonary 
hypertension (reversed by ovariectomy).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that estrogen-driven suppression of BMPR-II signaling in
non-PAH hPASMCs derived from women contributes to a pro-proliferative phenotype
in hPASMCs that may predispose women to PAH.

PMCID: PMC4384779
PMID: 25608111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):7067-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.618694. Epub 2015
Jan 16.

MicroRNA MiR-199a-5p regulates smooth muscle cell proliferation and morphology by
targeting WNT2 signaling pathway.

Hashemi Gheinani A(1), Burkhard FC(2), Rehrauer H(3), Aquino Fournier C(3),
Monastyrskaya K(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Urology Research Laboratory, Department Clinical Research, University
of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland. (2)Department of Urology, University Hospital,
3010 Bern, Switzerland, and. (3)Functional Genomics Center Zurich, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland. (4)From the Urology Research Laboratory, Department Clinical
Research, University of Bern, 3010 Bern, Switzerland, monastyk@dkf.unibe.ch.

MicroRNA miR-199a-5p impairs tight junction formation, leading to increased
urothelial permeability in bladder pain syndrome. Now, using transcriptome
analysis in urothelial TEU-2 cells, we implicate it in the regulation of cell
cycle, cytoskeleton remodeling, TGF, and WNT signaling pathways. MiR-199a-5p is
highly expressed in the smooth muscle layer of the bladder, and we altered its
levels in bladder smooth muscle cells (SMCs) to validate the pathway analysis.
Inhibition of miR-199a-5p with antimiR increased SMC proliferation, reduced cell 
size, and up-regulated miR-199a-5p targets, including WNT2. Overexpression of
WNT2 protein or treating SMCs with recombinant WNT2 closely mimicked the
miR-199a-5p inhibition, whereas down-regulation of WNT2 in antimiR-expressing
SMCs with shRNA restored cell phenotype and proliferation rates. Overexpression
of miR-199a-5p in the bladder SMCs significantly increased cell size and
up-regulated SM22, SM a-actin, and SM myosin heavy chain mRNA and protein levels.
These changes as well as increased expression of ACTG2, TGFB1I1, and CDKN1A were 
mediated by up-regulation of the smooth muscle-specific transcriptional activator
myocardin at mRNA and protein levels. Myocardin-related transcription factor A
downstream targets Id3 and MYL9 were also induced. Up-regulation of myocardin was
accompanied by down-regulation of WNT-dependent inhibitory Krüppel-like
transcription factor 4 in miR-199a-5p-overexpressing cells. In contrast,
Krüppel-like transcription factor 4 was induced in antimiR-expressing cells
following the activation of WNT2 signaling, leading to repression of
myocardin-dependent genes. MiR-199a-5p plays a critical role in the WNT2-mediated
regulation of proliferative and differentiation processes in the smooth muscle
and may behave as a key modulator of smooth muscle hypertrophy, which is relevant
for organ remodeling.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358129
PMID: 25596533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Nanobiotechnology. 2015 Jan 17;13:3. doi: 10.1186/s12951-014-0063-3.

Effects of an 11-nm DMSA-coated iron nanoparticle on the gene expression profile 
of two human cell lines, THP-1 and HepG2.

Zhang L(1,)(2), Wang X(3), Zou J(4), Liu Y(5), Wang J(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096,
China. lovegoflying@163.com. (2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Hubei
University of Science and Technology, Xianning, 437000, China.
lovegoflying@163.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast
University, Nanjing, 210096, China. wangxintsxy@163.com. (4)State Key Laboratory 
of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China.
zoujinglu2008@163.com. (5)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast
University, Nanjing, 210096, China. liuyingxiong@seu.edu.cn. (6)State Key
Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China.
wangjinke@seu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Iron nanoparticles (FeNPs) have attracted increasing attention over
the past two decades owing to their promising application as biomedical agents.
However, to ensure safe application, their potential nanotoxicity should be
carefully and thoroughly evaluated. Studies on the effects of FeNPs on cells at
the transcriptomic level will be helpful for identifying any potential
nanotoxicity of FeNPs and providing valuable mechanistic insights into various
FeNPs-induced nanotoxicities.
RESULTS: This study investigated the effects of an 11-nm dimercaptosuccinic
acid-coated magnetite nanoparticle on the gene expression profiles of two human
cell lines, THP-1 and HepG2. It was found that the expression of hundreds of
genes was significantly changed by a 24-h treatment with the nanoparticles at two
doses, 50 µg/mL and 100 µg/mL, in the two cell types. By identifying the
differentially expressed genes and annotating their functions, this study
characterized the general and cell-specific effects of the nanoparticles on two
cell types at the gene, biological process and pathway levels. At these doses,
the overall effects of the nanoparticle on the THP-1 cells were the induction of 
various responses and repression of protein translation, but in the HepG2 cells, 
the main effects were the promotion of cell metabolism, growth and mobility. In
combination with a previous study, this study also characterized the common
genes, biological processes and pathways affected by the nanoparticle in two
human and mouse cell lines and identified Id3 as a nanotoxicity biomarker of the 
nanoparticle.
CONCLUSION: The studied FeNPs exerted significant effects on the gene expression 
profiles of human cells. These effects were highly dependent on the innate
biological functions of cells, i.e., the cell types. However, cells can also show
some cell type-independent effects such as repression of Id3 expression. Id3 can 
be used as a nanotoxicity biomarker for iron nanoparticles.

PMCID: PMC4304128
PMID: 25595381  [PubMed - in process]


54. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015 Mar 16;28(3):373-83. doi: 10.1021/tx500333q. Epub 2015 Jan
6.

Iron nanoparticles significantly affect the in vitro and in vivo expression of Id
genes.

Zou J(1), Wang X, Zhang L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University , Nanjing 210096,
China.

In recent DNA microarray studies, we found that the transcription of the Id3 gene
was significantly down-regulated in five cell lines (RAW264.7, Hepa1-6, THP-1,
HepG2, and HL7702) treated with two doses (50 and 100 µg/mL) of a DMSA-coated
magnetite nanoparticle. Given the regulatory roles of Id genes in the cell cycle,
growth, and differentiation, we wanted to do more investigations on the effect of
the nanoparticle upon the Id genes. This study detected the expression of Id
genes in six cell lines (the above cell lines plus HeLa) treated with the
nanoparticle at the same doses using quantitative PCR. The results revealed that 
the expression of Id genes was significantly affected by the nanoparticle in
these cell lines. Under each treatment, the Id3 gene was significantly (p < 0.01)
down-regulated in all cell lines, the Id1 gene was significantly down-regulated
in all cell lines except the RAW264.7 cells, and the Id2 gene was significantly
down-regulated in the HepG2, HL7702, and HeLa cells. Because the Id1, Id2, and
Id3 genes were significantly down-regulated in three liver-derived cell lines
(Hepa1-6, HepG2, and HL7702) in both microarray and PCR detections, this study
then detected the expression of Id genes in the liver tissues of mice that were
intravenously injected with the nanoparticle at two doses (2 and 5 mg/kg body
weight). The results revealed that the expression of Id1, Id2, and Id3 genes was 
also significantly down-regulated in the liver tissues under each treatment.
Another Id gene, Id4, was also significantly regulated in some cells or liver
tissues treated with the nanoparticle. These results reveal that the nanoparticle
exerts a significant effect on the in vitro and in vivo expression of Id genes.
This study thus provides new insights into the Id-related nanotoxicity of the
nanoparticle and the close relationship between the regulation of Id genes and
iron.

PMID: 25522732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1855(1):92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.12.002. 
Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4): From development to cancer.

Patel D(1), Morton DJ(1), Carey J(2), Havrda MC(3), Chaudhary J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA. (2)Department of
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Norris Cotton Cancer Center and Geisel Medical School at Dartmouth, Lebanon,
NH, USA. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Cancer Research and
Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA.
Electronic address: jchaudhary@cau.edu.

Highly conserved Inhibitors of DNA-Binding (ID1-ID4) genes encode
multi-functional proteins whose transcriptional activity is based on dominant
negative inhibition of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors.
Initial animal models indicated a degree of compensatory overlap between ID genes
such that deletion of multiple ID genes was required to generate easily
recognizable phenotypes. More recently, new model systems have revealed
alterations in mice harboring deletions in single ID genes suggesting complex
gene and tissue specific functions for members of the ID gene family. Because ID 
genes are highly expressed during development and their function is associated
with a primitive, proliferative cellular phenotype there has been significant
interest in understanding their potential roles in neoplasia. Indeed, numerous
studies indicate an oncogenic function for ID1, ID2 and ID3. In contrast, the
inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) presents a paradigm shift in context of
well-established role of ID1, ID2 and ID3 in development and cancer. Apart from
some degree of functional redundancy such as HLH dependent interactions with bHLH
protein E2A, many of the functions of ID4 are distinct from ID1, ID2 and ID3: ID4
proteins a) regulate distinct developmental processes and tissue expression in
the adult, b) promote stem cell survival, differentiation and/or timing of
differentiation, c) epigenetic inactivation/loss of expression in several
advanced stage cancers and d) increased expression in some cancers such as those 
arising in the breast and ovary. Thus, in spite of sharing the conserved HLH
domain, ID4 defies the established model of ID protein function and expression.
The underlying molecular mechanism responsible for the unique role of ID4 as
compared to other ID proteins still remains largely un-explored. This review will
focus on the current understanding of ID4 in context of development and cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4312723
PMID: 25512197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Immunol. 2015 Jan 15;194(2):709-18. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300272. Epub 2014
Dec 12.

TGF-ß1, but not bone morphogenetic proteins, activates Smad1/5 pathway in primary
human macrophages and induces expression of proatherogenic genes.

Nurgazieva D(1), Mickley A(2), Moganti K(2), Ming W(3), Ovsyi I(3), Popova A(3), 
Sachindra(3), Awad K(2), Wang N(3), Bieback K(4), Goerdt S(3), Kzhyshkowska J(5),
Gratchev A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Center of Excellence
in Dermatology, Ruprecht-Karls University of Heidelberg, 68167 Mannheim, Germany;
N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, 115478 Moscow, Russia; (2)Department of
Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Center of Excellence in Dermatology,
Ruprecht-Karls University of Heidelberg, 68167 Mannheim, Germany; Institute of
Transfusion Medicine and Immunology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karls
University of Heidelberg, 68167 Mannheim, Germany; (3)Department of Dermatology, 
Venereology and Allergology, Center of Excellence in Dermatology, Ruprecht-Karls 
University of Heidelberg, 68167 Mannheim, Germany; (4)Institute of Transfusion
Medicine and Immunology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karls University of
Heidelberg, 68167 Mannheim, Germany; (5)Institute of Transfusion Medicine and
Immunology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karls University of Heidelberg,
68167 Mannheim, Germany; Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology,
125315 Moscow, Russia; and Laboratory for Translational Cellular and Molecular
Biomedicine, Tomsk State University, 634050 Tomsk, Russia. (6)Department of
Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Center of Excellence in Dermatology,
Ruprecht-Karls University of Heidelberg, 68167 Mannheim, Germany; N.N. Blokhin
Cancer Research Center, 115478 Moscow, Russia; alexei.gratchev@gmail.com.

Macrophages are responsible for the control of inflammation and healing, and
their malfunction results in cardiometabolic disorders. TGF-ß is a pleiotropic
growth factor with dual (protective and detrimental) roles in atherogenesis. We
have previously shown that in human macrophages, TGF-ß1 activates Smad2/3
signaling and induces a complex gene expression program. However, activated genes
were not limited to known Smad2/3-dependent ones, which prompted us to study
TGF-ß1-induced signaling in macrophages in detail. Analysis of Id3 regulatory
sequences revealed a novel enhancer, located between +4517 and 4662 bp, but the
luciferase reporter assay demonstrated that this enhancer is not Smad2/3
dependent. Because Id3 expression is regulated by Smad1/5 in endothelial cells,
we analyzed activation of Smad1/5 in macrophages. We demonstrate here for the
first time, to our knowledge, that TGF-ß1, but not BMPs, activates Smad1/5 in
macrophages. We show that an ALK5/ALK1 heterodimer is responsible for the
induction of Smad1/5 signaling by TGF-ß1 in mature human macrophages. Activation 
of Smad1/5 by TGF-ß1 induces not only Id3, but also HAMP and PLAUR, which
contribute to atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability. We suggest that the balance
between Smad1/5- and Smad2/3-dependent signaling defines the outcome of the
effect of TGF-ß on atherosclerosis where Smad1/5 is responsible for
proatherogenic effects, whereas Smad2/3 regulate atheroprotective effects of
TGF-ß.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25505291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Int Immunol. 2015 Apr;27(4):205-15. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxu104. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Bcl11b prevents the intrathymic development of innate CD8 T cells in a cell
intrinsic manner.

Hirose S(1), Touma M(2), Go R(3), Katsuragi Y(3), Sakuraba Y(4), Gondo Y(4), Abe 
M(5), Sakimura K(5), Mishima Y(3), Kominami R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510,
Japan hirose@med.niigata-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science,
Niigata University, Niigata 950-2181, Japan. (3)Division of Molecular Biology,
Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan. (4)Mutagenesis and Genomics Team,
RIKEN BioResource Center, Ibaragi 305-0074, Japan. (5)Basic Neuroscience Branch, 
Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.

If Bcl11b activity is compromised, CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) thymocytes
produce a greatly increased fraction of innate CD8(+) single-positive (SP) cells 
highly producing IFN-<U+03B3>, which are also increased in mice deficient of genes such 
as Itk, Id3 and NF-<U+03BA>B1 that affect TCR signaling. Of interest, the increase in
the former two is due to the bystander effect of IL-4 that is secreted by
promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger-expressing NKT and <U+03B3>dT cells whereas the
increase in the latter is cell intrinsic. Bcl11b zinc-finger proteins play key
roles in T cell development and T cell-mediated immune response likely through
TCR signaling. We examined thymocytes at and after the DP stage in Bcl11b
(F/S826G) CD4cre, Bcl11b (F/+) CD4cre and Bcl11b (+/S826G) mice, carrying the
allele that substituted serine for glycine at the position of 826. Here we show
that Bcl11b impairment leads to an increase in the population of
TCRaß(high)CD44(high)CD122(high) innate CD8SP thymocytes, together with two
different developmental abnormalities: impaired positive and negative selection
accompanying a reduction in the number of CD8SP cells, and developmental arrest
of NKT cells at multiple steps. The innate CD8SP thymocytes express Eomes and
secrete IFN-<U+03B3> after stimulation with PMA and ionomycin, and in this case their
increase is not due to a bystander effect of IL-4 but cell intrinsic. Those
results indicate that Bcl11b regulates development of different thymocyte subsets
at multiple stages and prevents an excess of innate CD8SP thymocytes.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2014. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25422283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Acta Inform Med. 2014 Aug;22(4):263-7. doi: 10.5455/aim.2014.22.263-267. Epub
2014 Aug 21.

Intelligent data analysis: the best approach for chronic heart failure (CHF)
follow up management.

Mohammadzadeh N(1), Safdari R(2), Baraani A(3), Mohammadzadeh F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Health Information Management, Tehran University of Medical Sciences. Tehran, 
Iran. (2)Health Information Management Department, Health Information Management 
Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran,
Iran. (4)Shahabe Danesh University, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Intelligent data analysis has ability to prepare and present complex
relations between symptoms and diseases, medical and treatment consequences and
definitely has significant role in improving follow-up management of chronic
heart failure (CHF) patients, increasing speed <U+200B><U+200B>and accuracy in diagnosis and
treatments; reducing costs, designing and implementation of clinical guidelines.
THE AIM: The aim of this article is to describe intelligent data analysis methods
in order to improve patient monitoring in follow and treatment of chronic heart
failure patients as the best approach for CHF follow up management.
METHODS: Minimum data set (MDS) requirements for monitoring and follow up of CHF 
patient designed in checklist with six main parts. All CHF patients that
discharged in 2013 from Tehran heart center have been selected. The MDS for
monitoring CHF patient status were collected during 5 months in three different
times of follow up. Gathered data was imported in RAPIDMINER 5 software.
RESULTS: Modeling was based on decision trees methods such as C4.5, CHAID, ID3
and k-Nearest Neighbors algorithm (K-NN) with k=1. Final analysis was based on
voting method. Decision trees and K-NN evaluate according to Cross-Validation.
CONCLUSION: Creating and using standard terminologies and databases consistent
with these terminologies help to meet the challenges related to data collection
from various places and data application in intelligent data analysis. It should 
be noted that intelligent analysis of health data and intelligent system can
never replace cardiologists. It can only act as a helpful tool for the
cardiologist's decisions making.

PMCID: PMC4216425
PMID: 25395730  [PubMed]


59. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Feb;24(2):101-7. doi: 10.1111/exd.12582.

Inhibitor of differentiation-4 (Id4) stimulates pigmentation in melanoma leading 
to histiocyte infiltration.

DiVito KA(1), Trabosh VA, Chen YS, Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.

TGF-ß and the inhibitors of differentiation (Id) are linked. Smad7 and other
TGF-ß inhibitors can potently suppress melanomagenesis; however, little work
examining Ids has been reported in melanoma, particularly for Id4. Here, we
report that Id4, but not Id2 or Id3 expression, surprisingly, activated robust
melanin production in xenografts of previously amelanotic (lacking pigment)
1205Lu/Smad7 (S7) cells. Fontana-Masson stain and de-novo expression of MART-1
and tyrosinase proteins confirmed melanin production. Additionally, pigment-laden
CD163+ mouse histiocytes with areas of extensive necrosis were found throughout
S7/Id4 tumors, but not in parental 1205Lu, S7/Id2 or S7Id3-derived tumors.
Mechanistic investigation revealed increased nuclear M-microphthalmia-associated 
transcription factor (MITF) and MART-1 promoter activation following Id4
expression in 1205Lu and WM852 melanoma cells, suggesting broader implications
for Id4 in melanin synthesis. In human tumors, melanin colocalized with Id4
expression establishing a correlation. Current chemotherapeutics for melanoma are
only marginally effective. Immunotherapy provides the most promise, yet the role 
of innate immunity is poorly understood. Here, TGF-ß suppression followed by Id4 
expression results in extensive melanin synthesis and robust histiocyte
recruitment following tumorigenesis, a novel role for Id4. Our results suggest
that TGF-ß suppression coupled with pigment overproduction triggers an innate
immune response resulting in tumor necrosis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25363621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. EMBO Rep. 2015 Jan;16(1):63-70. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439560. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Direct interaction between Id1 and Zrf1 controls neural differentiation of
embryonic stem cells.

Aloia L(1), Gutierrez A(2), Caballero JM(3), Di Croce L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain Universitat Pompeu Fabra
(UPF), Barcelona, Spain luigi.aloia@crg.eu luciano.dicroce@crg.eu. (2)Centre for 
Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
Barcelona, Spain. (3)Unidad de Animal de Laboratorio, PRBB, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain Universitat Pompeu Fabra
(UPF), Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
(ICREA), Barcelona, Spain luigi.aloia@crg.eu luciano.dicroce@crg.eu.

Id proteins are dominant-negative regulators within the HLH family of proteins.
In embryonic stem cells (ESCs), Id1 and Id3 maintain the pluripotent state by
preventing neural differentiation. The Id1-interacting protein Zrf1 plays a
crucial role as a chromatin-bound factor in specification of the neural fate from
ESCs. Here, we show that Id1 blocks Zrf1 recruitment to chromatin, thus
preventing the activation of neural genes in ESCs. Upon differentiation, Id1
expression decreases thus inducing Zrf1 binding to neural genes. Importantly,
depletion of Zrf1 rescues the expression of Polycomb targets involved in neural
specification which are up-regulated in Id1 knock-out ESCs. We therefore
identified Zrf1 as transcriptional regulator of neural fate downstream of Id1 in 
ESCs.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4304729
PMID: 25361733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Nov 6;15(5):619-33. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

BMP signaling and its pSMAD1/5 target genes differentially regulate hair follicle
stem cell lineages.

Genander M(1), Cook PJ(2), Ramsköld D(3), Keyes BE(1), Mertz AF(1), Sandberg
R(3), Fuchs E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden; Ludwig Institute for
Cancer Research, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development,
The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic
address: fuchslb@rockefeller.edu.

Hair follicle stem cells (HFSCs) and their transit amplifying cell (TAC) progeny 
sense BMPs at defined stages of the hair cycle to control their proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we exploit the distinct spatial and temporal localizations
of these cells to selectively ablate BMP signaling in each compartment and
examine its functional role. We find that BMP signaling is required for HFSC
quiescence and to promote TAC differentiation along different lineages as the
hair cycle progresses. We also combine in vivo genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation and deep-sequencing, transcriptional profiling, and
loss-of-function genetics to define BMP-regulated genes. We show that some
pSMAD1/5 targets, like Gata3, function specifically in TAC lineage-progression.
Others, like Id1 and Id3, function in both HFSCs and TACs, but in distinct ways. 
Our study therefore illustrates the complex differential roles that a key
signaling pathway can play in regulation of closely related stem/progenitor cells
within the context of their overall niche.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4276600
PMID: 25312496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct 29;42(19):12249-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku911. Epub
2014 Oct 1.

THOC5 controls 3'end-processing of immediate early genes via interaction with
polyadenylation specific factor 100 (CPSF100).

Tran DD(1), Saran S(1), Williamson AJ(2), Pierce A(2), Dittrich-Breiholz O(1),
Wiehlmann L(3), Koch A(1), Whetton AD(2), Tamura T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Biochemie, OE4310, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30623 Hannover, Germany. (2)Stem Cell and Leukaemia
Proteomics Laboratory, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, 27 Palatine Road, Withington Manchester, M20 3LJ UK.
(3)Pädiatrische Pneumologie OE6710 Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30623 Hannover, Germany. (4)Institut fuer Biochemie,
OE4310, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, D-30623
Hannover, Germany tamura.teruko@Mh-hannover.de.

Transcription of immediate early genes (IEGs) in response to extrinsic and
intrinsic signals is tightly regulated at multiple stages. It is known that
untranslated regions of the RNA can play a role in these processes. Here we show 
that THOC5, a member of the TREX (transcription/export) complex, plays a role in 
expression of only a subset of constitutively active genes, however transcriptome
analysis reveals that more than 90% of IEG were not induced by serum in THOC5
depleted cells. Furthermore, THOC5 depletion does not influence the expression of
the most rapidly induced IEGs, e.g. Fos and Jun. One group of THOC5 target genes,
including Id1, Id3 and Wnt11 transcripts, were not released from chromatin in
THOC5 depleted cells. Genes in another group, including Myc and Smad7
transcripts, were released with shortening of 3'UTR by alternative cleavage, and 
were spliced but export was impaired in THOC5 depleted cells. By interactome
analysis using THOC5 as bait, we show that upon stimulation with serum THOC5
forms a complex with polyadenylation-specific factor 100 (CPSF100). THOC5 is
required for recruitment of CPSF100 to 3'UTR of THOC5 target genes. These data
suggest the presence of a novel mechanism for the control of IEG response by
THOC5 via 3'end-processing.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4231767
PMID: 25274738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:189-216. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00005-1.

Id proteins: small molecules, mighty regulators.

Ling F(1), Kang B(1), Sun XH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (2)Immunobiology Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma 
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. Electronic address:
sunx@omrf.org.

The family of inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins is a group of
evolutionarily conserved molecules, which play important regulatory roles in
organisms ranging from Drosophila to humans. Id proteins are small polypeptides
harboring a helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif, which are best known to mediate
dimerization with other basic HLH proteins, primarily E proteins. Because Id
proteins do not possess the basic amino acids adjacent to the HLH motif necessary
for DNA binding, Id proteins inhibit the function of E protein homodimers, as
well as heterodimers between E proteins and tissue-specific bHLH proteins.
However, Id proteins have also been shown to have E protein-independent
functions. The Id genes are broadly but differentially expressed in a variety of 
cell types. Transcription of the Id genes is controlled by transcription factors 
such as C/EBPß and Egr as well as by signaling pathways triggered by different
stimuli, which include bone morphogenic proteins, cytokines, and ligands of T
cell receptors. In general, Id proteins are capable of inhibiting the
differentiation of progenitors of different cell types, promoting cell-cycle
progression, delaying cellular senescence, and facilitating cell migration. These
properties of Id proteins enable them to play significant roles in stem cell
maintenance, vasculogenesis, tumorigenesis and metastasis, the development of the
immune system, and energy metabolism. In this review, we intend to highlight the 
current understanding of the function of Id proteins and discuss gaps in our
knowledge about the mechanisms whereby Id proteins exert their diverse effects in
multiple cellular processes.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:153-87. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00004-X.

E proteins in lymphocyte development and lymphoid diseases.

Belle I(1), Zhuang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham North
Carolina, USA. Electronic address: ilb2@duke.edu. (2)Department of Immunology,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham North Carolina, USA.

As members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors, 
E proteins function in the immune system by directing and maintaining a vast
transcriptional network that regulates cell survival, proliferation,
differentiation, and function. Proper activity of this network is essential to
the functionality of the immune system. Aberrations in E protein expression or
function can cause numerous defects, ranging from impaired lymphocyte development
and immunodeficiency to aberrant function, cancer, and autoimmunity.
Additionally, disruption of inhibitor of DNA-binding (Id) proteins, natural
inhibitors of E proteins, can induce additional defects in development and
function. Although E proteins have been investigated for several decades, their
study continues to yield novel and exciting insights into the workings of the
immune system. The goal of this chapter is to discuss the various classical roles
of E proteins in lymphocyte development and highlight new and ongoing research
into how these roles, if compromised, can lead to disease.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Nov;113(3):149-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.08.008. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

The potential role of inhibitor of differentiation-3 in human adipose tissue
remodeling and metabolic health.

Svendstrup M(1), Vestergaard H(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Danish Diabetes Academy and Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic
Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic Genetics, Universitetsparken 1, 1st
Floor, University of Copenhagen, Denmark; The Danish Diabetes Academy and Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic
Genetics, Universitetsparken 1, 1st Floor, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Electronic address: mathilde@sund.ku.dk. (2)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Basic Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic Genetics, Universitetsparken 1,
1st Floor, University of Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
henrik.vestergaard@sund.ku.dk.

Metabolic health in obesity is known to differ among individuals, and the
distribution of visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) plays an
important role in this regard. Adipose tissue expansion is dependent on new blood
vessel formation in order to prevent hypoxia and inflammation in the tissue.
Regulation of angiogenesis in SAT and VAT in response to diet is therefore
crucial for the metabolic outcome in obesity. Knowledge about the underlying
genetic mechanisms determining metabolic health in obesity is very limited. We
aimed to review the literature of the inhibitor of differentiation-3 (ID3) gene
in relation to adipose tissue and angiogenesis in humans in order to determine
whether ID3 could be involved in the regulation of adipose tissue expansion and
metabolic health in human obesity. We find evidence that ID3 is involved in
regulatory mechanisms in adipose tissue and regulates angiogenesis in many
tissues including adipose tissue. We discuss how this might influence obesity and
metabolic health in obesity and further discuss some potential mechanisms by
which ID3 might regulate visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue expansion. The 
combined results from the reviewed literature suggest ID3 to play a potential
role in the underlying regulatory mechanisms of metabolic health in human
obesity. The literature is still sparse and further studies focusing on human ID3
in relation to the nature of obesity are warranted.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25239768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 3;452(4):912-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.155. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Interleukin-2 drives immature double negative thymocytes into <U+03B3>d T cells
expressing Foxp3 on a stromal cell line in vitro.

Shibuya K(1), Nakano N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, 2669 
Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-0022, Japan. (2)Research Institute for Biomedical
Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, 2669 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-0022,
Japan. Electronic address: naoko@rs.noda.tus.ac.jp.

<U+03B3>d T cells are exported from the thymus as innate-like lymphocytes that can
immediately respond to antigens. In the thymus, <U+03B3>d T cells diverge into
functionally distinct lineages. It is not known whether <U+03B3>d T cells differentiate 
into regulatory cells that express Foxp3, which is an essential transcription
factor for CD4(+) regulatory T cells. In this study, we analyzed CD25(+) immature
thymocytes that give rise to both aß and <U+03B3>d thymocytes. These precursor cells
have the potential to differentiate into Foxp3(+) <U+03B3>d T cells on a stromal cell
line, TSt4-Dll1. Development of Foxp3(+) <U+03B3>d thymocytes in this culture was
dependent on IL-2. IL-2 stimulation induced Id3, Egr1, and Egr3 expression in
CD25(+) immature thymocytes, suggesting that it could activate signaling
molecules that are downstream of TCR signaling. The induction of Foxp3 in
precursor <U+03B3>d T cells suggested that IL-2 could activate the Foxp3 gene early in
thymocyte development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25218473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 10;9(9):e106773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106773.
eCollection 2014.

The peritoneum is both a source and target of TGF-ß in women with endometriosis.

Young VJ(1), Brown JK(1), Saunders PT(1), Duncan WC(1), Horne AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, Queen's
Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is believed to play a major role in the
aetiology of peritoneal endometriosis. We aimed to determine if the peritoneum is
a source of TGF-ß and if peritoneal TGF-ß expression, reception or target genes
are altered in women with endometriosis. Peritoneal fluid, peritoneal bushings
and peritoneal biopsies were collected from women with and without endometriosis.
TGF-ß1, 2 and 3 protein concentrations were measured in the peritoneal fluid.
TGF-ß1 was measured in mesothelial cell conditioned media. Control peritoneum and
peritoneum prone to endometriosis (within Pouch of Douglas) from women without
disease (n = 16) and peritoneum distal and adjacent to endometriosis lesions in
women with endometriosis (n = 15) and were analysed for TGF-ß expression,
reception and signalling by immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR and a TGF-ß signalling 
PCR array. TGF-ß1 was increased in the peritoneal fluid of women with
endometriosis compared to those without disease (P<0.05) and peritoneal
mesothelial cells secrete TGF-ß1 in-vitro. In women with endometriosis,
peritoneum from sites adjacent to endometriosis lesions expressed higher levels
of TGFB1 mRNA when compared to distal sites (P<0.05). The TGF-ß-stimulated Smad
2/3 signalling pathway was active in the peritoneum and there were significant
increases (P<0.05) in expression of genes associated with tumorigenesis (MAPK8,
CDC6), epithelial-mesenchymal transition (NOTCH1), angiogenesis (ID1, ID3) and
neurogenesis (CREB1) in the peritoneum of women with endometriosis. In
conclusion, the peritoneum, and in particular, the peritoneal mesothelium, is a
source of TGF-ß1 and this is enhanced around endometriosis lesions. The
expression of TGF-ß-regulated genes is altered in the peritoneum of women with
endometriosis and this may promote an environment favorable to lesion formation.

PMCID: PMC4160207
PMID: 25207642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2014;205:501-5.

A novel SVM-ID3 hybrid feature selection method to build a disease model for
melanoma using integrated genotyping and phenotype data from dbGaP.

Son YA(1), Yücebas SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Informatics Department & Bioinformatics Graduate Program. Graduate
School of Informatics, Middle East Technical University. Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Çanakkale Onsekiz 
Mart University. Çanakkale, Turkey.

The relations between Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) and complex diseases
are likely to be non-linear and require analysis of the high dimensional data.
Previous studies in the field mostly focus on genotyping and effects of various
phenotypes are not considered. To fill this gap a hybrid feature selection model 
of support vector machine and decision tree has been designed. The designed
method is tested on melanoma. We were able to select phenotypic features such as 
moles and dysplastic nevi, and SNPs those maps to specific genes such as CAMK1D. 
The performance results of the proposed hybrid model, on melanoma dataset are
79.07% of sensitivity and 0.81 of area under ROC curve.

PMID: 25160235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Mar;55(3):618-31. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0401-9. Epub 2014 
Aug 17.

Microvascular lesions by estrogen-induced ID3: its implications in cerebral and
cardiorenal vascular disease.

Das JK(1), Felty Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Florida International
University, 11200 SW 8th Street, AHC-2 Bldg. Rm 593, Miami, FL, USA.

Severe symptoms of cerebral and cardiorenal vascular diseases can be triggered
when cerebral, coronary, or glomerular arterioles grow inappropriately as a
result of abnormal cell proliferation. The risk factor(s) and molecular
mechanisms responsible for microvascular lesion formation are largely unknown.
Although controversial, both animal and epidemiological studies have shown that
estrogen increases the risk of stroke which may be due to microvascular lesions. 
Since microvascular diseases are characterized by excessive vessel growth, it is 
plausible that estrogen-induced neovascularization contributes to the growth of
microvascular lesions. We present evidence for how ID3 overexpression in
endothelial cells contributes to the development of an estrogen-induced
neovascular phenotype with an additional focus on Pyk2 kinase. Our data showed
that ID3 overexpression increased neovascularization, cell migration, and
spheroid growth of human cerebral microvascular endothelial cells, hCMEC/D3.
ID3-overexpressing cells showed significant estrogen-induced G2/M phase
transition. Estrogen treatment increased both ID3 phosphorylation; total protein 
that was inhibited by tamoxifen, and Pyk2-mediated estrogen-induced ID3 mRNA
expression. These findings suggest that Pyk2 signals ID3 expression and ID3 is
necessary for estrogen-induced neovascularization in hCMEC/D3 cells. A better
understanding of how microvascular lesions depend on ID3 may open new avenues for
prevention and treatment of neurological diseases.

PMCID: PMC4320014
PMID: 25129100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 4;9(8):e104196. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104196. eCollection
2014.

Disruption of the thyroid system by the thyroid-disrupting compound Aroclor 1254 
in juvenile Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus).

Dong Y(1), Tian H(1), Wang W(1), Zhang X(1), Liu J(1), Ru S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Life Science College, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong
Province, The People's Republic of China.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are a group of persistent organochlorine
compounds that have the potential to disrupt the homeostasis of thyroid hormones 
(THs) in fish, particularly juveniles. In this study, thyroid histology, plasma
TH levels, and iodothyronine deiodinase (IDs, including ID1, ID2, and ID3) gene
expression patterns were examined in juvenile Japanese flounder (Paralichthys
olivaceus) following 25- and 50-day waterborne exposure to environmentally
relevant concentrations of a commercial PCB mixture, Aroclor 1254 (10, 100, and
1000 ng/L) with two-thirds of the test solutions renewed daily. The results
showed that exposure to Aroclor 1254 for 50 d increased follicular cell height,
colloid depletion, and hyperplasia. In particular, hypothyroidism, which was
induced by the administration of 1000 ng/L Aroclor 1254, significantly decreased 
plasma TT4, TT3, and FT3 levels. Profiles of the changes in mRNA expression
levels of IDs were observed in the liver and kidney after 25 and 50 d PCB
exposure, which might be associated with a reduction in plasma THs levels. The
expression level of ID2 mRNA in the liver exhibited a dose-dependent increase,
indicating that this ID isotype might serve as sensitive and stable indicator for
thyroid-disrupting chemical (TDC) exposure. Overall, our study confirmed that
environmentally relevant concentrations of Aroclor 1254 cause significant thyroid
disruption, with juvenile Japanese flounder being suitable candidates for use in 
TDC studies.

PMCID: PMC4121326
PMID: 25090620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 4;9(8):e104159. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104159. eCollection
2014.

PCB153-induced overexpression of ID3 contributes to the development of
microvascular lesions.

Das JK(1), Felty Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health, Florida International
University, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

Microvascular lesions resulting from endothelial cell dysfunction are produced in
the brain, lung, kidney, and retina of patients of complex chronic diseases. The 
environmental and molecular risk factors which may contribute in the development 
of microvascular damage are unclear. The mechanism(s) responsible for initiating 
microvascular damage remain poorly defined, although several inciting factors
have been proposed, including environmental toxicants-induced oxidative stress.
Enhanced neovascularization has been implicated in either the development or
progression of proliferative vascular lesions. Here, we present evidence for how 
PCB-induced ROS may contribute to the development of a neovascular phenotype with
the aim of elucidating the role of environmental toxicants in endothelial
dysfunction with a specific focus on the inhibitor of differentiation protein
ID3. We used a combination of phenotype and immunohistochemical analysis followed
by validating with protein expression and post-translational modifications with
Western Blot and MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis. We also looked for a correlation between
ID3 expression in vascular tissue. Our results showed that PCB-induced ROS
mediated a highly tube branched neovascular phenotype that also depended on ID3
and Pyk2; and PCB153 treatment increased the size of endothelial spheroids under 
conditions typically used for clonal selection of stem cell spheroids. High ID3
protein expression correlated with a greater degree of malignancy and oxidative
DNA damage marker 8-OHdG in blood vessels from human subjects. PCB153 treatment
increased both serine and tyrosine phosphorylation of endothelial ID3. Stable ID3
overexpression increased cell survival of human microvascular endothelial cell
line hCMEC/D3. In summary, our data provide evidence that ID3 may play a critical
role in regulating vascular endothelial cell survival and development of
microvascular lesions induced by persistent environmental pollutants such as
PCB153. Findings of this study are important because they provide a new paradigm 
by which PCBs may contribute to the growth of microvascular lesions.

PMCID: PMC4121297
PMID: 25090023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Cancer. 2014 May;5(5-6):212-25.

Increased expression of Id1 and Id3 promotes tumorigenicity by enhancing
angiogenesis and suppressing apoptosis in small cell lung cancer.

Chen D(1), Forootan SS(1), Gosney JR(1), Forootan FS(1), Ke Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer
Medicine, Liverpool University, 5/6th Floor, Duncan Building, Daulby Street,
Liverpool, L69 3GA, UK.

Constant deregulation of Id1 and Id3 has been implicated in a wide range of
carcinomas. However, underlying molecular evidence for the joint role of Id1 and 
Id3 in the tumorigenicity of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is sparse.
Investigating the biological significance of elevated expression in SCLC cells,
we found that Id1 and Id3 co-suppression resulted in significant reduction of
proliferation rate, invasiveness and anchorage-independent growth. Suppressing
both Id1 and Id3 expression also greatly reduced the average size of tumors
produced by transfectant cells when inoculated subcutaneously into nude mice.
Further investigation revealed that suppressed expression of Id1 and Id3 was
accompanied by decreased angiogenesis and increased apoptosis. Therefore, the
SCLC tumorigenicity suppression effect of double knockdown of Id1 and Id3 may be 
regulated through pathways of apoptosis and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4104762
PMID: 25061504  [PubMed]


73. Blood. 2014 Sep 4;124(10):1586-96. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-02-556522. Epub 2014
Jul 22.

Gfi-1 regulates the erythroid transcription factor network through Id2 repression
in murine hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Kim W(1), Klarmann KD(1), Keller JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Mouse Cancer and
Genetics Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick,
MD.

Growth factor independence 1 (Gfi-1) is a part of the transcriptional network
that regulates the development of adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. 
Gfi-1-null (Gfi-1(-/-)) mice have reduced numbers of hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs), impaired radioprotective function of hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPCs), and myeloid and erythroid hyperplasia. We found that the development of
HPCs and erythropoiesis, but not HSC function, was rescued by reducing the
expression of inhibitor of DNA-binding protein 2 (Id2) in Gfi-1(-/-) mice.
Analysis of Gfi-1(-/-);Id2(+/-) mice revealed that short-term HSCs, common
myeloid progenitors (CMPs), erythroid burst-forming units, colony-forming units
in spleen, and more differentiated red cells were partially restored by reducing 
Id2 levels in Gfi-1(-/-) mice. Moreover, short-term reconstituting cells, and, to
a greater extent, CMP and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor development, and red
blood cell production (anemia) were rescued in mice transplanted with
Gfi-1(-/-);Id2(+/-) bone marrow cells (BMCs) in comparison with Gfi-1(-/-) BMCs. 
Reduction of Id2 expression in Gfi-1(-/-) mice increased the expression of Gata1,
Eklf, and EpoR, which are required for proper erythropoiesis. Reducing the levels
of other Id family members (Id1 and Id3) in Gfi-1(-/-) mice did not rescue
impaired HPC function or erythropoiesis. These data provide new evidence that
Gfi-1 is linked to the erythroid gene regulatory network by repressing Id2
expression.

PMCID: PMC4155270
PMID: 25051963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BMC Biol. 2014 Jul 12;12:53. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0053-9.

Segregation of striated and smooth muscle lineages by a Notch-dependent
regulatory network.

Applebaum M, Ben-Yair R, Kalcheim C.

BACKGROUND: Lineage segregation from multipotent epithelia is a central theme in 
development and in adult stem cell plasticity. Previously, we demonstrated that
striated and smooth muscle cells share a common progenitor within their
epithelium of origin, the lateral domain of the somite-derived dermomyotome.
However, what controls the segregation of these muscle subtypes remains unknown. 
We use this in vivo bifurcation of fates as an experimental model to uncover the 
underlying mechanisms of lineage diversification from bipotent progenitors.
RESULTS: Using the strength of spatio-temporally controlled gene missexpression
in avian embryos, we report that Notch harbors distinct pro-smooth muscle
activities depending on the duration of the signal; short periods prevent
striated muscle development and extended periods, through Snail1, promote cell
emigration from the dermomyotome towards a smooth muscle fate. Furthermore, we
define a Muscle Regulatory Network, consisting of Id2, Id3, FoxC2 and Snail1,
which acts in concert to promote smooth muscle by antagonizing the pro-myogenic
activities of Myf5 and Pax7, which induce striated muscle fate. Notch and BMP
closely regulate the network and reciprocally reinforce each other¿s signal. In
turn, components of the network strengthen Notch signaling, while Pax7 silences
this signaling. These feedbacks augment the robustness and flexibility of the
network regulating muscle subtype segregation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demarcate the details of the Muscle Regulatory Network, 
underlying the segregation of muscle sublineages from the lateral dermomyotome,
and exhibit how factors within the network promote the smooth muscle at the
expense of the striated muscle fate. This network acts as an exemplar
demonstrating how lineage segregation occurs within epithelial primordia by
integrating inputs from competing factors.

PMCID: PMC4260679
PMID: 25015411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cytokine. 2014 Oct;69(2):226-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.06.009. Epub 2014 Jul
7.

Aberrant production of IL-13 by T cells promotes exocrinopathy in Id3 knockout
mice.

Belle I(1), Mahlios J(1), McKenzie A(2), Zhuang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA. (2)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK. (3)Department
of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic 
address: yzhuang@duke.edu.

Elevated levels of the cytokine IL-13 has been found to be associated with
autoimmune diseases, including Sjögren's Syndrome. However, whether IL-13 plays a
causative role in disease development is not known and cannot be easily studied
in humans. Our previous work has shown that levels of IL-13 are elevated in Id3
knockout mice, which has been established as a model for primary Sjögren's
Syndrome. Here, we utilized an IL-13 reporter to determine the source of the
elevated IL-13 levels observed in Id3 knockout mice and assess its contribution
to SS pathology. Our results indicate that T cells, notably CD4 and <U+03B3>d T cells,
in Id3 knockout mice acquire IL-13 competency at an elevated rate well before
disease symptoms become apparent. We also show that T cells developing early in
life are more predisposed to produce IL-13. Finally, analysis of Id3 and IL-13
double deficient mice demonstrated that IL-13 plays an essential role in the
deterioration of gland function. Our study provides crucial genetic evidence that
enhanced IL-13 production by T cells can play a causative role in the
exocrinopathy observed in Id3 knockout mice.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4127355
PMID: 25010390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Immunol. 2014 Aug;15(8):767-76. doi: 10.1038/ni.2928. Epub 2014 Jun 29.

Id2 and Id3 maintain the regulatory T cell pool to suppress inflammatory disease.

Miyazaki M(1), Miyazaki K(1), Chen S(1), Itoi M(2), Miller M(3), Lu LF(4), Varki 
N(5), Chang AN(6), Broide DH(3), Murre C(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Biology, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA. [2]. (2)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Meiji 
University of Integrative Medicine, Hiyoshi-cho, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Department of
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. (6)Center for Computational Biology, Institute 
for Genomic Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, 
USA.

Regulatory T (Treg) cells suppress the development of inflammatory disease, but
our knowledge of transcriptional regulators that control this function remains
incomplete. Here we show that expression of Id2 and Id3 in Treg cells was
required to suppress development of fatal inflammatory disease. We found that T
cell antigen receptor (TCR)-driven signaling initially decreased the abundance of
Id3, which led to the activation of a follicular regulatory T (TFR) cell-specific
transcription signature. However, sustained lower abundance of Id2 and Id3
interfered with proper development of TFR cells. Depletion of Id2 and Id3
expression in Treg cells resulted in compromised maintenance and localization of 
the Treg cell population. Thus, Id2 and Id3 enforce TFR cell checkpoints and
control the maintenance and homing of Treg cells.

PMCID: PMC4365819
PMID: 24973820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2014 Jul;160(1):41-8. doi: 10.1007/s12011-014-0024-6. Epub
2014 Jun 4.

Effect of selenium on selenoprotein expression in the adipose tissue of chickens.

Liang Y(1), Lin SL, Wang CW, Yao HD, Zhang ZW, Xu SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, 
150030, People's Republic of China.

This study describes the effects of selenium (Se) deficiency on the messenger
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression of 25 selenoproteins (Sels) (including
glutathione peroxidases (GPx1-GPx4), thioredoxin reductases (TrxR1-TrxR3),
iodothyronine deiodinases (ID1-ID3), selenophosphate synthetase 2 (SPS2), 15-kDa 
Sel (Sel15), SelH, SelI, SelK, SelM, Sepn1, SelO, Sepx, Selpb, SelS, SelT, SelW, 
Sepp1, and SelU in the adipose tissues (subcutaneous adipose, visceral adipose,
and articular adipose) of chickens. One hundred and fifty 1-day-old chickens were
randomly assigned to two groups of 75 each and were fed a low-Se diet (0.032
mg/kg Se) or a control diet (0.282 mg/kg Se). The expression levels of 25 Sel
mRNAs were determined on days 35, 45, and 55 from three parts (subcutaneous
adipose, visceral adipose, and articular adipose) of the chicken adipose tissues.
The results showed that the expression levels of the 25 Sel mRNAs were
significantly lower (P < 0.05) in the low-selenium group than in the control
group. In addition, the Sel mRNA expression levels in the three adipose tissues
were observed to decrease in a time-dependent manner with increasing feeding
time.

PMID: 24894829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Curr Opin Hematol. 2014 Jul;21(4):326-32. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000059.

New clues to the molecular pathogenesis of Burkitt lymphoma revealed through
next-generation sequencing.

Greenough A(1), Dave SS.

Author information: 
(1)aDuke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University bDuke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Burkitt lymphoma is an important clinical and model disease
arising from B cells. Burkitt lymphoma is characterized by translocation of the
c-MYC gene to an immunoglobulin enhancer region, resulting in enhanced cell
proliferation and rapid tumor progression. The development of deep sequencing has
widened the scope of genetic analysis to reveal the role of additional
collaborating mutations in Burkitt lymphoma. In this review, we examine the role 
of additional genetic events that cooperate with MYC in Burkitt lymphoma
pathogenesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Next-generation sequencing of Burkitt lymphoma has identified
recurrent silencing mutations in ID3, a novel tumor suppressor gene. In addition,
mutations in a number of genes including GNA13, TP53, and SMARCA4 occur in
Burkitt lymphoma. Copy number status has implicated recurrent aberrations
including gains of 1q and 18q and deletion of 19p13. Additionally, microRNA and
gene expression profiling has revealed unique transcriptome signatures in Burkitt
lymphoma subgroups.
SUMMARY: Analysis of genetic alterations in Burkitt lymphoma has yielded a better
understanding of the pathogenesis of this disease. These observations could lead 
to more effective strategies for the diagnosis and treatment of Burkitt lymphoma.

PMID: 24867287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2014;126(3):141-7. doi: 10.1159/000362452. Epub 2014 May 16.

Inhibitor of differentiation 3, a transcription factor, regulates
hyperlipidemia-associated kidney disease.

Nackiewicz D(1), Dey P, Szczerba B, Mohammad S, Kaplan JL, McNamara CA, Deshmukh 
US, Bagavant H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunity, Inflammation and Regenerative Medicine, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Va., USA.

BACKGROUND: Lipoprotein abnormalities are associated with a rapid decline in
renal function in patients of chronic kidney disease. In addition, hyperlipidemia
is associated with an increased risk of developing renal insufficiency. The
underlying molecular mechanisms for these clinical findings are unclear. We have 
previously reported a role for inhibitor of differentiation 3 (ID3), a
transcription factor, in regulating kidney disease in hyperlipidemia. Introducing
a genetic deficiency of Id3 in spontaneously hyperlipidemic apolipoprotein E
knockout (Apoe(-/-)) mice led to accelerated mesangioproliferative
glomerulonephritis. The present study was carried out to further investigate the 
contribution of ID3 in hyperlipidemia-associated kidney disease.
METHODS: Female C57BL/6 mice that were ID3-sufficient wild-type (WT) or
ID3-deficient (Id3(-/-)) were fed a Western diet and evaluated for proteinuria,
glomerular pathology, and immune infiltrating cells. Primary mesangial cell lines
were generated from both mouse strains and stimulated with oxidized
phospholipids. Cytokines and chemokines produced were measured by multiplex
assays, ELISA, and QPCR. Glomerular isolates were studied for CXCL1 expression by
QPCR.
RESULTS: Id3(-/-) mice on a Western diet developed accelerated proteinuria and
mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis compared to WT controls. In vitro,
Id3(-/-) glomerular mesangial cell lines produced higher levels of the monocyte
chemoattractant CXCL1 in response to oxidized phospholipids. This was consistent 
with the rapid increase in glomerular CXCL1 expression followed by macrophage
infiltration in Id3(-/-) mice fed a Western diet.
CONCLUSIONS: A functional ID3 influences susceptibility to kidney disease and
prevents glomerular injury by regulating local chemokine production and
inflammatory cell recruitment.

2014 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC4113412
PMID: 24854879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst. 2014 Jan;25(1):203-15. doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2013.2258037.

Linguistic decision making for robot route learning.

He H, McGinnity TM, Coleman S, Gardiner B.

Machine learning enables the creation of a nonlinear mapping that describes
robot-environment interaction, whereas computing linguistics make the interaction
transparent. In this paper, we develop a novel application of a linguistic
decision tree for a robot route learning problem by dynamically deciding the
robot's behavior, which is decomposed into atomic actions in the context of a
specified task. We examine the real-time performance of training and control of a
linguistic decision tree, and explore the possibility of training a machine
learning model in an adaptive system without dual CPUs for parallelization of
training and control. A quantified evaluation approach is proposed, and a score
is defined for the evaluation of a model's robustness regarding the quality of
training data. Compared with the nonlinear system identification nonlinear
auto-regressive moving average with eXogeneous inputs model structure with
offline parameter estimation, the linguistic decision tree model with online
linguistic ID3 learning achieves much better performance, robustness, and
reliability.

PMID: 24806654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Front Neurosci. 2014 Apr 10;8:74. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00074. eCollection
2014.

Orphan nuclear receptor TLX regulates astrogenesis by modulating BMP signaling.

Qin S(1), Niu W(2), Iqbal N(2), Smith DK(2), Zhang CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Neurodegeneration and Regenerative Therapy, Shanghai 
Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine Shanghai, China ;
Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center 
Dallas, TX, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center Dallas, TX, USA.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) are self-renewing multipotent progenitors that generate 
both neurons and glia. The precise control of NSC behavior is fundamental to the 
architecture and function of the central nervous system. We previously
demonstrated that the orphan nuclear receptor TLX is required for postnatal NSC
activation and neurogenesis in the neurogenic niche. Here, we show that TLX
modulates bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-SMAD signaling to control the timing
of postnatal astrogenesis. Genes involved in the BMP signaling pathway, such as
Bmp4, Hes1, and Id3, are upregulated in postnatal brains lacking Tlx. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays reveal that TLX can
directly bind the enhancer region of Bmp4. In accordance with elevated BMP
signaling, the downstream effectors SMAD1/5/8 are activated by phosphorylation in
Tlx mutant mice. Consequently, Tlx mutant brains exhibit an early appearance and 
increased number of astrocytes with marker expression of glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) and S100B. Taken together, these results suggest that TLX tightly 
controls postnatal astrogenesis through the modulation of BMP-SMAD signaling
pathway activity.

PMCID: PMC3989729
PMID: 24782704  [PubMed]


82. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Apr 7;8:98. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00098. eCollection 
2014.

Tis21 is required for adult neurogenesis in the subventricular zone and for
olfactory behavior regulating cyclins, BMP4, Hes1/5 and Ids.

Farioli-Vecchioli S(1), Ceccarelli M(1), Saraulli D(1), Micheli L(1), Cannas
S(2), D'Alessandro F(2), Scardigli R(3), Leonardi L(1), Cinà I(1), Costanzi M(4),
Mattera A(1), Cestari V(2), Tirone F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Neurobiology, National Research Council,
Fondazione Santa Lucia Rome, Italy. (2)Institute of Cell Biology and
Neurobiology, National Research Council, Fondazione Santa Lucia Rome, Italy ;
Department of Psychology and "Daniel Bovet" Center, Sapienza University of Rome
Rome, Italy. (3)Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research
Council, Fondazione EBRI Rome, Italy. (4)Institute of Cell Biology and
Neurobiology, National Research Council, Fondazione Santa Lucia Rome, Italy ;
Libera Università Maria Sartissima Assunta Rome, Italy.

Bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) and the Notch pathway regulate quiescence and
self-renewal of stem cells of the subventricular zone (SVZ), an adult neurogenic 
niche. Here we analyze the role at the intersection of these pathways of Tis21
(Btg2/PC3), a gene regulating proliferation and differentiation of adult SVZ stem
and progenitor cells. In Tis21-null SVZ and cultured neurospheres, we observed a 
strong decrease in the expression of BMP4 and its effectors Smad1/8, while the
Notch anti-neural mediators Hes1/5 and the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
inhibitors Id1-3 increased. Consistently, expression of the proneural bHLH gene
NeuroD1 decreased. Moreover, cyclins D1/2, A2, and E were strongly up-regulated. 
Thus, in the SVZ Tis21 activates the BMP pathway and inhibits the Notch pathway
and the cell cycle. Correspondingly, the Tis21-null SVZ stem cells greatly
increased; nonetheless, the proliferating neuroblasts diminished, whereas the
post-mitotic neuroblasts paradoxically accumulated in SVZ, failing to migrate
along the rostral migratory stream to the olfactory bulb. The ability, however,
of neuroblasts to migrate from SVZ explants was not affected, suggesting that
Tis21-null neuroblasts do not migrate to the olfactory bulb because of a defect
in terminal differentiation. Notably, BMP4 addition or Id3 silencing rescued the 
defective differentiation observed in Tis21-null neurospheres, indicating that
they mediate the Tis21 pro-differentiative action. The reduced number of granule 
neurons in the Tis21-null olfactory bulb led to a defect in olfactory detection
threshold, without effect on olfactory memory, also suggesting that within
olfactory circuits new granule neurons play a primary role in odor sensitivity
rather than in memory.

PMCID: PMC3977348
PMID: 24744701  [PubMed]


83. Cancer Sci. 2014 Jun;105(6):623-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12408. Epub 2014 May 12.

Disease-specific mutations in mature lymphoid neoplasms: recent advances.

Sakata-Yanagimoto M(1), Enami T, Yokoyama Y, Chiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Department of Hematology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Department of Hematology,
University of Tsukuba Hospital, Tsukuba, Japan.

Mature lymphoid neoplasms (MLN) are clinically and pathologically more complex
than precursor lymphoid neoplasms. Until recently, molecular characterization of 
MLN was mainly based on cytogenetics/fluorescence in situ hybridization, allele
copy number, and mRNA expression, approaches that yielded scanty gene mutation
information. Use of massive parallel sequencing technologies has changed this
outcome, and now many gene mutations have been discovered. Some of these are
considerably frequent in, and substantially specific to, distinct MLN subtypes,
and occur at single or several hotspots. They include the V600E BRAF mutation in 
hairy cell leukemia, the L265P MYD88 mutation in Waldenström macroglobulinemia,
the G17V RHOA mutation in angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma and peripheral
T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified, and the Y640F//D661Y/V/H/I//N647I STAT3
mutations in T-cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia. Detecting these
mutations is highly valuable in diagnosing MLN subtypes. Defining these mutations
also sheds light on the molecular pathogenesis of MLN, furthering development of 
molecular targeting therapies. In this review, we focus on the disease-specific
gene mutations in MLN discovered by recent massive sequencing technologies.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317900
PMID: 24689848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;53(4):417-24.e5. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2013.12.025. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Child abuse, depression, and methylation in genes involved with stress, neural
plasticity, and brain circuitry.

Weder N(1), Zhang H(2), Jensen K(2), Yang BZ(2), Simen A(3), Jackowski A(4),
Lipschitz D(2), Douglas-Palumberi H(2), Ge M(2), Perepletchikova F(2), O'Loughlin
K(5), Hudziak JJ(5), Gelernter J(2), Kaufman J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Child Mind Institute. (2)Yale University School of Medicine. (3)Yale
University School of Medicine; Merck Research Laboratories. (4)LiNC, Universidade
Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)University of Vermont, Vermont Center
for Children, Youth, and Families. (6)Child Mind Institute; Yale University
School of Medicine. Electronic address: 06520.joan.kaufman@yale.edu.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;53(4):395-7.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether epigenetic markers predict dimensional ratings
of depression in maltreated children.
METHOD: A genome-wide methylation study was completed using the Illumina 450K
BeadChip array in 94 maltreated and 96 healthy nontraumatized children with
saliva-derived DNA. The 450K BeadChip does not include any methylation sites in
the exact location as sites in candidate genes previously examined in the
literature, so a test for replication of prior research findings was not
feasible.
RESULTS: Methylation in 3 genes emerged as genome-wide-significant predictors of 
depression: DNA-Binding Protein Inhibitor ID-3 (ID3); Glutamate Receptor,
Ionotropic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 1 (GRIN1); and Tubulin Polymerization
Promoting Protein (TPPP) (p < 5.0 × 10(-7), all analyses). These genes are all
biologically relevant with ID3 involved in the stress response, GRIN1 involved in
neural plasticity, and TPPP involved in neural circuitry development. Methylation
in CpG sites in candidate genes were not predictors of depression at significance
levels corrected for whole genome testing, but maltreated and control children
did have significantly different ß values after Bonferroni correction at multiple
methylation sites in these candidate genes (e.g., BDNF, NR3C1, FKBP5).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that epigenetic changes in ID3, GRIN1, and TPPP 
genes, in combination with experiences of maltreatment, may confer risk for
depression in children. The study adds to a growing body of literature supporting
a role for epigenetic mechanisms in the pathophysiology of stress-related
psychiatric disorders. Although epigenetic changes are frequently long lasting,
they are not necessarily permanent. Consequently, interventions to reverse the
negative biological and behavioral sequelae associated with child maltreatment
are briefly discussed.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4126411
PMID: 24655651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;53(4):395-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jaac.2014.02.004.

The preeminent role of childhood abuse and neglect in vulnerability to major
psychiatric disorders: toward elucidating the underlying neurobiological
mechanisms.

Nemeroff CB(1), Binder E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami. Electronic address:
CNemeroff@med.miami.edu. (2)Max Planck Institute for Psychiatry, Munich.

Comment on
    J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;53(4):417-24.e5.

PMID: 24655648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e91404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091404. eCollection
2014.

A prostate cancer model build by a novel SVM-ID3 hybrid feature selection method 
using both genotyping and phenotype data from dbGaP.

Yücebas SC(1), Aydin Son Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Informatics Department, Graduate School of Informatics, Middle East
Technical University. Ankara, Turkey. (2)Medical Informatics Department, Graduate
School of Informatics, Middle East Technical University. Ankara, Turkey;
Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Graduate School of Informatics, Middle East
Technical University, Ankara, Turkey.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e114956.

Through Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) many Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism (SNP)-complex disease relations can be investigated. The output of
GWAS can be high in amount and high dimensional, also relations between SNPs,
phenotypes and diseases are most likely to be nonlinear. In order to handle high 
volume-high dimensional data and to be able to find the nonlinear relations we
have utilized data mining approaches and a hybrid feature selection model of
support vector machine and decision tree has been designed. The designed model is
tested on prostate cancer data and for the first time combined genotype and
phenotype information is used to increase the diagnostic performance. We were
able to select phenotypic features such as ethnicity and body mass index, and
SNPs those map to specific genes such as CRR9, TERT. The performance results of
the proposed hybrid model, on prostate cancer dataset, with 90.92% of sensitivity
and 0.91 of area under ROC curve, shows the potential of the approach for
prediction and early detection of the prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3961262
PMID: 24651484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 6;9(6):e90748. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090748. eCollection 
2014.

DMH1, a small molecule inhibitor of BMP type i receptors, suppresses growth and
invasion of lung cancer.

Hao J(1), Lee R(2), Chang A(2), Fan J(2), Labib C(3), Parsa C(4), Orlando R(4),
Andresen B(2), Huang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona,
California, United States of America. (2)College of Pharmacy, Western University 
of Health Sciences, Pomona, California, United States of America. (3)College of
Biomedical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California,
United States of America. (4)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, California, 
United States of America.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling cascade is aberrantly activated in
human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but not in normal lung epithelial cells,
suggesting that blocking BMP signaling may be an effective therapeutic approach
for lung cancer. Previous studies demonstrated that some BMP antagonists, which
bind to extracellular BMP ligands and prevent their association with BMP
receptors, dramatically reduced lung tumor growth. However, clinical application 
of protein-based BMP antagonists is limited by short half-lives, poor intra-tumor
delivery as well as resistance caused by potential gain-of-function mutations in 
the downstream of the BMP pathway. Small molecule BMP inhibitors which target the
intracellular BMP cascades would be ideal for anticancer drug development. In a
zebrafish embryo-based structure and activity study, we previously identified a
group of highly selective small molecule inhibitors specifically antagonizing the
intracellular kinase domain of BMP type I receptors. In the present study, we
demonstrated that DMH1, one of such inhibitors, potently reduced lung cell
proliferation, promoted cell death, and decreased cell migration and invasion in 
NSCLC cells by blocking BMP signaling, as indicated by suppression of Smad 1/5/8 
phosphorylation and gene expression of Id1, Id2 and Id3. Additionally, DMH1
treatment significantly reduced the tumor growth in human lung cancer xenograft
model. In conclusion, our study indicates that small molecule inhibitors of BMP
type I receptors may offer a promising novel strategy for lung cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3946239
PMID: 24603907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 6;9(3):e90222. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090222. eCollection 
2014.

A functionally significant polymorphism in ID3 is associated with human coronary 
pathology.

Manichaikul A(1), Rich SS(2), Perry H(3), Yeboah J(4), Law M(5), Davis M(3),
Parker M(3), Ragosta M(6), Connelly JJ(5), McNamara CA(5), Taylor AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Public Health Genomics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America; Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology,
Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America. (2)Center for Public Health Genomics,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, United States of America. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine/Cardiology, Wake Forest University Health Sciences, Winston Salem, North
Carolina, United States of America. (5)Cardiovascular Research Center, University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America; Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America. (6)Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(9):e109222.

AIMS: We previously identified association between the ID3 SNP rs11574 and
carotid intima-media thickness in the Diabetes Heart Study, a predominantly White
diabetic population. The nonsynonymous SNP rs11574 results in an amino acid
substitution in the C-terminal region of ID3, attenuating the dominant negative
function of ID3 as an inhibitor of basic HLH factor E12-mediated transcription.
In the current investigation, we characterize the association between the
functionally significant polymorphism in ID3, rs11574, with human coronary
pathology.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) is a
longitudinal study of subclinical cardiovascular disease, including non-Hispanic 
White (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,588), African American (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,560) and Hispanic (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,130)
participants with data on coronary artery calcium (CAC). The Coronary Assessment 
in Virginia cohort (CAVA) included 71 patients aged 30-80 years, undergoing a
medically necessary cardiac catheterization and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)
at the University of Virginia. ID3 SNP rs11574 risk allele was associated with
the presence of CAC in MESA Whites (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.017). In addition, the risk allele was 
associated with greater atheroma burden and stenosis in the CAVA cohort
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.04 respectively). The risk allele remained predictive of
atheroma burden in multivariate analysis (Model 1: covariates age, gender, and
LDL, regression coefficient<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.578, SE<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.657, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0110; Model 2: covariates 
Model 1, presence of hypertension, presence of diabetes, regression
coefficient<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.389, SE<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.788, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0163).
CONCLUSIONS: We present additional cohorts that demonstrate association of ID3
SNP rs11574 directly with human coronary artery pathology as measured by CAC and 
IVUS: one a multiethnic, relatively healthy population with low levels of
diabetes and the second a predominantly White population with a higher incidence 
of T2DM referred for cardiac catheterization.

PMCID: PMC3946163
PMID: 24603695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Oncol. 2014 May;44(5):1727-35. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2312. Epub 2014 Feb
27.

Identification of BMP2 as an epigenetically silenced growth inhibitor in
rhabdomyosarcoma.

Wolf S(1), Hagl B(1), Kappler R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, D-80337 Munich, Germany.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma of infancy and
although therapy has improved over the years, mortality is still fairly high. The
establishment of new treatments has been hampered by the limited knowledge of the
molecular mechanisms driving development of RMS. One characteristic of cancer
cells is aberrant DNA methylation, which could lead to silencing of tumor
suppressor genes. However, only a few epigenetically silenced genes have been
described in RMS so far. We performed an expression profiling analysis of three
RMS cell lines that were treated with the demethylating agent
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) facilitating re-expression of epigenetically
silenced genes. This treatment induced the gene BMP2 (bone morphogenetic protein 
2) throughout all cell lines. Detailed methylation analysis of CpG sites in the
BMP2 promoter region by bisulfite sequencing and methylation-specific PCR
revealed that a high degree of DNA methylation is causatively associated with the
suppression of BMP2 in RMS cells. Consequently, treatment of the RMS cell lines
with 5-Aza-dC resulted in DNA demethylation of the BMP2 promoter, most
prominently in alveolar RMS. Supplementation of recombinant human BMP2 (rhBMP2)
led to a reduced viability of RMS cells. Altogether, these findings suggest that 
suppression of BMP2 by epigenetic silencing may play a critical role in the
genesis of RMS, thereby providing a rationale for the development of a new
treatment strategy for RMS.

PMID: 24585058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 7;9(2):e88417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088417. eCollection 
2014.

Id proteins regulate capillary repair and perivascular cell proliferation
following ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Lee D(1), Shenoy S(1), Nigatu Y(1), Plotkin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Renal Research Division, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, New York, United States of America.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) results in microvascular damage that if not normally
repaired, may lead to fibrosis. The Id1 and 3 proteins have a critical role in
promoting angiogenesis during development, tumor growth and wound repair by
functioning as dominant negative regulators of bHLH transcription factors. The
goal of this study was to determine if Id proteins regulate microvascular repair 
and remodeling and if increased Id1 expression results in decreased capillary
loss following AKI. The effect of changes in Id expression in vivo was examined
using Id1-/-, Id3RFP/+ (Id1/Id3 KO) and Tek (Tie2)-rtTA, TRE-lacz/TRE Id1 (TRE
Id1) mice with doxycycline inducible endothelial Id1 and ß-galactosidase
expression. Id1 and 3 were co-localized in endothelial cells in normal adult
kidneys and protein levels were increased at day 3 following ischemia-reperfusion
injury (IRI) and contralateral nephrectomy. Id1/Id3 KO mice had decreased
baseline capillary density and pericyte coverage and increased tubular damage
following IRI but decreased interstitial cell proliferation and fibrosis compared
with WT littermates. No compensatory increase in kidney size occurred in KO mice 
resulting in increased creatinine compared with WT and TRE Id1 mice. TRE Id1 mice
had no capillary rarefaction within 1 week following IRI in comparison with WT
littermates. TRE Id1 mice had increased proliferation of PDGFRß positive
interstitial cells and medullary collagen deposition and developed capillary
rarefaction and albuminuria at later time points. These differences were
associated with increased Angiopoietin 1 (Ang1) and decreased Ang2 expression in 
TRE Id1 mice. Examination of gene expression in microvascular cells isolated from
WT, Id1/Id3 KO and TRE Id1 mice showed increased Ang1 and aSMA in Id1
overexpressing cells and decreased pericyte markers in cells from KO mice. These 
results suggest that increased Id levels following AKI result in microvascular
remodeling associated with increased fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3917915
PMID: 24516656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Srp Arh Celok Lek. 2013 Nov-Dec;141(11-12):775-9.

[Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase 
producing urinary isolates of Escherichia coli in outpatients].

[Article in Serbian]

Markovic T(1), Jeinic L(2), Smitran A(3), Petkovic M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Institute, Banja Luka, Republic of Srpska. marktatjana@gmail.com
(2)Public Health Institute, Banja Luka, Republic of Srpska. (3)Faculty of
Medicine, University of Banja Luka, Banja Luka, Republic of Srpska.

INTRODUCTION: In Gram-negative bacteria, the production of beta-lactamases is the
most important mechanism of resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics. In the Banja
Luka region, there were no extensive researches on the prevalence and
antimicrobial resistance of the extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producing
Escherichia coli (E. coli) isolates.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to determine the presence of ESBL
producing E. coli isolates as the cause of the urinary tract infections in
outpatients, the distribution of these ESBL isolates according to age and gender 
of patients and their susceptibility to antimicrobials.
METHODS: Urine specimens obtained from outpatients were cultured on chromogenic
CPS-ID3 media. All plates showing significant (> 10(5) cfu/ml) growth of E. coli 
in pure culture were further processed. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was 
performed on VITEK TWO Compact using AST-GN27 cards for testing Gram negative
bacteria and detection of ESBL producers.
RESULTS: Out of 2,195 isolates, 177 (8.1%) were ESBL producers. Ninety-two
isolates were obtained from female patients (5% of E. coli isolated from women)
and 85 isolates from male patients (23% of E. coli isolated from men). High
percentage of ESBL isolates was detected in the infant age group under one year
(36.7%) and in the age group over 60 years (28.8%). All ESBL isolates were
susceptible to imipenem and resistant to ampicillin, piperacillin, cefazolin,
cefotaxime, ceftazidime and cefepime. There was a significant resistance to
amikacin (79.1%), gentamicin (76.8%), amoxicillin/clavulanate (54.8%) and
trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole (45.8%). Resistance to nutrofurantoin was 13.6%.
CONCLUSION: This study has demonstrated the presence of ESBL producing E. coli
urinary isolates in outpatients, and their extensive susceptibility to imipenem
and nitrofurantoin.

PMID: 24502096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem J. 2014 Apr 15;459(2):405-15. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131360.

GLCE regulates PC12 cell neuritogenesis induced by nerve growth factor through
activating SMAD/ID3 signalling.

Li J, Fang J(1), Qin Y(1), Liao W(1), Liu H(1), Zhou Y(2), Ding K(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Glycochemistry & Glycobiology Lab, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (2)*School of Life Sciences,
Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China.

Neurodevelopment is orchestrated by a series of growth factor-HS (heparan
sulfate) interactions which are involved in neuritogenesis. GLCE (glucuronic acid
epimerase) is a critical enzyme involved in HS synthesis, which converts GlcA
(D-glucuronic acid) into IdoA (L-iduronic acid). However, the function of GLCE in
neuritogenesis is largely unknown. In the present study we showed that GLCE
depletion caused arrested PC12 cell growth and promoted the cell neuritogenesis
and differentiation induced by NGF (nerve growth factor). PC12 cell growth was
boosted by overexpression of GLCE, and neuritogenesis was impaired when GLCE
depletion was rescued. Interestingly, overexpression of wild-type GLCE with Y168A
and Y222A mutations led to enhanced PC12 cell growth and attenuated the
neuritogenesis triggered by GLCE silencing. We showed further that GLCE depletion
blocked SMAD1/5/8 phosphorylation; however, this signalling could be restored by 
GLCE or the mutation of its active enzymatic site. In addition, the downstream
effector of SMAD1/5/8, ID3 (inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation 3) was
induced by GLCE. ID3 silencing inhibited PC12 cell growth and induced cell
neuritogenesis and differentiation. In addition, ectopic expression of ID3
partially rescued the phenotype caused by GLCE silencing. The results of the
present study suggest that GLCE plays a key role in PC12 cell growth and
neuritogenesis through SMAD/ID3 signalling.

PMID: 24499487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087131. eCollection
2014.

IL-12 directs further maturation of ex vivo differentiated NK cells with improved
therapeutic potential.

Lehmann D(1), Spanholtz J(2), Sturtzel C(1), Tordoir M(2), Schlechta B(3),
Groenewegen D(2), Hofer E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology and Thrombosis Research, Center for Physiology 
and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (2)Glycostem
Therapeutics, s-Hertogenbosch, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

The possibility to modulate ex vivo human NK cell differentiation towards
specific phenotypes will contribute to a better understanding of NK cell
differentiation and facilitate tailored production of NK cells for immunotherapy.
In this study, we show that addition of a specific low dose of IL-12 to an ex
vivo NK cell differentiation system from cord blood CD34(+) stem cells will
result in significantly increased proportions of cells with expression of CD62L
as well as KIRs and CD16 which are preferentially expressed on mature CD56(dim)
peripheral blood NK cells. In addition, the cells displayed decreased expression 
of receptors such as CCR6 and CXCR3, which are typically expressed to a lower
extent by CD56(dim) than CD56(bright) peripheral blood NK cells. The increased
number of CD62L and KIR positive cells prevailed in a population of
CD33(+)NKG2A(+) NK cells, supporting that maturation occurs via this subtype.
Among a series of transcription factors tested we found Gata3 and TOX to be
significantly downregulated, whereas ID3 was upregulated in the IL-12-modulated
ex vivo NK cells, implicating these factors in the observed changes. Importantly,
the cells differentiated in the presence of IL-12 showed enhanced cytokine
production and cytolytic activity against MHC class I negative and positive
targets. Moreover, in line with the enhanced CD16 expression, these cells
exhibited improved antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity for B-cell leukemia
target cells in the presence of the clinically applied antibody rituximab.
Altogether, these data provide evidence that IL-12 directs human ex vivo NK cell 
differentiation towards more mature NK cells with improved properties for
potential cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC3909052
PMID: 24498025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Hematol Oncol. 2014 Sep;32(3):120-5. doi: 10.1002/hon.2094. Epub 2013 Sep 23.

The combined expression of VPREB3 and ID3 represents a new helpful tool for the
routine diagnosis of mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas.

Soldini D(1), Georgis A, Montagna C, Schüffler PJ, Martin V, Curioni-Fontecedro
A, Martinez A, Tinguely M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

Genomic studies, such as gene expression profiling and next-generation sequencing
studies, have provided new insights into the phenotypic characteristics and
pathogenesis of mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas. In particular, mutations in
the transcription factors ID3 and TCF3, leading to overexpression of B-cell
receptor components such as VPREB3, have been shown to be specific for Burkitt
lymphoma (BL) and play an important tumourigenic role by mediating the activation
of the pro-survival phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase pathway. We performed
immunohistochemical analysis by applying commercially available anti-VPREB3
antibody to a large cohort of 185 genetically and immunophenotypically
characterized mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas and analyzed these results
together with recent data on ID3 expression. The combined expression of both
VPREB3 and ID3 was associated with a diagnosis of BL with high sensitivity
(0.77), high specificity (0.75) and high negative predictive values (0.96),
however, with lower positive predictive value (0.30). Double negative cases were 
absent in the group of BLs but could be found in approximately one third of the
remaining cases of mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas. Further, we could not
identify a correlation with MYC, BCL2 or BCL6 aberrations with neither VPREB3 nor
ID3 expression in each of the diagnostic groups analyzed. Our results, which are 
in line with recently discovered mutations in next-generation sequencing studies,
suggest that the combined immunohistochemical detection of VPREB3 and ID3 is
applicable to the routine diagnostic in case of mature aggressive B-cell
lymphomas. In particular, it represents a useful and routinely applicable
diagnostic tool to exclude BL diagnosis in case of single positive or double
negative cases.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24493312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014 Feb 1;4(2). pii: a014282. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a014282.

Oncogenic mechanisms in Burkitt lymphoma.

Schmitz R(1), Ceribelli M, Pittaluga S, Wright G, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Burkitt lymphoma is a germinal center B-cell-derived cancer that was instrumental
in the identification of MYC as an important human oncogene more than three
decades ago. Recently, new genomics technologies have uncovered several
additional oncogenic mechanisms that cooperate with MYC to create this highly
aggressive cancer. The transcription factor TCF-3 is central to Burkitt lymphoma 
pathogenesis. TCF-3 is rendered constitutively active in Burkitt lymphoma by two 
related mechanisms: (1) somatic mutations that inactivate its negative regulator 
ID3, and (2) somatic mutations in TCF-3 that block the ability of ID3 to bind and
interfere with its activity as a transcription factor. TCF-3 is also a master
regulator of normal germinal center B-cell differentiation. Within the germinal
center, TCF-3 up-regulates genes that are characteristically expressed in the
rapidly dividing centroblasts, the putative cell of origin for Burkitt lymphoma, 
while repressing genes expressed in the less proliferative centrocytes. TCF-3
promotes antigen-independent (tonic) B-cell-receptor signaling in Burkitt
lymphoma by transactivating immunoglobulin heavy- and light-chain genes while
repressing PTPN6, which encodes the phosphatase SHP-1, a negative regulator of
B-cell-receptor signaling. Tonic B-cell-receptor signaling sustains Burkitt
lymphoma survival by engaging the PI3 kinase pathway. In addition, TCF-3 promotes
cell-cycle progression by transactivating CCND3, encoding a D-type cyclin that
regulates the G1-S phase transition. Additionally, CCND3 accumulates oncogenic
mutations that stabilize cyclin D3 protein expression and drive proliferation.
These new insights into Burkitt lymphoma pathogenesis suggest new therapeutic
strategies, which are sorely needed in developing regions of the world where this
cancer is endemic.

PMCID: PMC3904095
PMID: 24492847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Apr;53(4):277-88. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22136. Epub
2014 Feb 1.

Expression of stress-induced phosphoprotein1 (STIP1) is associated with tumor
progression and poor prognosis in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Cho H(1), Kim S, Shin HY, Chung EJ, Kitano H, Hyon Park J, Park L, Chung JY,
Hewitt SM, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Institute of Women's Life Medical
Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Stress-induced phosphoprotein1 (STIP1) is a candidate biomarker in epithelial
ovarian cancer (EOC). In this study, we investigated in detail the expression of 
STIP1, as well as its functions, in EOC. STIP1 expression was assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and the results were compared with clinicopathologic
factors, including survival data. The effects of STIP1 gene silencing via small
interfering RNA (siRNA) were examined in EOC cells and a xenograft model. The
expression of STIP1 protein in EOC was significantly higher than in the other
study groups (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and this increase of expression was significantly
associated with tumor stage (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), tumor grade (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.029), and lymph node 
metastasis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020). In multivariate analysis, overall survival in EOC was
significantly shorter in cases with high STIP1 expression (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.78 [1.01-7.63],
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047). STIP1 silencing in EOC cells resulted in inhibition of cell
proliferation and invasion. In addition, in vivo experiments using STIP1 siRNA
clearly showed a strong inhibition of tumor growth and a modulation of expression
of prosurvival and apoptotic genes, further suggesting that STIP1 silencing can
prevent cell proliferation and invasion. In conclusion, increased STIP1
expression is associated with poor survival outcome in EOC, and STIP1 may
represent a useful therapeutic target in EOC patients.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24488757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 1;192(5):2227-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302904. Epub 2014
Jan 27.

E and Id proteins influence invariant NKT cell sublineage differentiation and
proliferation.

D'Cruz LM(1), Stradner MH, Yang CY, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.

Disease outcome is known to be influenced by defined subsets of invariant NKT
(iNKT) cells residing in distinct locations within peripheral tissue. However,
the factors governing the development of these unique iNKT sublineages during
thymic development are unknown. In this study we explored the mechanism by which 
E protein transcription factors and their negative regulators, the Id proteins,
control the development of iNKT sublineages after positive selection. We found
that E proteins directly bound the promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF)
promoter and were required for expression of this lineage-defining transcription 
factor and for the maturation and expansion of thymic iNKT cells. Moreover,
expression of the negative regulators of E proteins, Id2 and Id3, defined
distinct iNKT cell sublineages. Id3 was expressed in PLZF(high) NKT2 cells and
loss of Id3 allowed for increased thymic iNKT cell expansion and abundance of the
PLZF(+) NKT2 sublineage. Id2 was expressed in T-BET(+) NKT1 cells, and both Id
proteins were required for the formation of this sublineage. Thus, we provide
insight into E and Id protein regulation of iNKT cell proliferation and
differentiation to specific sublineages during development in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3943952
PMID: 24470501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nature. 2014 Mar 27;507(7493):513-8. doi: 10.1038/nature12910. Epub 2014 Jan 19.

Transcription factor achaete-scute homologue 2 initiates follicular T-helper-cell
development.

Liu X(1), Chen X(2), Zhong B(3), Wang A(1), Wang X(1), Chu F(4), Nurieva RI(5),
Yan X(6), Chen P(7), van der Flier LG(8), Nakatsukasa H(9), Neelapu SS(4), Chen
W(9), Clevers H(10), Tian Q(6), Qi H(2), Wei L(11), Dong C(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China [2]
Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77054, USA.
(2)Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China. (3)1]
Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77054, USA
[2] College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (B.Z.);
SomantiX B.V., Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands (L.G.v.d.F.).
(4)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 
77054, USA. (5)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77054, USA. (6)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington 98103,
USA. (7)Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-1858, USA. (8)1] Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center
Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands [2] College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China (B.Z.); SomantiX B.V., Padualaan 
8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands (L.G.v.d.F.). (9)National Institute of Dental
and Craniofacial Research, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2190, USA. (10)Hubrecht 
Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT
Utrecht, the Netherlands. (11)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, China.

In immune responses, activated T cells migrate to B-cell follicles and develop
into follicular T-helper (TFH) cells, a recently identified subset of CD4(+) T
cells specialized in providing help to B lymphocytes in the induction of germinal
centres. Although Bcl6 has been shown to be essential in TFH-cell function, it
may not regulate the initial migration of T cells or the induction of the TFH
program, as exemplified by C-X-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CXCR5) upregulation. 
Here we show that expression of achaete-scute homologue 2 (Ascl2)--a basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor--is selectively upregulated in TFH
cells. Ectopic expression of Ascl2 upregulates CXCR5 but not Bcl6, and
downregulates C-C chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) expression in T cells in vitro, as 
well as accelerating T-cell migration to the follicles and TFH-cell development
in vivo in mice. Genome-wide analysis indicates that Ascl2 directly regulates
TFH-related genes whereas it inhibits expression of T-helper cell 1 (TH1) and
TH17 signature genes. Acute deletion of Ascl2, as well as blockade of its
function with the Id3 protein in CD4(+) T cells, results in impaired TFH-cell
development and germinal centre response. Conversely, mutation of Id3, known to
cause antibody-mediated autoimmunity, greatly enhances TFH-cell generation. Thus,
Ascl2 directly initiates TFH-cell development.

PMCID: PMC4012617
PMID: 24463518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Apr;115(4):744-53. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24714.

Identification of FHL2-regulated genes in liver by microarray and bioinformatics 
analysis.

Ng CF(1), Xu JY, Li MS, Tsui SK.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
Hong Kong.

FHL2 is a LIM domain protein that is able to form various protein complexes and
regulate gene transcription. Recent findings showed that FHL2 is a potential
tumor suppressor gene that was down-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma. In the
present study, microarray profiling of gene expression was performed to identify 
the genes regulated by FHL2 in mouse livers. The differentially expressed genes
were further analyzed by bioinformatics tools including DAVID, KEGG, and STRING. 
Our data illustrate that FHL2 affects genes involved in various functions
including signal transduction, responses to external stimulus, cancer-related
pathways, cardiovascular function and regulation of actin cytoskeleton. Moreover,
a network of differentially expressed genes identified in this study and known
FHL2-interacting proteins was constructed. Then, genes identified by
bioinformatics tools and most functional relevant to FHL2 were selected for
further validation. Finally, the differential expression of Ar, Id3, Inhbe,
Alas1, Bcl6, Ppard, Angptl4, and Erbb4 were confirmed by quantitative real-time
PCR. In summary, we have established a database of genes that are potentially
regulated by FHL2 and these genes should be future targets for the elucidation of
functional roles of FHL2.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24453047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Manag Res. 2014 Jan 9;6:27-38. doi: 10.2147/CMAR.S37745.

Developments in Burkitt's lymphoma: novel cooperations in oncogenic MYC
signaling.

Spender LC(1), Inman GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Research, Medical Research Institute, Jacqui Wood Cancer
Centre, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee, UK.

Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive disorder associated with extremely high 
rates of cell proliferation tempered by high levels of apoptosis. Despite the
high levels of cell death, the net effect is one of rapid tumor growth. The tumor
arises within the germinal centers of secondary lymphoid tissues and is
identifiable by translocation of the c-MYC gene into the immunoglobulin gene
loci, resulting in deregulation of the proto-oncogene. Many of the major players 
involved in determining the development of BL have been characterized in human BL
cell lines or in mouse models of MYC-driven lymphomagenesis. Both systems have
been useful so far in characterizing the role of tumor suppressor genes (for
example, p53), prosurvival signaling pathways, and members of the B-cell
lymphoma-2 family of apoptosis regulators in determining the fate of c-MYC
overexpressing B-cells, and ultimately in regulating lymphoma development.
Signaling through phosphoinositide (PI)3-kinase stands out as being critical for 
BL cell survival. Recurrent mutations in ID3 or TCF3 (E2A) that promote signaling
through PI3-kinase have recently been identified in human BL samples, and new
therapeutic strategies based on coordinately targeting both the prosurvival
factor, B-cell lymphoma-XL, and the PI3-kinase/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) signaling pathway to synergistically induced BL apoptosis have been
proposed. Now, engineering both constitutive c-MYC expression and PI3-kinase
activity, specifically in murine B-cells undergoing the germinal center reaction,
has revealed that there is synergistic cooperation between c-MYC and PI3-kinase
during BL development. The resulting tumors phenocopy the human malignancy, and
acquire tertiary mutations also present in human tumors. This model may,
therefore, prove useful in further studies to identify functionally relevant
mutational events necessary for BL pathogenesis. This review discusses these
cooperating interactions, the possible influence of BL tumor-associated viruses, 
and highlights potential new opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3890408
PMID: 24426788  [PubMed]


101. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2014 Jan;143(1):34-9.

[Launch of new drug development support network led by iD3].

[Article in Japanese]

Eno H.

PMID: 24420135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 2;34(1):53-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.531. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Id4 suppresses MMP2-mediated invasion of glioblastoma-derived cells by direct
inactivation of Twist1 function.

Rahme GJ(1), Israel MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH, USA [2] Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 
Hanover, NH, USA. (2)1] Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA [3] Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.

Tumor cell invasion is a major contributor to cancer morbidity, and is of
particular importance in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the highest
grade and most aggressive primary brain tumor. Tumor cell invasion and the
expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are required for GBM
invasion, are enhanced by inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) gene family members, Id1,
Id2 and Id3, which can be highly expressed in glioma. Id4 is expressed in GBM at 
more variable levels than these other family members and we sought to determine
its role in invasion. We found, unexpectedly, that invasion was dramatically
inhibited in cells expressing Id4 as a result of decreased MMP2, a secreted
proteinase key for brain tumor invasion. We demonstrate that Id4 decreased MMP2
expression by a direct inhibitory interaction with Twist1, a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor known to increase MMP2 expression.
Importantly, using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we show that Id4 expression
correlates with survival of glioblastoma patients and inversely correlates with
MMP2 expression. These data suggest that the upregulation of MMP2 resulting from 
decreased Id4 expression in GBM may contribute to the morbidity and mortality of 
GBM patients.

PMID: 24413082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Dec 28;19(48):9334-42. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i48.9334.

Inhibitor of differentiation proteins do not influence prognosis of biliary tract
cancer.

Harder J(1), Müller MJ(1), Fuchs M(1), Gumpp V(1), Schmitt-Graeff A(1), Fischer
R(1), Frank M(1), Opitz O(1), Hasskarl J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jan Harder, Department of Gastroenterology, Hematology and Oncology,
Hegau-Bodensee-Hochrhein Kliniken, 78221 Singen, Germany.

AIM: To investigate the expression and clinical relevance of inhibitor of
differentiation (ID) proteins in biliary tract cancer.
METHODS: ID protein expression was analyzed in 129 samples from patients with
advanced biliary tract cancer (BTC) (45 extrahepatic, 50 intrahepatic, and 34
gallbladder cancers), compared to normal controls and correlated with clinical an
pathological parameters.
RESULTS: ID1-3 proteins are frequently overexpressed in all BTC subtypes
analyzed. No correlation between increased ID protein expression and tumor
grading, tumor subtype or treatment response was detected. Survival was
influenced primary tumor localization (extrahepatic vs intrahepatic and gall
bladder cancer, OS 1.5 years vs 0.9 years vs 0.7 years, P = 0.002), by stage at
diagnosis (OS 2.7 years in stage I vs 0.6 years in stage IV, P < 0.001),
resection status and response to systemic chemotherapy. In a multivariate model, 
ID protein expression did not correlate with clinical prognosis. Nevertheless,
there was a trend of shorter OS in patients with loss of cytoplasmic ID4 protein 
expression (P = 0.076).
CONCLUSION: ID protein expression is frequently deregulated in BTC but does not
influence clinical prognosis. Their usefulness as prognostic biomarkers in BTC is
very limited.

PMCID: PMC3882406
PMID: 24409060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Front Genet. 2013 Dec 25;4:304. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00304. eCollection 2013.

The role of SNP-loop diuretic interactions in hypertension across ethnic groups
in HyperGEN.

de Las Fuentes L(1), Sung YJ(2), Schwander KL(2), Kalathiveetil S(2), Hunt SC(3),
Arnett DK(4), Rao DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA ; Division of Biostatistics, Washington University
School of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA. (2)Division of Biostatistics, Washington
University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA. (3)Division of Cardiovascular
Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham Birmingham, AL, USA.

Blood pressure (BP) is significantly influenced by genetic factors; however, less
than 3% of the BP variance has been accounted for by variants identified from
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of primarily European-descent cohorts.
Other genetic influences, including gene-environment (GxE) interactions, may
explain more of the unexplained variance in BP. African Americans (AA) have a
higher prevalence and earlier age of onset of hypertension (HTN) as compared with
European Americans (EA); responses to anti-hypertensive drugs vary across race
groups. To examine potential interactions between the use of loop diuretics and
HTN traits, we analyzed systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood BP from 1222 AA 
and 1231 EA participants in the Hypertension Genetic Epidemiology Network
(HyperGEN). Population-specific score tests were used to test associations of SBP
and DBP, using a panel of genotyped and imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) for AA (2.9 million SNPs) and EA (2.3 million SNPs). Several promising
loci were identified through gene-loop diuretic interactions, although no SNP
reached genome-wide significance after adjustment for genomic inflation. In AA,
SNPs in or near the genes NUDT12, CHL1, GRIA1, CACNB2, and PYHIN1 were identified
for SBP, and SNPs near ID3 were identified for DBP. For EA, promising SNPs for
SBP were identified in ESR1 and for DBP in SPATS2L and EYA2. Among these SNPs,
none were common across phenotypes or population groups. Biologic plausibility
exists for many of the identified genes, suggesting that these are candidate
genes for regulation of BP and/or anti-hypertensive drug response. The lack of
genome-wide significance is understandable in this small study employing
gene-drug interactions. These findings provide a set of prioritized
SNPs/candidate genes for future studies in HTN. Studies in more diversified
population samples may help identify previously missed variants.

PMCID: PMC3872290
PMID: 24400021  [PubMed]


105. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):1055-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302694. Epub 2013
Dec 30.

Id3 and Id2 act as a dual safety mechanism in regulating the development and
population size of innate-like <U+03B3>d T cells.

Zhang B(1), Lin YY, Dai M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

The innate-like T cells expressing V<U+03B3>1.1 and Vd6.3 represent a unique T cell
lineage sharing features with both the <U+03B3>d T and the invariant NKT cells. The
population size of V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cells is tightly controlled and usually
contributes to a very small proportion of thymic output, but the underlying
mechanism remains enigmatic. Deletion of Id3, an inhibitor of E protein
transcription factors, can induce an expansion of the V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cell
population. This phenotype is much stronger on the C57BL/6 background than on the
129/sv background. Using quantitative trait linkage analysis, we identified Id2, 
a homolog of Id3, to be the major modifier of Id3 in limiting V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T 
cell expansion. The V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) phenotype is attributed to an intrinsic
weakness of Id2 transcription from Id2 C57BL/6 allele, leading to an overall
reduced dosage of Id proteins. However, complete removal of both Id2 and Id3
genes in developing T cells suppressed the expansion of V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cells 
because of decreased proliferation and increased cell death. We showed that
conditional knockout of Id2 alone is sufficient to promote a moderate expansion
of <U+03B3>d T cells. These regulatory effects of Id2 and Id3 on V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T
cells are mediated by titration of E protein activity, because removing one or
more copies of E protein genes can restore V<U+03B3>1.1(+)Vd6.3(+) T cell expansion in
Id2 and Id3 double conditional knockout mice. Our data indicated that Id2 and Id3
collaboratively control survival and expansion of the <U+03B3>d lineage through
modulating a proper threshold of E proteins.

PMCID: PMC3899720
PMID: 24379125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Apr;35(4):951-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt479. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

Id2, Id3 and Id4 overcome a Smad7-mediated block in tumorigenesis, generating
TGF-ß-independent melanoma.

DiVito KA(1), Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Chen YS, Trabosh VA, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The role for the inhibitors of differentiation (Ids) proteins in melanomagenesis 
has been poorly explored. In other cell types, Ids have been shown to contribute 
to cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis and, along with a number of
other genes, are direct downstream targets of the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß pathway. Expression of Smad7, which suppress TGF-ß signaling, or
synthetic TGF-ß inhibitors, was shown to potently suppress melanomagenesis. We
found that endogenous Id2, Id3 and Id4 expression was elevated in 1205Lu versus
1205Lu cells constitutively expressing Smad7, indicating Ids may play a role in
melanomagenesis. Therefore, the effects of Tet-inducible expression of Id2, Id3
or Id4 along with Smad7 in TGF-ß-dependent 1205Lu human melanoma cells were
explored in vitro and in vivo. 1205Lu cells formed subcutaneous tumors in athymic
mice, whereas cells expressing Smad7 failed to form tumors. However, 1205Lu cells
expressing Smad7 along with doxycycline-induced Id2, Id3 or Id4 were able to
overcome the potent tumorigenic block mediated by S7, to varying degrees.
Conversely, Id small interfering RNA knockdown suppressed anchorage-independent
growth of melanoma. Histology of tumors from 1205Lu cells expressing Smad7 + Id4 
revealed an average of 31% necrosis, compared with 5.2% in tumors from 1205Lu
with vector only. Downstream, Ids suppressed cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, 
and re-upregulated invasion and metastasis-related genes matrix metalloproteinase
2 (MMP2), MMP9, CXCR4 and osteopontin, shown previously to be downregulated in
response to Smad7. This study shows that Id2, Id3 and Id4 are each able to
overcome TGF-ß dependence, and establish a role for Ids as key mediators of TGF-ß
melanomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4031572
PMID: 24343358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2830. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3830.

A genome-wide regulatory network identifies key transcription factors for memory 
CD8<U+207A> T-cell development.

Hu G(1), Chen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA.

Memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell development is defined by the expression of a specific set of 
memory signature genes. Despite recent progress, many components of the
transcriptional control of memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell development are still unknown. To
identify transcription factors and their interactions in memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell
development, we construct a genome-wide regulatory network and apply it to
identify key transcription factors that regulate memory signature genes. Most of 
the known transcription factors having a role in memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell development
are rediscovered and about a dozen new ones are also identified. Sox4, Bhlhe40,
Bach2 and Runx2 are experimentally verified, and Bach2 is further shown to
promote both development and recall proliferation of memory CD8<U+207A> T cells through 
Prdm1 and Id3. Gene perturbation study identifies the interactions between the
transcription factors, with Sox4 positioned as a hub. The identified
transcription factors and insights into their interactions should facilitate
further dissection of molecular mechanisms underlying memory CD8<U+207A> T-cell
development.

PMCID: PMC3999894
PMID: 24335726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 28;8(11):e81551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081551.
eCollection 2013.

Anti-Müllerian hormone recruits BMPR-IA in immature granulosa cells.

Sèdes L(1), Leclerc A, Moindjie H, Cate RL, Picard JY, di Clemente N, Jamin SP.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U782, Clamart, France ; Université Paris-Sud, UMR- S0782, Clamart,
France.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is a member of the TGF-ß superfamily secreted by the
gonads of both sexes. This hormone is primarily known for its role in the
regression of the Müllerian ducts in male fetuses. In females, AMH is expressed
in granulosa cells of developing follicles. Like other members of the TGF-ß
superfamily, AMH transduces its signal through two transmembrane serine/threonine
kinase receptors including a well characterized type II receptor, AMHR-II. The
complete signalling pathway of AMH involving Smads proteins and the type I
receptor is well known in the Müllerian duct and in Sertoli and Leydig cells but 
not in granulosa cells. In addition, few AMH target genes have been identified in
these cells. Finally, while several co-receptors have been reported for members
of the TGF-ß superfamily, none have been described for AMH. Here, we have shown
that none of the Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) co-receptors, Repulsive
guidance molecules (RGMs), were essential for AMH signalling. We also
demonstrated that the main Smad proteins used by AMH in granulosa cells were Smad
1 and Smad 5. Like for the other AMH target cells, the most important type I
receptor for AMH in these cells was BMPR-IA. Finally, we have identified a new
AMH target gene, Id3, which could be involved in the effects of AMH on the
differentiation of granulosa cells and its other target cells.

PMCID: PMC3842941
PMID: 24312319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Histochem Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;141(4):431-40. doi: 10.1007/s00418-013-1169-7. Epub
2013 Nov 30.

ID2 and ID3 protein expression mirrors granulopoietic maturation and
discriminates between acute leukemia subtypes.

May AM(1), Frey AV, Bogatyreva L, Benkisser-Petersen M, Hauschke D, Lübbert M,
Wäsch R, Werner M, Hasskarl J, Lassmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Breisacher Str. 115a,
79106, Freiburg, Germany.

The inhibitors of DNA binding (ID) inhibit basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors and thereby guide cellular differentiation and proliferation. To
elucidate the involvement of IDs in hematopoiesis and acute leukemias (AL), we
analyzed ID2 and ID3 expression in hematopoiesis and leukemic blasts in bone
marrow biopsies (BMB). BMB of healthy stem cell donors (n = 19) and BMB of
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with myelodysplasia-related changes
(AML-MD; n = 19), de novo AML (n = 20), B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL)
(n = 23), T-ALL (n = 19), were immunohistochemically stained for ID2 and ID3
expression. The expression patterns were evaluated and quantified for each
hematopoietic lineage and each leukemia subtype. In normal BMB, immature
granulopoiesis showed weak ID2 and strong ID3 expression, which was lost during
maturation (p < 0.001). Erythropoiesis remained negative for ID2/3 (p < 0.001).
ID2/3 expression differed between immature granulopoiesis and leukemic blasts
(p < 0.001). Moreover, differential ID2/3 expression was seen between AL
subgroups: AML, especially AML-MD, had more ID2- (p < 0.001) and ID3-positive
(p < 0.001) blasts than ALL. We show a comprehensive in situ picture of ID2/3
expression in hematopoiesis and AL. Morphologically, ID2/3 proteins seem to be
involved in the granulopoietic maturation. Importantly, the distinct ID2/3
expression patterns in AL indicate a specific deregulation of ID2/3 in the
various types of AL and may support subtyping of AL.

PMID: 24292846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 2013 Dec 15;191(12):5973-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301521. Epub 2013 
Nov 15.

Essential functions for ID proteins at multiple checkpoints in invariant NKT cell
development.

Verykokakis M(1), Krishnamoorthy V, Iavarone A, Lasorella A, Sigvardsson M, Kee
BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637;

Invariant NKT (iNKT) cells display characteristics of both adaptive and innate
lymphoid cells (ILCs). Like other ILCs, iNKT cells constitutively express ID
proteins, which antagonize the E protein transcription factors that are essential
for adaptive lymphocyte development. However, unlike ILCs, ID2 is not essential
for thymic iNKT cell development. In this study, we demonstrated that ID2 and ID3
redundantly promoted iNKT cell lineage specification involving the induction of
the signature transcription factor PLZF and that ID3 was critical for development
of TBET-dependent NKT1 cells. In contrast, both ID2 and ID3 limited iNKT cell
numbers by enforcing the postselection checkpoint in conventional thymocytes.
Therefore, iNKT cells show both adaptive and innate-like requirements for ID
proteins at distinct checkpoints during iNKT cell development.

PMCID: PMC3864619
PMID: 24244015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. RNA. 2014 Jan;20(1):24-35. doi: 10.1261/rna.039701.113. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Role of helical constraints of the EBS1-IBS1 duplex of a group II intron on
demarcation of the 5' splice site.

Popovic M, Greenbaum NL.

Recognition of the 5' splice site by group II introns involves pairing between an
exon binding sequence (EBS) 1 within the ID3 stem-loop of domain 1 and a
complementary sequence at the 3' end of exon 1 (IBS1). To identify the molecular 
basis for splice site definition of a group IIB ai5<U+03B3> intron, we probed the
solution structure of the ID3 stem-loop alone and upon binding of its IBS1 target
by solution NMR. The ID3 stem was structured. The base of the ID3 loop was
stacked but displayed a highly flexible EBS1 region. The flexibility of EBS1
appears to be a general feature of the ai5<U+03B3> and the smaller Oceanobacillus
iheyensis (O.i.) intron and may help in effective search of conformational space 
and prevent errors in splicing as a result of fortuitous base-pairing. Binding of
IBS1 results in formation of a structured seven base pair duplex that terminates 
at the 5' splice site in spite of the potential for additional A-U and G•U pairs.
Comparison of these data with conformational features of EBS1-IBS1 duplexes
extracted from published structures suggests that termination of the duplex and
definition of the splice site are governed by constraints of the helical geometry
within the ID3 loop. This feature and flexibility of the uncomplexed ID3 loop
appear to be common for both the ai5<U+03B3> and O.i. introns and may help to fine-tune 
elements of recognition in group II introns.

PMCID: PMC3866642
PMID: 24243113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Anticancer Res. 2013 Nov;33(11):4771-8.

ID3 mutations are recurrent events in double-hit B-cell lymphomas.

Gebauer N(1), Bernard V, Feller AC, Merz H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Referenzzentrum für Lymphknotendiagnostik und
Hämatopathologie, Universität zu Luebeck, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.
niklas.gebauer@medizin.uni-luebeck.de.

BACKGROUND: Double-hit lymphomas (DHL) with chromosomal rearrangements affecting 
the avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (cMYC) and either the B-cell
lymphoma-2 (BCL2) or -6 (BCL6) locus are uncommon neoplasms with an aggressive
clinical course and dismal prognosis. Most cases exhibit a phenotype intermediate
between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma. Recently
mutations affecting the inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (ID3), a helix-loop-helix
protein regulating cell cycle progression and B-cell differentiation, were
identified as being molecular hallmarks in Burkitt lymphoma, with only rare
mutations being found in other lymphomas with translocations affecting cMYC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, we evaluated the mutational status
of ID3 in 37 cases of DHL and 16 cases of sporadic Burkitt lymphoma in order to
identify a possible association of this new found hallmark with the rare and
insufficiently-defined entity of DHL, seeking to broaden the understanding of
these lymphomas at a molecular level.
RESULTS: We identified ID3 mutations in lymphomas with chromosomal aberrations at
cMYC and either BCL2 or BCL6 at a frequency intermediate between that of DLBCL
and Burkitt lymphoma, hinting at a common pathway in lymphomagenesis for a subset
of patients with DHL.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study assist in the molecular characterization of
these highly aggressive lymphomas, potentially giving rise to novel therapeutic
approaches.

PMID: 24222112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS Genet. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003887. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003887. Epub 2013
Oct 31.

Tracking proliferative history in lymphocyte development with cre-mediated sister
chromatid recombination.

Zhang B(1), Dai M, Li QJ, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, United States of America.

Tracking and isolating live cells based on their proliferative history in live
animals remains a technical challenge in animal studies. We have designed a
genetic marking system for tracking the proliferative frequency and history of
lymphocytes during their development and homeostatic maintenance. This system is 
based on activation of a fluorescent marker after Cre-dependent recombination
between sister chromatids at a specially designed tandem loxP site, named Tlox.
We have demonstrated the utility of the Tlox system in tracking proliferative
windows of B and T lymphocyte development. We have further applied the Tlox
system in the analysis of the proliferative behavior and homeostatic maintenance 
of V<U+03B3>1.1 positive <U+03B3>d T cells. Our data show that V<U+03B3>1.1 T cells generated in
neonatal but not adult life are able to expand in the thymus. The expanded V<U+03B3>1.1 
T cells are preferentially maintained in the liver but not in lymphoid organs. It
has been shown that numbers of V<U+03B3>1.1 T cells were dramatically increased in the
lymphoid organs of Id3 deficient mice. By combining BrdU and Tlox assays we show 
that this phenotype is primarily due to enhanced neonatal expansion and
subsequent retention of V<U+03B3>1.1 T cells. Thus, the Tlox system provides a new
genetic tool to track clonal expansion within a defined cell population or tissue
type in live animals.

PMCID: PMC3814321
PMID: 24204301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cancer. 2013 Oct 26;12(1):129. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-129.

Small molecule antagonist of the bone morphogenetic protein type I receptors
suppresses growth and expression of Id1 and Id3 in lung cancer cells expressing
Oct4 or nestin.

Langenfeld E, Deen M, Zachariah E, Langenfeld J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, One 
Robert Wood Johnson Place, P,O, Box 19, New Brunswick, NJ 08903-0019, USA.
langenje@rwjms.rutgers.edu.

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) are embryonic morphogens that are
aberrantly expressed in lung cancer. BMPs mediate cell fate decisions and
self-renewal of stem cells, through transcription regulation of inhibitor of
differentiation protein/DNA binding proteins (Id1-3). Inhibition of BMP signaling
decreases growth and induces cell death of lung cancer cells lines by
downregulating the expression of Id proteins. It is not known whether the BMP
signaling cascade regulates growth and the expression of Id proteins of lung
cancer cells expressing the stem cell markers Oct4 and/or nestin.
METHODS: Lung cancer cells expressing Oct4 or nestin were isolated from lung
cancer cell lines by stably transfecting the Oct4 promoter or nestin promoter
expression vectors that induce expression of the green fluorescent protein
reporter.
RESULTS: Our studies suggest that lung cancer cells expressing Oct4 or nestin are
different cell populations. Microarray and quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated that 
the expression of specific stem cell markers were different between isolated Oct4
and nestin cells. Both the Oct4 and nestin populations were more tumorigenic than
controls but histologically they were quite different. The isolated Oct4 and
nestin cells also responded differently to inhibition of BMP signaling. Blockade 
of BMP signaling with the BMP receptor antagonist DMH2 caused significant growth 
inhibition of both the Oct4 and nestin cell populations but only increased cell
death in the nestin population. DMH2 also induced the expression of nestin in the
Oct4 population but not in the nestin cells. We also show that BMP signaling is
an important regulator of Id1 and Id3 in both the Oct4 and nestin cell
populations. Furthermore, we show that NeuN is frequently expressed in NSCLC and 
provide evidence suggesting that Oct4 cells give rise to cancer cells expressing 
nestin and/or NeuN.
CONCLUSION: These studies show that although biologically different, BMP
signaling is growth promoting in cancer cells expressing Oct4 or nestin.
Inhibition of BMP signaling decreases expression of Id proteins and suppresses
growth of cancer cells expressing Oct4 or Nestin. Small molecule antagonists of
the BMP type I receptors represent potential novel drugs to target the population
of cancer cells expressing stem cell markers.

PMCID: PMC4176118
PMID: 24160469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 24;4:e879. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.409.

Transcriptional regulation of immediate-early gene response by THOC5, a member of
mRNA export complex, contributes to the M-CSF-induced macrophage differentiation.

Tran DD(1), Saran S, Dittrich-Breiholz O, Williamson AJ, Klebba-Färber S, Koch A,
Kracht M, Whetton AD, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Biochemie, OE4310, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Street 1, Hannover D-30623, Germany.

Hematopoiesis and commitment to a restricted lineage are guided by a timely
expressed set of cytokine receptors and their downstream transcription factors. A
member of the mRNA export complex, THOC5 (suppressors of the transcriptional
defects of hpr1 delta by overexpression complex 5) is a substrate for several
tyrosine kinases such as macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) receptor
and various leukemogenic tyrosine kinases, such as Bcr-Abl, or NPM-ALK. THOC5
tyrosine phosphorylation is elevated in stem cells from patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia, suggesting that THOC5 may be involved in leukemia development. 
THOC5 is also an essential element in the maintenance of hematopoiesis in adult
mice. In this report, we show that THOC5 is located in the nuclear speckles, and 
that it is translocated from the nucleus to cytoplasm during M-CSF-induced bone
marrow-derived macrophage differentiation. Furthermore, we have identified THOC5 
target genes by trancriptome analysis, using tamoxifen-inducible THOC5 knockout
macrophages. Although only 99 genes were downregulated in THOC5-depleted
macrophages, half of the genes are involved in differentiation and/or migration. 
These include well-known regulators of myeloid differentiation inhibitor of DNA
binding (Id)1, Id3, Smad family member 6 (Smad6) and Homeobox (Hox)A1. In
addition, a subset of M-CSF-inducible genes, such as Ets family mRNAs are THOC5
target mRNAs. Upon depletion of THOC5, unspliced v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26
oncogene homolog (Ets1) mRNA was accumulated in the nucleus. Furthermore, THOC5
was recruited to chromatin where Ets1 was transcribed and bound to unspliced and 
spliced Ets1 transcripts, indicating that THOC5 has a role in processing/export
of M-CSF-inducible genes. In conclusion, regulation of immediate-early gene
response by THOC5, a member of mRNA export complex contributes to the
M-CSF-induced macrophage differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3920956
PMID: 24157873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 15;191(10):5052-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301252. Epub 2013 
Oct 11.

Combined deletion of Id2 and Id3 genes reveals multiple roles for E proteins in
invariant NKT cell development and expansion.

Li J(1), Wu D, Jiang N, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710;

The invariant NKT (iNKT) cells represent a unique group of aß T cells that have
been classified based on their exclusive usage of the invariant Va14Ja18
TCRa-chain and their innate-like effector function. Thus far, the transcriptional
programs that control Va14Ja18 TCRa rearrangements and the population size of
iNKT cells are still incompletely defined. E protein transcription factors have
been shown to play necessary roles in the development of multiple T cell
lineages, including iNKT cells. In this study, we examined E protein functions in
T cell development through combined deletion of genes encoding E protein
inhibitors Id2 and Id3. Deletion of Id2 and Id3 in T cell progenitors resulted in
a partial block at the pre-TCR selection checkpoint and a dramatic increase in
numbers of iNKT cells. The increase in iNKT cells is accompanied with a biased
rearrangement involving Va14 to Ja18 recombination at the double-positive stage
and enhanced proliferation of iNKT cells. We further demonstrate that a 50%
reduction of E proteins can cause a dramatic switch from iNKT to innate-like <U+03B3>d T
cell fate in Id2- and Id3-deficient mice. Collectively, these findings suggest
that Id2- and Id3-mediated inhibition of E proteins controls iNKT development by 
restricting lineage choice and population expansion.

PMCID: PMC3837387
PMID: 24123680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Anticancer Res. 2013 Oct;33(10):4271-8.

Id4 promotes senescence and sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in DU145
prostate cancer cells.

Carey JP(1), Knowell AE, Chinaranagari S, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, 223 James P. Brawley 
Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA 30314, U.S.A. jchaudhary@cau.edu.

Inhibitor of differentiation proteins (Id1, 2, 3 and 4) are dominant negative
regulators of basic helix loop helix transcription factors and play dominant
roles in cancer cells, spanning several molecular pathways including senescence, 
invasion, metastasis, proliferation and apoptosis. In contrast to high Id1, Id2
and Id3 expression, the expression of Id4 is epigenetically silenced in prostate 
cancer. In the present study we demonstrated a novel role of Id4, that of
promotion of cellular senescence in prostate cancer cells.MATERIALS AND METHODS: 
Id4 was ectopically expressed in DU145 cells (DU145+Id4). The cells treated with 
Doxorubicin (0-500 nm) or vehicle control were analyzed for apoptosis, senescence
(SA-beta Galactosidase), and expression of CDKN1A (p21), CDKN1B(p27), CDKN2A
(p16), E2F1, vimentin and E-cadherin by immuno-histochemistry and/or Western
blot.
RESULTS: In the present study we demonstrated that Id4 promotes cellular
senescence in prostate cancer cell line DU145. Ectopic overexpression of Id4 in
androgen receptor-negative DU145 prostate cancer cells resulted in increased
expression of p16, p21, p27, E-cadherin and vimentin but down-regulated E2F1
expression. Id4 also potentiated the effect of doxorubicin induced senescence and
apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: The absence of functional p16, pRB and p53 in DU145 suggests that Id4
could alter additional molecular pathways such as those involving E2F1 to promote
senescence and increased sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. The
results of the present study support the role of Id4 as a tumor suppressor in
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4042247
PMID: 24122992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Gene. 2014 Jan 1;533(1):1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.105. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

MiR-375, a microRNA related to diabetes.

Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, PR China.
Electronic address: lixueling@hotmail.com.

MiR-375 is an important small non-coding RNA that is specifically expressed in
islet cells of the pancreas. miR-375 is required for normal pancreatic genesis
and influences not only ß-cell mass but also a-cell mass. miR-375 is also
important to glucose-regulated insulin secretion through the regulation of the
expression of Mtpn and Pdk1 genes. When human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
differentiate into endodermal lineages, miR-375 is highly expressed in the
definitive endoderm, which suggests that miR-375 may have a distinct role in
early development. miR-375 plays an important role in the complex regulatory
network of pancreatic development, which could be regulated by pancreatic genes, 
such as NeuroD1, Ngn3, Pdx1 and Hnf6; additionally, miR-375 regulates genes
related to pancreas development, cell growth and proliferation and insulin
secretion genes to exert its function. Because of the special role of miR-375, it
may be a potential target to treat diabetes. Antagonising miR-375 may enhance the
effects of exendin-4 in patients, and controlling the expression of miR-375 could
assist mature hESCs-derived ß-cells.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Dec;33(12):2771-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302571. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Helix-loop-helix factor inhibitor of differentiation 3 regulates interleukin-5
expression and B-1a B cell proliferation.

Perry HM(1), Oldham SN, Fahl SP, Que X, Gonen A, Harmon DB, Tsimikas S, Witztum
JL, Bender TP, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Center (H.M.P., S.N.O., D.B.H., C.A.M.),
Department of Pathology (H.M.P.), Department of Medicine (S.N.O.), Beirne B.
Carter Center for Immunology Research (S.P.F., C.A.M.), Department of
Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology (S.P.F., T.P.B.), Department of
Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Genetics (D.B.H., T.P.B.), Department of
Medicine, Cardiovascular Division (C.A.M.), Department of Molecular Physiology
and Biological Physics (C.A.M.), University of Virginia, Charlottesville; and the
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego (X.Q., A.G., S.T.,
J.L.W.).

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Dec;33(12):2697-8.

OBJECTIVE: Natural immunity is emerging as an important mediator of protection
from atherogenesis. Natural IgM antibodies that recognize oxidation-specific
epitopes on low-density lipoprotein or phospholipids and the B-1a B cells that
produce them attenuate atherosclerosis. We previously demonstrated that Apoe(-/-)
mice globally deficient in the helix-loop-helix protein inhibitor of
differentiation 3 (Id3) develop early diet-induced atherosclerosis. Furthermore, 
B cell-mediated attenuation of atherosclerosis in B cell-deficient mice was
dependent on Id3. Here, we sought to determine whether Id3 regulates B-1a B cells
and the natural antibodies that they produce and identify mechanisms mediating
these effects.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Mice lacking Id3 had significantly fewer B-1a B cells in
the spleen and peritoneal cavity and reduced serum levels of the natural antibody
E06. B cell-specific deletion of Id3 revealed that this effect was not because of
the loss of Id3 in B cells. Interleukin (IL)-33 induced abundant, Id3-dependent
IL-5 production in the recently identified innate lymphoid cell, the natural
helper (NH) cell, but not Th2 or mast cells. In addition, delivery of IL-5 to
Id3-deficient mice restored B-1a B cell proliferation. B-1a B cells were present 
in aortic samples also containing NH cells. Aortic NH cells produced IL-5, a B-1a
B cell mitogen in response to IL-33 stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies are the first to identify NH and B-1a B cells in the
aorta and provide evidence that Id3 is a key regulator of NH cell IL-5 production
and B-1a B cell homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4003558
PMID: 24115031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Curr Opin Immunol. 2013 Oct;25(5):660-6. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2013.09.004. Epub
2013 Oct 1.

Remembering one's ID/E-ntity: E/ID protein regulation of T cell memory.

Omilusik KD(1), Shaw LA, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Division of Biology, 9500 Gilman Drive, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0377, United States.

Upon infection, CD8(+) T cells proliferate and differentiate into armed effector 
cells capable of eliminating the assaulting pathogen. Although the majority of
the antigen-specific T cells will die as the immune response wanes, a few will
survive indefinitely to establish the memory population and provide long-lived
protection against reinfection. E protein transcription factors and their
inhibitors, ID proteins, operate to balance expression of genes that control
CD8(+) T cell differentiation through this process. Here, we discuss the role of 
ID2 and ID3 in promoting the generation and survival of effector and memory
populations, particularly highlighting their reciprocal roles in shaping the
CD8(+) T cell response unique to the inflammatory milieu. We further examine this
coordinated control of gene expression in the context of additional transcription
factors within the transcriptional network that programs CD8(+) effector and
memory T cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3839785
PMID: 24094885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mucosal Immunol. 2014 May;7(3):521-32. doi: 10.1038/mi.2013.69. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Transcription of ROR<U+03B3>t in developing Th17 cells is regulated by E-proteins.

Zhang F(1), Fuss IJ(1), Yang Z(1), Strober W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.

In the present study we investigated the molecular mechanisms regulating the
expression of RAR-related orphan receptor gamma t (ROR<U+03B3>t), the central factor
controlling interleukin (IL)-17 transcription and Th17 differentiation. In key
studies, we found that cells from mice with major deletions of E-protein
transcription factors, E2A and HEB, display greatly reduced ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17
expression and that E-protein-deficient mice exhibit greatly diminished
IL-17-dependent inflammation in experimental allergic encephalitis models. In
additional studies, we unexpectedly found that cells from mice with deletion of
Id3, a protein that inhibits E-protein binding to DNA, display diminished
ROR<U+03B3>t/IL-17 expression and mice deficient in this protein exhibit decreased
Th17-mediated inflammation in a cell-transfer colitis model. The explanation of
these initially paradoxical findings came from studies showing that Id3
deficiency leads to increased IL-4-induced GATA-3 expression, the latter a
negative regulator of ROR<U+03B3>t transcription; thus, increased Id3 expression likely 
has a net positive effect on ROR<U+03B3>t expression via its inhibition of IL-4
production. Finally, we found that both E-proteins and Id3 are upregulated in
tandem by the cytokines that induce Th17 differentiation, transforming growth
factor-ß, and IL-6, implying that these transcription factors are critical
regulators of Th17 induction.

PMCID: PMC4381430
PMID: 24064669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Sep 10;110(37):15019-24. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1309378110. Epub 2013 Aug 26.

The transcription factor Interferon Regulatory Factor 4 is required for the
generation of protective effector CD8+ T cells.

Raczkowski F(1), Ritter J, Heesch K, Schumacher V, Guralnik A, Höcker L, Raifer
H, Klein M, Bopp T, Harb H, Kesper DA, Pfefferle PI, Grusdat M, Lang PA,
Mittrücker HW, Huber M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246
Hamburg, Germany.

Robust cytotoxic CD8(+) T-cell response is important for immunity to
intracellular pathogens. Here, we show that the transcription factor IFN
Regulatory Factor 4 (IRF4) is crucial for the protective CD8(+) T-cell response
to the intracellular bacterium Listeria monocytogenes. IRF4-deficient (Irf4(-/-))
mice could not clear L. monocytogenes infection and generated decreased numbers
of L. monocytogenes-specific CD8(+) T cells with impaired effector phenotype and 
function. Transfer of wild-type CD8(+) T cells into Irf4(-/-) mice improved
bacterial clearance, suggesting an intrinsic defect of CD8(+) T cells in
Irf4(-/-) mice. Following transfer into wild-type recipients, Irf4(-/-) CD8(+) T 
cells became activated and showed initial proliferation upon L. monocytogenes
infection. However, these cells could not sustain proliferation, produced reduced
amounts of IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a, and failed to acquire cytotoxic function. Forced IRF4
expression in Irf4(-/-) CD8(+) T cells rescued the defect. During acute
infection, Irf4(-/-) CD8(+) T cells demonstrated diminished expression of B
lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1), inhibitor of DNA binding
(Id)2, and T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet), transcription factors programming 
effector-cell generation. IRF4 was essential for expression of Blimp-1,
suggesting that altered regulation of Blimp-1 contributes to the defects of
Irf4(-/-) CD8(+) T cells. Despite increased levels of B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL-6), 
Eomesodermin, and Id3, Irf4(-/-) CD8(+) T cells showed impaired memory-cell
formation, indicating additional functions for IRF4 in this process. As IRF4
governs B-cell and CD4(+) T-cell differentiation, the identification of its
decisive role in peripheral CD8(+) T-cell differentiation, suggests a common
regulatory function for IRF4 in adaptive lymphocytes fate decision.

PMCID: PMC3773801
PMID: 23980171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1829(10):1147-59. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.08.002. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Serum regulation of Id1 expression by a BMP pathway and BMP responsive element.

Lewis TC(1), Prywes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA. Electronic address: Tca2103@columbia.edu.

Immediate early genes (IEGs) are expressed upon re-entry of quiescent cells into 
the cell cycle following serum stimulation. These genes are involved in growth
control and differentiation and hence their expression is tightly controlled.
Many IEGs are regulated through Serum Response Elements (SREs) in their
promoters, which bind Serum Response Factor (SRF). However, many other IEGs do
not have SREs in their promoters and their serum regulation is poorly understood.
We have identified SRF-independent IEGs in SRF-depleted fibroblasts. One of
these, Id1, was examined more closely. We mapped a serum responsive element in
the Id1 promoter and find that it is identical to a BMP responsive element (BRE).
The Id1 BRE is necessary and sufficient for the serum regulation of Id1.
Inhibition of the BMP pathway by siRNA depletion of Smad 4, treatment with the
BMP antagonist noggin, or the BMP receptor inhibitor dorsomorphin blocked serum
induction of Id1. Further, BMP2 is sufficient to induce Id1 expression. Given
reports that SRC inhibitors can block Id1 expression, we tested the SRC
inhibitor, AZD0530, and found that it inhibits the serum activation of Id1.
Surprisingly, this inhibition is independent of SRC or its family members.
Rather, we show that AZD0530 directly inhibits the BMP type I receptors. Serum
induction of the Id1 related gene Id3 also required the BMP pathway. Given these 
and other findings we conclude that the Id family of IEGs is regulated by BMPs in
serum through similar BREs. This represents a second pathway for serum regulation
of IEGs.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3786144
PMID: 23948603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Clin Implant Dent Relat Res. 2015 Jan;17 Suppl 1:e35-44. doi: 10.1111/cid.12121. 
Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Correlation between the bone density recorded by a computerized implant motor and
by a histomorphometric analysis: a preliminary in vitro study on bovine ribs.

Iezzi G(1), Scarano A, Di Stefano D, Arosio P, Doi K, Ricci L, Piattelli A,
Perrotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University of
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the present preliminary in vitro study on bovine ribs was
to validate a new intraoperative site-specific classification of bone Density
Index (IDI), obtained by an innovative computerized implant motor, by correlating
these data with the data obtained by the histomorphometrical evaluation of the
same samples.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five segments of bovine ribs were used, and a total of 22 
perforations were performed. A computerized implant motor ("Torque Measuring
Motor") was used to evaluate the bone density, which was classified into four
classes: ID1, ID2, ID3, and ID4. Histomorphometrical analysis of bone density,
expressed as percentage of bony trabeculae over the total biopsy area, was also
performed. The data of bone density obtained by the implant motor were
statistically correlated with the histomorphometrical results.
RESULTS: A significant positive correlation was found between the bone density
measured by the implant motor and the bone density assessed by histomorphometry
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.89, p<U+2009><<U+2009>.0001). Moreover, a significant positive correlation in D1, D2,
and D4, whereas a negative, not significant correlation in D3 was found.
CONCLUSION: Within the limitations of this in vitro study, the intraoperative
site-specific classification of bone density, obtained with this innovative
system, could be helpful for the clinician to tailor the surgical protocol to the
different situations in implant dentistry.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23879771  [PubMed - in process]


125. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3188-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.090696. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Notch1 is required in newly postmitotic cells to inhibit the rod photoreceptor
fate.

Mizeracka K(1), DeMaso CR, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Several models of cell fate determination can be invoked to explain how single
retinal progenitor cells (RPCs) produce different cell types in a terminal
division. To gain insight into this process, the effects of the removal of a cell
fate regulator, Notch1, were studied in newly postmitotic cells using a
conditional allele of Notch1 (N1-CKO) in mice. Almost all newly postmitotic
N1-CKO cells became rod photoreceptors, whereas wild-type (WT) cells achieved a
variety of fates. Single cell profiling of wild-type and N1-CKO retinal cells
transitioning from progenitor to differentiated states revealed differential
expression of inhibitor of DNA binding factors Id1 and Id3, as well as
Notch-regulated ankyrin repeat protein (Nrarp). Misexpression of Id1 and Id3 was 
found to be sufficient to drive production of Müller glial cells and/or RPCs.
Moreover, Id1 and Id3 were shown to partially rescue the production of bipolar
and Müller glial cells in the absence of Notch1 in mitotic and newly postmitotic 
cells. Misexpression of Nrarp, a downstream target gene and inhibitor of the
Notch signaling pathway, resulted in the overproduction of rod photoreceptors at 
the expense of Müller glial cells. These data demonstrate that cell fate
decisions can be made in newly postmitotic retinal cells, and reveal some of the 
regulators downstream of Notch1 that influence the choice of rod and non-rod
fates. Taken together, our results begin to address how different signals
downstream from a common pathway lead to different fate outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3931735
PMID: 23824579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24560-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.434423. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Ankyrin repeat domain protein 2 and inhibitor of DNA binding 3 cooperatively
inhibit myoblast differentiation by physical interaction.

Mohamed JS(1), Lopez MA, Cox GA, Boriek AM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Ankyrin repeat domain protein 2 (ANKRD2) translocates from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm upon myogenic induction. Overexpression of ANKRD2 inhibits C2C12
myoblast differentiation. However, the mechanism by which ANKRD2 inhibits
myoblast differentiation is unknown. We demonstrate that the primary myoblasts of
mdm (muscular dystrophy with myositis) mice (pMB(mdm)) overexpress ANKRD2 and ID3
(inhibitor of DNA binding 3) proteins and are unable to differentiate into
myotubes upon myogenic induction. Although suppression of either ANKRD2 or ID3
induces myoblast differentiation in mdm mice, overexpression of ANKRD2 and
inhibition of ID3 or vice versa is insufficient to inhibit myoblast
differentiation in WT mice. We identified that ANKRD2 and ID3 cooperatively
inhibit myoblast differentiation by physical interaction. Interestingly, although
MyoD activates the Ankrd2 promoter in the skeletal muscles of wild-type mice,
SREBP-1 (sterol regulatory element binding protein-1) activates the same promoter
in the skeletal muscles of mdm mice, suggesting the differential regulation of
Ankrd2. Overall, we uncovered a novel pathway in which SREBP-1/ANKRD2/ID3
activation inhibits myoblast differentiation, and we propose that this pathway
acts as a critical determinant of the skeletal muscle developmental program.

PMCID: PMC3750154
PMID: 23824195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Jun;33(6):812-8.

[Expression of Id1 and Id3 in endometrial carcinoma and their roles in regulating
biological behaviors of endometrial carcinoma cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun L(1), Li X, Liu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, China. sunlili1207@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of inhibitor of DNA differentiation/DNA 
binding 1 (Id1) and Id3 in endometrial carcinoma and explore their roles in
regulating the proliferation, invasion, migration and adhesion of endometrial
carcinoma cells in vitro.
METHODS: Id1 and Id3 expression in 4 fresh endometrial cancer tissue specimens
and matched adjacent tissues were detected using Western blotting. Two
endometrial cancer cell lines, HEC-1-B and RL-952, were both divided into 4
groups, namely the untreated group, blank virus group, promoter group and Id1/Id3
double-knockdown group, and their expressions of MMP2, CXCR4 and P21 were
detected by qRT-PCR and Western blotting. The proliferation, invasion, migration 
and adhesion of the cells were evaluated with MTT, Transwell, wound-healing, and 
adhesion assays.
RESULTS: Endometrial carcinoma tissues showed significantly higher Id1 and Id3
expression than the adjacent tissues (P<0.05). In the two endometrial carcinoma
cell lines, Id1/Id3 double-knockdown significantly decreased MMP2 and CXCR4
expression and increased P21 expression at both mRNA and protein levels (P<0.05),
and resulted in suppressed cell proliferation, invasion, migration and adhesion.
CONCLUSION: Id1 and Id3 expressions are up-regulated in endometrial carcinoma to 
promote the proliferation, invasion, migration and adhesion of the tumor cells by
increasing MMP2 and CXCR4 expression and reducing P21 expression. Therapies
targeting Id1/Id3 can be a novel strategy for treatment of endometrial carcinoma.

PMID: 23803189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Expert Rev Hematol. 2013 Jun;6(3):219-21. doi: 10.1586/ehm.13.27.

Genetic sequencing studies in Burkitt's lymphoma: what can we learn about
tumorigenesis?

Soldini D, Campo E.

PMID: 23782073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Aug 15;305(4):L312-21. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00054.2013. Epub 2013 Jun 14.

Id proteins are critical downstream effectors of BMP signaling in human pulmonary
arterial smooth muscle cells.

Yang J(1), Li X, Li Y, Southwood M, Ye L, Long L, Al-Lamki RS, Morrell NW.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Level 5, Box 157 Addenbrooke's Hospitals, Hills Rd.,
Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.. nwm23@cam.ac.uk.

Bone morphogenetic protein type II receptor (BMPR-II) mutations are responsible
for over 70% of cases of heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Loss of
BMP signaling promotes pulmonary vascular remodeling via modulation of pulmonary 
artery smooth muscle cell (PASMC) proliferation. Id proteins (Id1-4) are major
downstream transcriptional targets of BMP signaling. However, the impact of
BMPR-II mutation on the expression of the range of Id proteins and the
contribution of individual Id proteins to abnormal PASMC function remain unclear.
Human PASMCs were used to determine the expression of Id proteins (Id1-4) by
real-time PCR and immunoblotting. The BMP responses in control cells were
compared with PASMCs harboring BMPR-II mutations and cells in which BMPR-II was
knocked down by siRNA transfection. Id3 expression in pulmonary vessels was also 
investigated in BMPR-II mutant mice and in patients with heritable PAH. BMP4 and 
BMP6, but not BMP9, induced mRNA expression of Id1, Id2, and Id3. The
BMP-stimulated induction of Id1 and Id3 was markedly reduced in BMPR-II mutant
PASMCs and in control PASMCs following siRNA silencing of BMPR-II. Pulmonary
arteries in BMPR-II mutant mice and patients with heritable PAH demonstrated
reduced levels of Id3 compared with control subjects. Lentiviral overexpression
of Id3 reduced cell cycle progression and inhibited proliferation of PASMCs.
Lipopolysaccharide further reduced Id3 expression in mutant PASMCs. In
conclusion, Id proteins, and particularly Id1 and Id3, are critical downstream
effectors of BMP signaling in PASMCs. Loss of BMPR-II function reduces the
induction of Id genes in PASMCs, Id1, and Id3 regulate the proliferation of
PASMCs via cell cycle inhibition, an effect that may be exacerbated by
inflammatory stimuli.

PMCID: PMC3891012
PMID: 23771884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jun 15;13:291. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-291.

ID3 contributes to cerebrospinal fluid seeding and poor prognosis in
medulloblastoma.

Phi JH(1), Choi SA, Lim SH, Lee J, Wang KC, Park SH, Kim SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: The inhibitor of differentiation (ID) genes have been implicated as
promoters of tumor progression and metastasis in many human cancers. The current 
study investigated the expression and functional roles of ID genes in seeding and
prognosis of medulloblastoma.
METHODS: ID gene expression was screened in human medulloblastoma tissues.
Knockdown of ID3 gene was performed in medulloblastoma cells in vitro. The
expression of metastasis-related genes after ID3 knockdown was assessed. The
effect of ID3 knockdown on tumor seeding was observed in an animal model in vivo.
The survival of medulloblastoma patients was plotted according to the ID3
expression levels.
RESULTS: Significantly higher ID3 expression was observed in medulloblastoma with
cerebrospinal fluid seeding than tumors without seeding. Knockdown of ID3
decreased proliferation, increased apoptosis, and suppressed the migration of
D283 medulloblastoma cells in vitro. In a seeding model of medulloblastoma, ID3
knockdown in vivo with shRNA inhibited the growth of primary tumors, prevented
the development of leptomeningeal seeding, and prolonged animal survival. High
ID3 expression was associated with shorter survival of medulloblastoma patients, 
especially in Group 4 medulloblastomas.
CONCLUSIONS: High ID3 expression is associated with medulloblastoma seeding and
is a poor prognostic factor, especially in patients with Group 4 tumors. ID3 may 
represent the metastatic/ aggressive phenotype of a subgroup of medulloblastoma.

PMCID: PMC3686661
PMID: 23768125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Anticancer Res. 2013 May;33(5):2179-83.

The mRNA expression of inhibitors of DNA binding-1 and -2 is associated with
advanced tumour stage and adverse clinical outcome in human breast cancer.

Wazir U(1), Jiang WG, Sharma AK, Newbold RF, Mokbel K.

Author information: 
(1)London Breast Institute, the Princess Grace Hospital, 45 Nottingham Place,
London W1U 5NY, UK.

Inhibitors of DNA binding (ID) are known to have a role in embryogenesis and
oncogenesis. In this study, we analyzed the role of ID1 and ID2 in breast cancer,
by assessing associations of mRNA expression with clinicopathological
parameters.MATERIALS AND METHODS: Breast cancer tissues (n=152) and adjacent
normal tissues (n=31) underwent reverse transcription and quantitative-
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Transcript levels were correlated with
clinicopathological data.
RESULTS: Patients who were disease-free had significantly lower ID1 mRNA
expression than all other patients (p=0.0033). Higher expression was associated
with worse disease-free (p=0.001) and overall survival (p=0.02). ID2 expression
was directly associated with the Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI) (NPI 2 vs. 3; 
p=0.0062) and worsening clinical outcome (disease-free vs. mortality: p=0.0004), 
and with worse disease-free (p=0.01) and overall survival (p=0.005).
CONCLUSION: Our findings are suggestive of a role for ID1 and ID2 in human breast
cancer as possible prognostic markers and therapeutic targets meriting further
validating investigations, by immunohistochemistry and mechanistic studies.

PMID: 23645773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 12;8(4):e61256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061256. Print 2013.

Bone morphogenetic protein type I receptor antagonists decrease growth and induce
cell death of lung cancer cell lines.

Langenfeld E(1), Hong CC, Lanke G, Langenfeld J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are highly conserved morphogens that are
essential for normal development. BMP-2 is highly expressed in the majority of
non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) but not in normal lung tissue or benign
lung tumors. The effects of the BMP signaling cascade on the growth and survival 
of cancer cells is poorly understood. We show that BMP signaling is basally
active in lung cancer cell lines, which can be effectively inhibited with
selective antagonists of the BMP type I receptors. Lung cancer cell lines express
alk2, alk3, and alk6 and inhibition of a single BMP receptor was not sufficient
to decrease signaling. Inhibition of more than one type I receptor was required
to decrease BMP signaling in lung cancer cell lines. BMP receptor antagonists and
silencing of BMP type I receptors with siRNA induced cell death, inhibited cell
growth, and caused a significant decrease in the expression of inhibitor of
differentiation (Id1, Id2, and Id3) family members, which are known to regulate
cell growth and survival in many types of cancers. BMP receptor antagonists also 
decreased clonogenic cell growth. Knockdown of Id3 significantly decreased cell
growth and induced cell death of lung cancer cells. H1299 cells stably
overexpressing Id3 were resistant to growth suppression and induction of cell
death induced by the BMP antagonist DMH2. These studies suggest that BMP
signaling promotes cell growth and survival of lung cancer cells, which is
mediated through its regulation of Id family members. Selective antagonists of
the BMP type I receptors represents a potential means to pharmacologically treat 
NSCLC and other carcinomas with an activated BMP signaling cascade.

PMCID: PMC3625205
PMID: 23593444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59948. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059948. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

E47 and Id1 interplay in epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Cubillo E(1), Diaz-Lopez A, Cuevas EP, Moreno-Bueno G, Peinado H, Montes A,
Santos V, Portillo F, Cano A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (CSIC-UAM),
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.

E12/E47 proteins (encoded by E2A gene) are members of the class I basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors (also known as E proteins). E47 has
been described as repressor of E-cadherin and inducer of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). We reported previously that EMT mediated by E47 in MDCK cells
occurs with a concomitant overexpression of Id1 and Id3 proteins. Id proteins
belong to class V of HLH factors that lack the basic domain; they dimerise with E
proteins and prevent their DNA interaction, thus, acting as dominant negative of 
E proteins. Here, we show that E47 interacts with Id1 in E47 overexpressing MDCK 
cells that underwent a full EMT as well as in mesenchymal breast carcinoma and
melanoma cell lines. By conducting chromatin immunoprecipitation assays we
demonstrate that E47 binds directly to the endogenous E-cadherin promoter of
mesenchymal MDCK-E47 cells in a complex devoid of Id1. Importantly, our data
suggest that both E47 and Id1 are required to maintain the mesenchymal phenotype 
of MDCK-E47 cells. These data support the collaboration between E47 and Id1 in
the maintenance of EMT by mechanisms independent of the dominant negative action 
of Id1 on E47 binding to E-cadherin promoter. Finally, the analysis of several N0
breast tumour series indicates that the expression of E47 and ID1 is
significantly associated with the basal-like phenotype supporting the biological 
significance of the present findings.

PMCID: PMC3608585
PMID: 23555842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 19;433(4):579-85. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.027. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

The metalloid arsenite induces nuclear export of Id3 possibly via binding to the 
N-terminal cysteine residues.

Kurooka H(1), Sugai M, Mori K, Yokota Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Biochemistry and Bioinformative 
Sciences, School of Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui,
Fukui, Japan. hkurooka@u-fukui.ac.jp

Ids are versatile transcriptional repressors that regulate cell proliferation and
differentiation, and appropriate subcellular localization of the Id proteins is
important for their functions. We previously identified distinct functional
nuclear export signals (NESs) in Id1 and Id2, but no active NES has been reported
in Id3. In this study, we found that treatment with the stress-inducing metalloid
arsenite led to the accumulation of GFP-tagged Id3 in the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic 
accumulation was impaired by a mutation in the Id3 NES-like sequence resembling
the Id1 NES, located at the end of the HLH domain. It was also blocked by
co-treatment with the CRM1-specific nuclear export inhibitor leptomycin B (LMB), 
but not with the inhibitors for mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs).
Importantly, we showed that the closely spaced N-terminal cysteine residues of
Id3 interacted with the arsenic derivative phenylarsine oxide (PAO) and were
essential for the arsenite-induced cytoplasmic accumulation, suggesting that
arsenite induces the CRM1-dependent nuclear export of Id3 via binding to the
N-terminal cysteines. Finally, we demonstrated that Id3 significantly repressed
arsenite-stimulated transcription of the immediate-early gene Egr-1 and that this
repression activity was inversely correlated with the arsenite-induced nuclear
export. Our results imply that Id3 may be involved in the biological action of
arsenite.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23523789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Dev Cell. 2013 Mar 25;24(6):586-99. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.01.022. Epub 2013 
Mar 7.

Dll4 and PDGF-BB convert committed skeletal myoblasts to pericytes without
erasing their myogenic memory.

Cappellari O(1), Benedetti S, Innocenzi A, Tedesco FS, Moreno-Fortuny A, Ugarte
G, Lampugnani MG, Messina G, Cossu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Centre for Stem Cells and
Regenerative Medicine, University College London, WC1E 6DE London, UK.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Jul 28;30(2):246-7.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Mar 25;24(6):563-4.

Pericytes are endothelial-associated cells that contribute to vessel wall. Here, 
we report that pericytes may derive from direct conversion of committed skeletal 
myoblasts. When exposed to Dll4 and PDGF-BB, but not Dll1, skeletal myoblasts
downregulate myogenic genes, except Myf5, and upregulate pericyte markers,
whereas inhibition of Notch signaling restores myogenesis. Moreover, when
cocultured with endothelial cells, skeletal myoblasts, previously treated with
Dll4 and PDGF-BB, adopt a perithelial position stabilizing newly formed
vessel-like networks in vitro and in vivo. In a transgenic mouse model in which
cells expressing MyoD activate Notch, skeletal myogenesis is abolished and
pericyte genes are activated. Even if overexpressed, Myf5 does not trigger
myogenesis because Notch induces Id3, partially sequestering Myf5 and inhibiting 
MEF2 expression. Myf5-expressing cells adopt a perithelial position, as
occasionally also observed in wild-type (WT) embryos. These data indicate that
endothelium, via Dll4 and PDGF-BB, induces a fate switch in adjacent skeletal
myoblasts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23477786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57084. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057084. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Tumor stress-induced phosphoprotein1 (STIP1) as a prognostic biomarker in ovarian
cancer.

Chao A(1), Lai CH, Tsai CL, Hsueh S, Hsueh C, Lin CY, Chou HH, Lin YJ, Chen HW,
Chang TC, Wang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. angel945@cgmh.org.tw

Stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1) has been recently identified as a
released biomarker in human ovarian cancer. In addition, STIP1 secreted by human 
ovarian cancer cells has been shown to promote tumor cell proliferation by
binding to ALK2 (activin A receptor, type II-like kinase 2) and activating the
SMAD-ID3 signaling pathways. In this study, a total of 330 ovarian cancer tumor
samples were evaluated for STIP1 expression by immunohistochemistry and analyzed 
for a possible correlation with patient characteristics and survival. The
quantification of immunoreactivity was accomplished by applying an
immunohistochemical scoring system (histoscore). Patients with high-level STIP1
expression (histoscore =169) had a significantly worse survival (high STIP1, mean
survival time<U+200A>=<U+200A>76 months; low STIP1, mean survival time<U+200A>=<U+200A>112 months; P<0.0001).
Moreover, STIP1 histoscores were significantly higher in high-grade tumors (grade
3) than in low-grade (grade 1-2) malignancies (P<0.0001), suggesting that STIP1
may be a proxy for tumor aggressiveness. The results of multivariable analysis
revealed that high STIP1 histoscores, advanced stages, histologic types, and the 
presence of residual disease (=2 cm) were independent predictors of poor
prognosis. The addition of STIP1 histoscores improved the prediction of overall
and progression-free survival rates in the multivariable Cox proportional hazard 
model. The treatment of ovarian cancer cells with recombinant STIP1 stimulated
cell proliferation and migration, but co-treatment with anti-STIP1 antibodies
abrogated this effect. Our findings suggest that STIP1 expression may be related 
to prognosis and that the STIP1 pathway may represent a novel therapeutic target 
for human ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3584135
PMID: 23468915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jun;87(6):1103-13. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1018-4. Epub 2013
Feb 10.

Monitoring of deiodinase deficiency based on transcriptomic responses in SH-SY5Y 
cells.

Song M(1), Song MK, Choi HS, Ryu JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Center for Integrated Risk
Research, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), P.O. Box 131,
Cheongryang, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Iodothyronine deiodinase types I, II, and III (D1, D2, and D3, respectively),
which constitute a family of selenoenzymes, activate and inactivate thyroid
hormones through the removal of specific iodine moieties from thyroxine and its
derivatives. These enzymes are important in the biological effects mediated by
thyroid hormones. The expression of activating and inactivating deiodinases plays
a critical role in a number of cell systems, including the neuronal system,
during development as well as in adult vertebrates. To investigate
deiodinase-disrupting chemicals based on transcriptomic responses, we examined
differences in gene expression profiles between T3-treated and
deiodinase-knockdown SH-SY5Y cells using microarray analysis and quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. A total of 1,558 genes, consisting of 755 upregulated and 803
downregulated genes, were differentially expressed between the T3-treated and
deiodinase-knockdown cells. The expression levels of 10 of these genes (ID2, ID3,
CCL2, TBX3, TGOLN2, C1orf71, ZNF676, GULP1, KLF9, and ITGB5) were altered by
deiodinase-disrupting chemicals (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin,
polychlorinated biphenyls, propylthiouracil, iodoacetic acid, methylmercury,
ß-estradiol, methimazole, 3-methylcholanthrene, aminotriazole, amiodarone,
cadmium chloride, dimethoate, fenvalerate, octylmethoxycinnamate, iopanoic acid, 
methoxychlor, and 4-methylbenzylidene-camphor). These genes are potential
biomarkers for detecting deiodinase deficiency and predicting their effects on
thyroid hormone production.

PMID: 23397585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Jul;19(3):437-46. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9599-4. Epub
2013 Feb 9.

Expression pattern of id proteins in medulloblastoma.

Snyder AD(1), Dulin-Smith AN, Houston RH, Durban AN, Brisbin BJ, Oostra TD,
Marshall JT, Kahwash BM, Pierson CR.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding or inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins are up
regulated in a variety of neoplasms, particularly in association with high-grade,
poorly differentiated tumors, while differentiated tissues show little or no Id
expression. The four Id genes are members of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of
transcription factors and act as negative regulators of transcription by binding 
to and sequestering HLH complexes. We tested the hypothesis that Id proteins are 
overexpressed in medulloblastoma by performing immunohistochemistry using a
medulloblastoma tissue microarray with 45 unique medulloblastoma and 11 normal
control cerebella, and antibodies specific for Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. A
semi-quantitative staining score that took staining intensity and the proportion 
of immunoreactive cells into account was used. Id1 was not detected in normal
cerebella or in medulloblastoma cells, but 78 % of tumors showed strong Id1
expression in endothelial nuclei of tumor vessels. Id2 expression was scant in
normal cerebella and increased in medulloblastoma (median staining score: 4). Id3
expression was noted in some neurons of the developing cerebellar cortex, but it 
was markedly up regulated in medulloblastoma (median staining score: 12) and in
tumor endothelial cells. Id4 was not expressed in normal cerebella or in tumor
cells. Id2 or Id3 overexpression drove proliferation in medulloblastoma cell
lines by altering the expression of critical cell cycle regulatory proteins in
favor of cell proliferation. This study shows that Id1 expression in endothelial 
cells may contribute to angiogenic processes and that increased expression of Id2
and Id3 in medulloblastoma is potentially involved in tumor cell proliferation
and survival.

PMCID: PMC3826575
PMID: 23397264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Vasc Cell. 2013 Feb 6;5(1):3. doi: 10.1186/2045-824X-5-3.

The angiogenic gene profile of circulating endothelial progenitor cells from
ischemic stroke patients.

Navarro-Sobrino M(1), Hernández-Guillamon M, Fernandez-Cadenas I, Ribó M, Romero 
IA, Couraud PO, Weksler BB, Montaner J, Rosell A.

Author information: 
(1)Neurovascular Research Laboratory and Neurovascular Unit, Neurology and
Medicine Department, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute of Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Pg Vall d'Hebron 119-129, Barcelona, 08035, 
Spain. anna.rosell@vhir.org.

BACKGROUND: The identification of circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs)
has introduced new possibilities for cell-based treatments for stroke. We tested 
the angiogenic gene expression of outgrowth endothelial cells (OECs), an EPC
subtype capable to shape vessel structures.
METHODS: OECs (at colony or mature stages) from ischemic stroke patients (n=8)
were characterized using the RT2 ProfilerTM human angiogenesis PCR Array, and
human microvascular endothelial cells (hCMEC/D3) were used as an expression
reference of endothelial cells.
RESULTS: Colony-OECs showed higher expression of CCL2, ID3, IGF-1, MMP9, TGFBR1, 
TNFAIP2, TNF and TGFB1. However, BAI-1, NRP2, THBS1, MMP2 and VEGFC expression
was increased in mature-OECs (p<0.05). ID3 (p=0.008) and TGFBR1 (p=0.03) genes
remained significantly overexpressed in colony-OECs compared to mature-OECs or
hCMEC/D3. MMP9 levels were significantly increased in colony-OECs (p=0.025)
compared to mature-OECs. Moreover, MMP-2, VEGF-C, THBS1 and NRP-2 gene expression
was also significantly increased in mature-OECs compared to hCMEC/D3 (p<0.05).
Some of these genes were positively validated by RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows that OECs from stroke patients present higher levels 
of pro-angiogenic factors at early stages, decreasing in mature OECs when they
become more similar to mature microvascular endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3583716
PMID: 23388410  [PubMed]


140. Cancer Med. 2012 Oct;1(2):187-97. doi: 10.1002/cam4.19. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Id1 and Id3 expression is associated with increasing grade of prostate cancer:
Id3 preferentially regulates CDKN1B.

Sharma P(1), Patel D, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Centre for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia, 30314, USA.

As transcriptional regulators of basic helix-oop-helix (bHLH) transcription and
non-bHLH factors, the inhibitor of differentiation (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4)
proteins play a critical role in coordinated regulation of cell growth,
differentiation, tumorigenesis, and angiogenesis. Id1 regulates prostate cancer
(PCa) cell proliferation, apoptosis, and androgen independence, but its clinical 
significance in PCa remains controversial. Moreover, there is lack of evidence on
the expression of Id2 and Id3 in PCa progression. In this study we investigated
the expression of Id2 and Id3 and reevaluated the expression of Id1 in PCa. We
show that increased Id1 and Id3 protein expression is strongly associated with
increasing grade of PCa. At the molecular level, we report that silencing either 
Id1 or Id3 attenuates cell cycle. Although structurally and mechanistically
similar, our results show that both these proteins are noncompensatory at least
in PCa progression. Moreover, through gene silencing approaches we show that Id1 
and Id3 primarily attenuates CDKN1A (p21) and CDKN1B (p27), respectively. We also
demonstrate that silencing Id3 alone significantly attenuates proliferation of
PCa cells as compared with Id1. We propose that increased Id1 and Id3 expression 
attenuates all three cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKN2B, -1A, and -1B)
resulting in a more aggressive PCa phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3544440
PMID: 23342268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cancer Med. 2012 Oct;1(2):176-86. doi: 10.1002/cam4.16. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Epigenetic inactivation of inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4) correlates with
prostate cancer.

Sharma P(1), Chinaranagari S, Patel D, Carey J, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center For Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

The inhibitor of DNA-binding (Id) proteins, Id1-4 are negative regulators of
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. As key regulators of cell
cycle and differentiation, expression of Id proteins are increasingly observed in
many cancers and associated with aggressiveness of the disease. Of all the four
Id proteins, the expression of Id1, Id2, and to a lesser extent, Id3 in prostate 
cancer and the underlying molecular mechanism is relatively well known. On the
contrary, our previous results demonstrated that Id4 acts as a potential tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer. In the present study, we extend these observations
and demonstrate that Id4 is down-regulated in prostate cancer due to promoter
hypermethylation. We used prostate cancer tissue microarrays to investigate Id4
expression. Methylation specific PCR on bisulfite treated DNA was used to
determine methylation status of Id4 promoter in laser capture micro-dissected
normal, stroma and prostate cancer regions. High Id4 expression was observed in
the normal prostate epithelial cells. In prostate cancer, a stage-dependent
decrease in Id4 expression was observed with majority of high grade cancers
showing no Id4 expression. Furthermore, Id4 expression progressively decreased in
prostate cancer cell line LNCaP and with no expression in androgen-insensitive
LNCaP-C81 cell line. Conversely, Id4 promoter hypermethylation increased in
LNCaP-C81 cells suggesting epigenetic silencing. In prostate cancer samples, loss
of Id4 expression was also associated with promoter hypermethylation. Our results
demonstrate loss of Id4 expression in prostate cancer due to promoter
hypermethylation. The data strongly support the role of Id4 as a tumor
suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3544455
PMID: 23342267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Transl Med. 2013 Jan 11;11:13. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-13.

Id1 and Id3 co-expression correlates with clinical outcome in stage III-N2
non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with definitive chemoradiotherapy.

Castañon E(1), Bosch-Barrera J, López I, Collado V, Moreno M, López-Picazo JM,
Arbea L, Lozano MD, Calvo A, Gil-Bazo I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, 31008, Pamplona,
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) and 3 (Id3) genes have been related 
with the inhibition of cell differentiation, cell growth promotion and tumor
metastasis. Recently, Id1 has been identified as an independent prognostic factor
in patients with lung adenocarcinoma, regardless of the stage. Furthermore, Id1
may confer resistance to treatment (both, radiotherapy and chemotherapy).
METHODS: We have studied, using monoclonal antibodies for immunohistochemistry,
the Id1 and Id3 tumor epithelial expression in 17 patients with stage III-N2
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with definitive chemoradiotherapy.
RESULTS: Id1 expression is observed in 82.4% of the tumors, whereas Id3
expression is present in 41.2% of the samples. Interestingly, Id1 and Id3
expression are mutually correlated (R<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.579, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015). In a subgroup analysis
of patients with the most locally advanced disease (T4N2 stage), co-expression of
Id1 and Id3 showed to be related with a worse overall survival (45 vs 6 months,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). A trend towards significance for a worse progression free survival
(30 vs 1 months, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.219) and a lower response rate to the treatment (RR<U+2009>=<U+2009>50% 
vs 87.5%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.07) were also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: A correlation between Id1 and Id3 protein expression is observed.
Id1 and Id3 co-expression seems associated with a poor clinical outcome in
patients with locally advanced NSCLC treated with definitive chemoradiotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3567999
PMID: 23311395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Apr;48(4):448-55. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2012-0201OC.

Bone morphogenetic protein-inducer tilorone identified by high-throughput
screening is antifibrotic in vivo.

Leppäranta O(1), Tikkanen JM, Bespalov MM, Koli K, Myllärniemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki
and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive lung disease with a poor
prognosis and very few therapeutic options. On the molecular level, patients with
IPF have increased amounts of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) inhibitor
gremlin in their lungs, which results in decreased BMP signaling, and an increase
in transforming growth factor-ß signaling. Based on these findings, we
hypothesized that restoration of the impaired BMP signaling would offer a novel
strategy for the prevention of fibrosis progression or for the treatment of
pulmonary fibrosis. We used reporter cell lines and high-throughput screening of 
a chemical compound library as an approach to finding molecules that increase BMP
signaling in lung epithelial cells, without increasing transforming growth
factor-ß signaling. The most promising candidate drug was analyzed further by
studying its effects on BMP target gene expression, Smad protein phosphorylation,
and a mouse model of silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis. The most promising drug
candidate, tilorone, induced BMP signaling in the reporter cells and increased
the expression of BMP-7 and a BMP target gene, Id3, in lung epithelial A549
cells. In a mouse model of pulmonary fibrosis, tilorone decreased lung
hydroxyproline content and the expression of collagen genes Col1A1 and Col3A1.
Mice treated with tilorone showed markedly decreased histological changes,
compared with untreated mice. These findings indicate that tilorone has
biologically significant antifibrotic properties.

PMID: 23258233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1288-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2476.

New pathogenic mechanisms in Burkitt lymphoma.

Campo E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. ecampo@clinic.ub.es

Two studies in this issue identify the landscape of somatic mutations in Burkitt 
lymphoma and highlight the pathogenic and clinical relevance of inactivating
mutations of ID3, an inhibitor of the TCF3 transcription factor.

PMID: 23192177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Hum Reprod. 2013 Feb;19(2):82-92. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gas052. Epub 2012 Nov
16.

Expression and localization of inhibitor of differentiation (ID) proteins during 
tissue and vascular remodelling in the human corpus luteum.

Nio-Kobayashi J(1), Narayanan R, Giakoumelou S, Boswell L, Hogg K, Duncan WC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, The Queen's
Medical Research Institute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.

Members of the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) superfamily are likely to
have major roles in the regulation of tissue and vascular remodelling in the
corpus luteum (CL). There are four inhibitor-of-differentiation (ID1-4) genes
that are regulated by members of the TGF-ß superfamily and are involved in the
transcriptional regulation of cell growth and differentiation. We studied their
expression, localization and regulation in dated human corpora lutea from across 
the luteal phase (n = 22) and after human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
administration in vivo (n = 5), and in luteinized granulosa cells (LGCs), using
immunohistochemistry and quantitative RT-PCR. ID1-4 can be localized to multiple 
cell types in the CL across the luteal phase. Endothelial cell ID3 (P < 0.05) and
ID4 (P < 0.05) immunostaining intensities peak at the time of angiogenesis but
overall ID1 (P < 0.05) and ID3 (P < 0.05) expression peaks at the time of
luteolysis, and luteal ID3 expression is inhibited by hCG in vivo (P < 0.01). In 
LGC cultures in vitro, hCG had no effect on ID1, down-regulated ID3 (P < 0.001), 
and up-regulated ID2 (P < 0.001) and ID4 (P < 0.01). Bone morphogenic proteins
(BMPs) had no effect on ID4 expression but up-regulated ID1 (P < 0.01 to P <
0.005). BMP up-regulation of ID2 (P < 0.05) was additive to the hCG up-regulation
of ID2 expression (P < 0.001), while BMP cancelled out the down regulative effect
of hCG on ID3 regulation. As well as documenting regulation patterns specific for
ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4, we have shown that IDs are located and differentially
regulated in the human CL, suggesting a role in the transcriptional regulation of
luteal cells during tissue and vascular remodelling.

PMID: 23160862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1321-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2468. Epub 2012 Nov 11.

The genetic landscape of mutations in Burkitt lymphoma.

Love C(1), Sun Z, Jima D, Li G, Zhang J, Miles R, Richards KL, Dunphy CH, Choi
WW, Srivastava G, Lugar PL, Rizzieri DA, Lagoo AS, Bernal-Mizrachi L, Mann KP,
Flowers CR, Naresh KN, Evens AM, Chadburn A, Gordon LI, Czader MB, Gill JI, Hsi
ED, Greenough A, Moffitt AB, McKinney M, Banerjee A, Grubor V, Levy S, Dunson DB,
Dave SS.

Author information: 
(1)Duke Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA.

Burkitt lymphoma is characterized by deregulation of MYC, but the contribution of
other genetic mutations to the disease is largely unknown. Here, we describe the 
first completely sequenced genome from a Burkitt lymphoma tumor and germline DNA 
from the same affected individual. We further sequenced the exomes of 59 Burkitt 
lymphoma tumors and compared them to sequenced exomes from 94 diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) tumors. We identified 70 genes that were recurrently
mutated in Burkitt lymphomas, including ID3, GNA13, RET, PIK3R1 and the SWI/SNF
genes ARID1A and SMARCA4. Our data implicate a number of genes in cancer for the 
first time, including CCT6B, SALL3, FTCD and PC. ID3 mutations occurred in 34% of
Burkitt lymphomas and not in DLBCLs. We show experimentally that ID3 mutations
promote cell cycle progression and proliferation. Our work thus elucidates
commonly occurring gene-coding mutations in Burkitt lymphoma and implicates ID3
as a new tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC3674561
PMID: 23143597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1316-20. doi: 10.1038/ng.2469. Epub 2012 Nov 11.

Recurrent mutation of the ID3 gene in Burkitt lymphoma identified by integrated
genome, exome and transcriptome sequencing.

Richter J(1), Schlesner M, Hoffmann S, Kreuz M, Leich E, Burkhardt B, Rosolowski 
M, Ammerpohl O, Wagener R, Bernhart SH, Lenze D, Szczepanowski M, Paulsen M,
Lipinski S, Russell RB, Adam-Klages S, Apic G, Claviez A, Hasenclever D,
Hovestadt V, Hornig N, Korbel JO, Kube D, Langenberger D, Lawerenz C, Lisfeld J, 
Meyer K, Picelli S, Pischimarov J, Radlwimmer B, Rausch T, Rohde M, Schilhabel M,
Scholtysik R, Spang R, Trautmann H, Zenz T, Borkhardt A, Drexler HG, Möller P,
MacLeod RA, Pott C, Schreiber S, Trümper L, Loeffler M, Stadler PF, Lichter P,
Eils R, Küppers R, Hummel M, Klapper W, Rosenstiel P, Rosenwald A, Brors B,
Siebert R; ICGC MMML-Seq Project.

Collaborators: Ammerpohl O, Claviez A, Esser D, Hornig N, Klapper W, Pott C,
Richter G, Richter J, Rosenstiel P, Schilhabel M, Schreiber S, Siebert R,
Hemmrich-Stanisak G, Szczepanowski M, Trautmann H, Wagener R, Ebert S, Kube D,
Meyer K, Trümper L, Burkhardt B, Lisfeld J, Rohde M, Brors B, Eils J, Eils R,
Hutter B, Jäger N, Korbel J, Lawerenz C, Lichter P, Radlwimmer B, Radomski S,
Schlesner M, Scholz I, Zenz T, Möller P, Lenze D, Hummel M, Leich E, Pischimarov 
J, Rosenwald A, Binder V, Borkhardt A, Hoell J, Hezaveh K, Bernhart SH, Binder H,
Hoffmann S, Hopp L, Kreuz M, Langenberger D, Loeffler M, Rosolowski M, Stadler
PF, Hansmann ML, Küppers R, Weniger M, Scholtysik R, Spang R, Barth TF, Bernd HW,
Cogliatti SB, Feller AC, Hansmann ML, Hummel M, Klapper W, Möller P,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Ott G, Stein H, Szczepanowski M, Wacker HH, Barth TF,
Behrmann P, Daniel P, Dierlammm J, Haralambieva E, Harder L, Holterhus PM,
Küppers R, Kube D, Lichter P, Martín-Subero JI, Möller P, Murga-Peñas EM,
Pscherer A, Rosenwald A, Schwaenen C, Siebert R, Trautmann H, Vockerodt M,
Wessendorf S, Bentink S, Berger H, Hasenclever D, Kreuz M, Loeffler M, Rosolowski
M, Spang R, Stürzenhofecker B, Trümper L, Wehner M, Loeffler M, Siebert R, Stein 
H, Trümper L.

Burkitt lymphoma is a mature aggressive B-cell lymphoma derived from germinal
center B cells. Its cytogenetic hallmark is the Burkitt translocation
t(8;14)(q24;q32) and its variants, which juxtapose the MYC oncogene with one of
the three immunoglobulin loci. Consequently, MYC is deregulated, resulting in
massive perturbation of gene expression. Nevertheless, MYC deregulation alone
seems not to be sufficient to drive Burkitt lymphomagenesis. By whole-genome,
whole-exome and transcriptome sequencing of four prototypical Burkitt lymphomas
with immunoglobulin gene (IG)-MYC translocation, we identified seven recurrently 
mutated genes. One of these genes, ID3, mapped to a region of focal homozygous
loss in Burkitt lymphoma. In an extended cohort, 36 of 53 molecularly defined
Burkitt lymphomas (68%) carried potentially damaging mutations of ID3. These were
strongly enriched at somatic hypermutation motifs. Only 6 of 47 other B-cell
lymphomas with the IG-MYC translocation (13%) carried ID3 mutations. These
findings suggest that cooperation between ID3 inactivation and IG-MYC
translocation is a hallmark of Burkitt lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 23143595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048591. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

A divalent ion is crucial in the structure and dominant-negative function of ID
proteins, a class of helix-loop-helix transcription regulators.

Wong MV(1), Jiang S, Palasingam P, Kolatkar PR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Structural Biochemistry, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

Inhibitors of DNA binding and differentiation (ID) proteins, a dominant-negative 
group of helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription regulators, are well-characterized 
key players in cellular fate determination during development in mammals as well 
as Drosophila. Although not oncogenes themselves, their upregulation by various
oncogenic proteins (such as Ras, Myc) and their inhibitory effects on cell cycle 
proteins (such as pRb) hint at their possible roles in tumorigenesis.
Furthermore, their potency as inhibitors of cellular differentiation, through
their heterodimerization with subsequent inactivation of the ubiquitous E
proteins, suggest possible novel roles in engineering induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs). We present the high-resolution 2.1Å crystal structure of ID2 (HLH 
domain), coupled with novel biochemical insights in the presence of a divalent
ion, possibly calcium (Ca2+), in the loop of ID proteins, which appear to be
crucial for the structure and activity of ID proteins. These new insights will
pave the way for new rational drug designs, in addition to current synthetic
peptide options, against this potent player in tumorigenesis as well as more
efficient ways for stem cells reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3484135
PMID: 23119064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Prostate. 2013 May;73(6):624-33. doi: 10.1002/pros.22603. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Inhibitor of differentiation 1 (Id1) and Id3 proteins play different roles in
TGFß effects on cell proliferation and migration in prostate cancer cells.

Strong N(1), Millena AC, Walker L, Chaudhary J, Khan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta
University, Atlanta, Georgia 30314, USA.

BACKGROUND: In prostate cancer cells, transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)
inhibits proliferation in earlier stages of the disease; however, the cancer
cells become refractory to growth inhibitory effects in advanced stages where
TGFß promotes cancer progression and metastasis. Inhibitor of differentiation
(Id) family of closely related proteins (Id1-Id4) are dominant negative
regulators and basic helix loop helix (bHLH) transcription factors and in general
promote proliferation, and inhibit differentiation. In the present study, we have
investigated the role of Id1 and Id3 proteins in the growth inhibitory effects of
TGFß on prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: The effect of TGF ß on proliferation and Id1 and Id3 expression were
investigated in PZ-HPV7, DU145, and PC3 cells. Id1 silencing through siRNA was
also used in DU145 and PC3 cells to examine its role in anti-proliferative and
migratory effects of TGFß.
RESULTS: TGFß increased expression of Id1 and Id3 in all cell lines followed by a
later down regulation of Id1 in PZ-HPV7 expression and DU145 cells but not in PC3
cells. Id3 expression remained elevated in all three cell lines. This loss of Id1
protein correlated with an increase of CDKNI p21. Id1 knockdown in both DU145 and
PC3 cells resulted in decreased proliferation. However, while TGFß caused a
further decrease in proliferation of DU145, but had no further effects in PC3
cells. Knockdown of Id1 or Id3 inhibited TGFß1induced migration in PC3 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest an essential role of Id1 and Id3 in TGFß1
effects on proliferation and migration in prostate cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4018743
PMID: 23060149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Dec;32(12):2855-61. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300352. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Loss of Id3 increases VCAM-1 expression, macrophage accumulation, and
atherogenesis in Ldlr-/- mice.

Lipinski MJ(1), Campbell KA, Duong SQ, Welch TJ, Garmey JC, Doran AC, Skaflen MD,
Oldham SN, Kelly KA, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Inhibitor of differention-3 (Id3) promotes B cells homing to the aorta
and atheroprotection in Apoe(-/-) mice. We sought to determine the impact of loss
of Id3 in the Ldlr((-/-)) mouse model of diet-induced atherosclerosis and
identify novel Id3 targets in the vessel wall.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ex vivo optical imaging confirmed that Id3((-/-))
Ldlr((-/-)) mice have significantly fewer aortic B cells than Id3((+/+))
Ldlr(-/-) mice. After 8 and 16 weeks of Western diet, Id3((-/-)) Ldlr((-/-)) mice
developed significantly more atherosclerosis than Id3((+/+)) Ldlr((-/-)) mice,
with Id3(+/-) Ldlr(-/-) mice demonstrating an intermediate phenotype. There were 
no differences in serum lipid levels between genotypes. Immunostaining
demonstrated that aortas from Id3((-/-)) Ldlr((-/-)) mice had greater intimal
macrophage density and C-C chemokine ligand 20 and vascular cell adhesion
molecule 1 (VCAM-1) expression compared with Id3((+/+)) Ldlr(-/-) mice. Real-time
polymerase chain reaction demonstrated increased VCAM-1 mRNA levels in the aortas
of Id3(-/-) Ldlr(-/-) mice. Primary vascular smooth muscle cells from Id3((-/-)) 
mice expressed greater amounts of VCAM-1 protein compared with control. Gain and 
loss of function studies in primary vascular smooth muscle cells identified a
role for Id3 in repressing VCAM-1 promoter activation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated interaction of E12 with the VCAM-1 promoter,
which is inhibited by Id3.
CONCLUSIONS: Id3 is an atheroprotective transcription regulator with targets in
both B cells and vessel wall cells leading to reduced macrophage accumulation and
reduced atherosclerosis formation.

PMCID: PMC3509414
PMID: 23042815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jan 28;328(2):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.09.005. Epub
2012 Sep 27.

Blockade of EGFR signaling promotes glioma stem-like cell invasiveness by
abolishing ID3-mediated inhibition of p27(KIP1) and MMP3 expression.

Jin X(1), Jin X, Sohn YW, Yin J, Kim SH, Joshi K, Nam DH, Nakano I, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea.

Aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is a typical oncogenic
signature in glioblastoma. Here, we show that EGFR inhibition in primary glioma
stem cells (GSCs) with oncogenic EGFRvIII and EGFRvIII-transduced glioma
stem-like cells promotes invasion by decreasing ID3 levels. ID3 suppresses GSC
invasiveness by inhibiting p27(KIP1)-RhoA-dependent migration and MMP3
expression. Xenograft and human glioblastoma specimens show that ID3 localizes
within glioblastoma cores, whereas p27(KIP1) and MMP3 are predominantly expressed
in glioma cells in invasive fronts. Together, our findings show that EGFR
inhibition induces GSC invasiveness by abolishing ID3-mediated inhibition of
p27(KIP1) and MMP3 expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nepal Med Coll J. 2011 Dec;13(4):241-6.

True palmar pattern in vitiligo--a case control study.

Bhakta A(1), Mistri S, Mondal GC, Bandyopadhyay M, Bhattacharaya T, Ghosh SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, NRS Medical College, Kolkata, India.
drabhijit3@gmail.com

Characteristic epidermal ridges formed on the finger pad and on the palm by the
end of the second trimester and remain unchanged thereafter and those are
responsible for the highly specific finger prints of each individual. These
ridges are nither influenced by later prenatal period nor they subject to any
influence in the postnatal environmental factors because the formation of ridge
patterns gets already completed by about the eighteenth week of gestation.
Dermatoglyphics is a scientific study of such epidermal ridges. Dermatoglyphic
study of both palms of clinically diagnosed vitiligo patients and control
subjects were carried out and statisticaltly analysed in respect to sex and side 
of hands. The study revealed variable number of deviations of this patterns in
Vitiligo patients when compared with that of control. Increased number of true
palmar patterns in right hypothenar, right thenar and both inter digital areas 2 
(ID-2) and decreased TPP in Rt. ID3, Rt. ID4 in vitiligo male patients and
increased TPP in Rt. Hypothenar and Rt. ID1 and decreased TPP in Rt. ID2 and Lt. 
ID 3 in vitiligo female patients while compared with that of the control group.
Some of the variations observed were stastically significant.

PMID: 23016471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Bone Miner Metab. 2013 Jan;31(1):34-43. doi: 10.1007/s00774-012-0381-1. Epub
2012 Sep 14.

Identification of a novel bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-inducible transcript, 
BMP-inducible transcript-1, by utilizing the conserved BMP-responsive elements in
the Id genes.

Shin M(1), Ohte S, Fukuda T, Sasanuma H, Yoneyama K, Kokabu S, Miyamoto A,
Tsukamoto S, Hohjoh H, Jimi E, Katagiri T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathophysiology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka-shi, Saitama, 350-1241, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) inhibit myogenesis and induce osteoblastic
differentiation in myoblasts. They also induce the transcription of several
common genes, such as Id1, Id2 and Id3, in various cell types. We have reported
that a GC-rich element in the Id1 gene functions as a BMP-responsive element
(BRE) that is regulated by Smads. In this study, we analyzed and identified BREs 
in the 5'-flanking regions of the mouse Id2 and Id3 genes. The core GGCGCC
sequence was conserved among the BREs in the Id1, Id2 and Id3 genes and was
essential for the response to BMP signaling via Smads. We found a novel BRE on
mouse chromosome 13 at position 47,723,740-47,723,768 by searching for conserved 
sequences containing the Id1 BRE. This potential BRE was found in the 5'-flanking
region of a novel gene that produces a non-coding transcript, termed
BMP-inducible transcript-1 (BIT-1), and this element regulated the expression of 
this gene in response to BMP signaling. We found that BIT-1 is expressed in BMP
target tissues such as the testis, brain, kidney and cartilage. These findings
suggest that the transcriptional induction of the Ids, BIT-1 and additional novel
genes containing the conserved BRE sequence may play an important role in the
regulation of the differentiation and/or function of target cells in response to 
BMPs.

PMID: 22976053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Ann Oncol. 2013 Jan;24(1):193-201. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds209. Epub 2012 Sep 11.

A new diagnostic algorithm for Burkitt and diffuse large B-cell lymphomas based
on the expression of CSE1L and STAT3 and on MYC rearrangement predicts outcome.

Soldini D(1), Montagna C, Schüffler P, Martin V, Georgis A, Thiesler T,
Curioni-Fontecedro A, Went P, Bosshard G, Dehler S, Mazzuchelli L, Tinguely M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Aggressive mature B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (BCL) sharing
features of Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
(intermediate BL/DLBCL) but deviating with respect to one or more characteristics
are increasingly recognized. The limited knowledge about these biologically
heterogeneous lymphomas hampers their assignment to a known entity, raising
incertitude about optimal treatment approaches. We therefore searched for
discriminative, prognostic, and predictive factors for their better
characterization.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed 242 cytogenetically defined aggressive mature
BCL for differential protein expression. Marker selection was based on recent
gene-expression profile studies. Predictive models for diagnosis were established
and validated by a different set of lymphomas.
RESULTS: CSE1L- and inhibitor of DNA binding-3 (ID3)-overexpression was
associated with the diagnosis of BL and signal transduction and transcription-3
(STAT3) with DLBCL (P<0.001 for all markers). All three markers were associated
with patient outcome in DLBCL. A new algorithm discriminating BL from DLBCL
emerged, including the expression of CSE1L, STAT3, and MYC translocation. This
'new classifier' enabled the identification of patients with intermediate
BL/DLBCL who benefited from intensive chemotherapy regimens.
CONCLUSION: The proposed algorithm, which is based on markers with reliable
staining properties for routine diagnostics, represents a novel valid tool in
separating BL from DLBCL. Most interestingly, it allows segregating intermediate 
BL/DLBCL into groups with different treatment requirements.

PMID: 22967991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Vaccine. 2012 Oct 5;30(45):6427-35. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.08.014. Epub 2012
Aug 18.

Dose sparing intradermal trivalent influenza (2010/2011) vaccination overcomes
reduced immunogenicity of the 2009 H1N1 strain.

Hung IF(1), Levin Y, To KK, Chan KH, Zhang AJ, Li P, Li C, Xu T, Wong TY, Yuen
KY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Emerging Infectious Diseases, Carol Yu's Centre for
Infection and Division of Infectious Diseases, The University of Hong Kong, Queen
Mary Hospital, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong.
ivanfn@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that low dose intradermal vaccination of the
trivalent influenza vaccine (TIV) delivered by the MicronJet600™ (NanoPass
Technologies, Israel) would be non-inferior to the full dose intramuscular and
mid dose Intanza(®) vaccination in the elderly and the chronically ill adults.
METHODS: We performed a prospective randomized trial on elderly and chronically
ill adults. Subjects were randomly assigned into 4 groups. Groups ID3 and ID9
received reduced dose ID TIV (3 µg and 9 µg of hemagglutinin (HA) per strain
respectively) delivered by MicronJet600™ (NanoPass Technologies, Israel). Group
INT9 received reduced dose ID TIV (9 µg) delivered by Becton Dickinson's Soluvia™
device (Intanza(®)9, Sanofi-Pasteur, France). Control group IM15 received a full 
dose IM TIV (15 µg). We measured antibody titers by hemagglutination inhibition
(HAI) and microneutralization (MN) assays at baseline and day 21.
RESULTS: Baseline characteristics for all groups were similar (group and sample
sizes: ID3=63; ID9=68; INT9=65; and IM15=66). At day 21 post vaccination, the GMT
ratio and the seroconversion rates difference for all three strains of the ID
vaccine groups were non-inferior to the IM vaccine group. The seroconversion
rate, seroprotection rate, and the GMT of the H1N1 strains by HAI and MN assays
were significantly higher in the ID groups compared with the full dose IM vaccine
group. The seroconversion rates of the H3N2 strain by HAI assay were also
significantly higher in the ID groups when compared with the full dose IM group. 
Direct comparison among the three ID groups showed no significant differences. No
serious adverse events related to vaccination were reported.
CONCLUSION: Dose-sparing ID TIV can overcome reduced immunogenicity of the H1N1
strain, and according to some measures, for the H3N2 strain. At risk subjects
indicated for the TIV should be considered for intradermal immunization to
compensate for reduced immunogenicity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22910287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Int Med Res. 2012;40(3):887-98.

Transcriptome and coexpression network analysis of the human glioma cell line
Hs683 exposed to candoxin.

Jiang YX(1), Ma Y, Cheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Gliomas are the most common primary tumours of the central nervous
system. Snake venom, such as candoxin (CDX) isolated from Bungarus candidus,
inhibits glioma cell proliferation. This study explored the gene regulation
profile of CDX-treated human glioma Hs683 cells.
METHODS: Using microarray technology and bioinformatics analyses the underlying
molecular mechanism of action of CDX was evaluated by constructing gene
regulation and protein-protein interaction co expression networks.
RESULTS: CDX treatment induced a large number of related genes at the
transcriptional level. The MYC gene (v-myc myelocytomatosis viral oncogene
homologue [avian]) had a key role in the response of Hs683 cells to CDX
treatment. Activation of MYC upregulated NDRG1 (N-myc downstream regulated 1),
WNT10B (wingless-type mouse mammary tumour virus integration site family, member 
10B), CASP9 (caspase 9, apoptosis-related cysteine peptidase) and CDKN2A
(cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A), and downregulated ID3 (inhibitor of DNA
binding 3, dominant negative helix-loop-helix protein) and SLC1A4 (solute carrier
family 1 [glutamate/neutral amino acid transporter], member 4). In addition, a
subnetwork was constructed among SPP1 (secreted phosphoprotein 1), SDC1 (syndecan
1) and CD44 based on protein-protein interactions, and these genes were predicted
to be involved in glioma cell invasion.
CONCLUSION: These findings might provide novel therapeutic targets for glioma
chemotherapy.

PMID: 22906261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Nature. 2012 Oct 4;490(7418):116-20. doi: 10.1038/nature11378. Epub 2012 Aug 12.

Burkitt lymphoma pathogenesis and therapeutic targets from structural and
functional genomics.

Schmitz R(1), Young RM, Ceribelli M, Jhavar S, Xiao W, Zhang M, Wright G, Shaffer
AL, Hodson DJ, Buras E, Liu X, Powell J, Yang Y, Xu W, Zhao H, Kohlhammer H,
Rosenwald A, Kluin P, Müller-Hermelink HK, Ott G, Gascoyne RD, Connors JM, Rimsza
LM, Campo E, Jaffe ES, Delabie J, Smeland EB, Ogwang MD, Reynolds SJ, Fisher RI, 
Braziel RM, Tubbs RR, Cook JR, Weisenburger DD, Chan WC, Pittaluga S, Wilson W,
Waldmann TA, Rowe M, Mbulaiteye SM, Rickinson AB, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Oct;9(10):551.

Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) can often be cured by intensive chemotherapy, but the
toxicity of such therapy precludes its use in the elderly and in patients with
endemic BL in developing countries, necessitating new strategies. The normal
germinal centre B cell is the presumed cell of origin for both BL and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), yet gene expression analysis suggests that these
malignancies may use different oncogenic pathways. BL is subdivided into a
sporadic subtype that is diagnosed in developed countries, the
Epstein-Barr-virus-associated endemic subtype, and an HIV-associated subtype, but
it is unclear whether these subtypes use similar or divergent oncogenic
mechanisms. Here we used high-throughput RNA sequencing and RNA interference
screening to discover essential regulatory pathways in BL that cooperate with
MYC, the defining oncogene of this cancer. In 70% of sporadic BL cases, mutations
affecting the transcription factor TCF3 (E2A) or its negative regulator ID3
fostered TCF3 dependency. TCF3 activated the pro-survival
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase pathway in BL, in part by augmenting tonic
B-cell receptor signalling. In 38% of sporadic BL cases, oncogenic CCND3
mutations produced highly stable cyclin D3 isoforms that drive cell cycle
progression. These findings suggest opportunities to improve therapy for patients
with BL.

PMCID: PMC3609867
PMID: 22885699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Rep. 2012 Aug 30;2(2):283-93. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.07.002. Epub 2012
Aug 9.

Secreted stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 activates the ALK2-SMAD signaling
pathways and promotes cell proliferation of ovarian cancer cells.

Tsai CL(1), Tsai CN, Lin CY, Chen HW, Lee YS, Chao A, Wang TH, Wang HS, Lai CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Kwai-Shan Taoyuan Taiwan, Republic of China.

Stress-induced phosphoprotein 1 (STIP1), a cochaperone that organizes other
chaperones, heat shock proteins (HSPs), was recently shown to be secreted by
human ovarian cancer cells. In neuronal tissues, binding to prion protein was
required for STIP1 to activate the ERK (extracellular-regulated MAP kinase)
signaling pathways. However, we report that STIP1 binding to a bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) receptor, ALK2 (activin A receptor, type II-like kinase 2), was
necessary and sufficient to stimulate proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. The 
binding of STIP1 to ALK2 activated the SMAD signaling pathway, leading to
transcriptional activation of ID3 (inhibitor of DNA binding 3), promoting cell
proliferation. In conclusion, ovarian-cancer-tissue-secreted STIP1 stimulates
cancer cell proliferation by binding to ALK2 and activating the SMAD-ID3
signaling pathways. Although animal studies are needed to confirm these
mechanisms in vivo, our results may pave the way for developing novel therapeutic
strategies for ovarian cancer.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22884369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Chin Med J (Engl). 2012 Jul;125(13):2329-33.

FHL2 inhibits the Id3-promoted proliferation and invasive growth of human MCF-7
breast cancer cells.

Chen YH(1), Wu ZQ, Zhao YL, Si YL, Guo MZ, Han WD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Logistics Division, Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital,
Beijing 100853, China.

BACKGROUND: Id3 plays a key role in the progression of breast cancer. Previously,
four and a half LIM protein (FHL2) was identified as a repressor of Id family
proteins by interacting with them. This study aimed to investigate the effects of
FHL2 on the transcriptional regulation and oncogenic activities of Id3 in human
breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Cell transfection was performed with SuperFect reagent. Stable
transfectants that overexpressed Id3 were obtained by selection on G418. The
level of Id3 protein was determined by Western blotting analysis. Dual luciferase
assays were used to measure the effect of Id3 and FHL2 on E47-mediated
transcriptional activity in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. The MTT assay was
used to measure cell proliferation. The transwell assay was used to measure the
invasive capacity of MCF-7 cancer cells.
RESULTS: Id3 markedly repressed transcription mediated by the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factor E47 in MCF-7 cells. This Id3-mediated repression
was effectively antagonized by FHL2. Overexpression of Id3 markedly promoted the 
proliferation and invasive capacity of MCF-7 cells; however, these effects were
significantly suppressed by the overexpression of FHL2.
CONCLUSIONS: FHL2 can inhibit the proliferation and invasive growth of human
breast cancer cells by repressing the functional activity of Id3. The functional 
roles of FHL2-Id3 signaling in the development of human breast cancer need
further research.

PMID: 22882857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Aug 3;11(2):231-41. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.05.022.

Pax3/7BP is a Pax7- and Pax3-binding protein that regulates the proliferation of 
muscle precursor cells by an epigenetic mechanism.

Diao Y(1), Guo X, Li Y, Sun K, Lu L, Jiang L, Fu X, Zhu H, Sun H, Wang H, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, The 
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clearwater Bay, Kowloon, Hong
Kong, China.

In mouse skeletal muscles, Pax7 uniquely marks muscle satellite cells and plays
some important yet unknown functions at the perinatal stage. To elucidate its in 
vivo functions, we initiated a yeast two-hybrid screening to look for
Pax7-interacting proteins and identified a previously uncharacterized Pax7- and
Pax3-binding protein (Pax3/7BP). Pax3/7BP is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear
protein, enriched in Pax7+ muscle precursor cells (MPCs), and serves as an
indispensable adaptor for Pax7 to recruit the histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4)
methyltransferase (HMT) complex by bridging Pax7 and Wdr5. Knockdown of Pax3/7BP 
abolished the Pax3/7-associated H3K4 HMT activity and inhibited the proliferation
of Pax7+ MPCs from young mice both in culture and in vivo. Id3 and Cdc20 were
direct target genes of Pax7 and Pax3/7BP involved in the proliferation of Pax7+
MPCs. Collectively, our work establishes Pax3/7BP as an essential adaptor linking
Pax3/7 with the H3K4 HMT to regulate the proliferation of MPCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22862948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Fitoterapia. 2012 Oct;83(7):1160-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2012.07.006. Epub 2012 
Jul 22.

Carnosic acid inhibits the growth of ER-negative human breast cancer cells and
synergizes with curcumin.

Einbond LS(1), Wu HA, Kashiwazaki R, He K, Roller M, Su T, Wang X, Goldsberry S.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032,
USA. lseinbond@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Studies indicate that extracts and purified components, including
carnosic acid, from the herb rosemary display significant growth inhibitory
activity on a variety of cancers.
PURPOSE: This paper examines the ability of rosemary/carnosic acid to inhibit the
growth of human breast cancer cells and to synergize with curcumin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To do this, we treated human breast cancer cells with
rosemary/carnosic acid and assessed effects on cell proliferation, cell cycle
distribution, gene expression patterns, activity of the purified Na/K ATPase and 
combinations with curcumin.
RESULTS: Rosemary/carnosic acid potently inhibits proliferation of ER-negative
human breast cancer cells and induces G1 cell cycle arrest. Further, carnosic
acid is selective for MCF7 cells transfected for Her2, indicating that Her2 may
function in its action. To reveal primary effects, we treated ER-negative breast 
cancer cells with carnosic acid for 6h. At a low dose, 5 µg/ml (15 µM), carnosic 
acid activated the expression of 3 genes, induced through the presence of
antioxidant response elements, including genes involved in glutathione
biosynthesis (CYP4F3, GCLC) and transport (SLC7A11). At a higher dose, 20 µg/ml, 
carnosic acid activated the expression of antioxidant (AKR1C2, TNXRD1, HMOX1) and
apoptosis (GDF15, PHLDA1, DDIT3) genes and suppressed the expression of inhibitor
of transcription (ID3) and cell cycle (CDKN2C) genes. Carnosic acid exhibits
synergy with turmeric/curcumin. These compounds inhibited the activity of the
purified Na-K-ATPase which may contribute to this synergy.
CONCLUSION: Rosemary/carnosic acid, alone or combined with curcumin, may be
useful to prevent and treat ER-negative breast cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22828666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Anim Reprod Sci. 2012 Jul;133(1-2):86-92. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.06.005.
Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Identification of differentially expressed genes in Mongolian sheep ovaries by
suppression subtractive hybridization.

He X(1), Li B, Wang F, Tian C, Rong W, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Inner Mongolia Prataculture Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Huhhot, PR China.

Fecundity is an important trait in sheep. Because it is directly related to
production costs and efficiency, it has great economic impact in sheep husbandry.
Because Mongolian sheep are a longstanding, indigenous breed, they are
genetically related to most other breeds of sheep in China. The study of genes
related to reproductive traits is essential to improving the fecundity of
Mongolian sheep. In the present study, suppression subtractive hybridization
(SSH) was performed using forward and reverse nested primers on cDNA libraries
from ovarian tissue of single-bearing (S) and biparous (B) Mongolian sheep (MS). 
This yielded 768 clones. The length of the inserted fragments ranged from 150 to 
1000 bp. From these, dot blot hybridization followed by sequencing and homology
blast search in GenBank resolved 373 differentially expressed clones,
representing 185 gene sequences (homology >85% and length >200 bp), 10 expressed 
sequence tags (ESTs; homology >95% and length >100 bp), and 4 unknown ESTs. The
analysis of the differentially expressed gene functions allowed these genes to be
categorized into seven groups: cell/body or immune defense, metabolism,
transportation, nucleic acid modification, cell development, signal transduction,
and cell structure. Four differentially expressed genes, a disintegrin and
metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 1 (ADAMTS1), inhibitor of DNA
binding 3 (ID3), bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6), and integrin beta 1
(ITGB1), were randomly selected and verified using relative quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RQ-PCR). The expression of these genes in
BMS ovaries was 30.06, 11.55, 0.82, and 1.12-fold that of SMS ovaries,
respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22727452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cancer Cell. 2012 Jun 12;21(6):777-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.04.036.

ID1 and ID3 regulate the self-renewal capacity of human colon cancer-initiating
cells through p21.

O'Brien CA(1), Kreso A, Ryan P, Hermans KG, Gibson L, Wang Y, Tsatsanis A,
Gallinger S, Dick JE.

Author information: 
(1)Campbell Family Institute, Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret
Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada.
cobrien@uhnres.utoronto.ca

There is increasing evidence that some cancers are hierarchically organized,
sustained by a relatively rare population of cancer-initiating cells (C-ICs).
Although the capacity to initiate tumors upon serial transplantation is a
hallmark of all C-ICs, little is known about the genes that control this process.
Here, we establish that ID1 and ID3 function together to govern colon
cancer-initiating cell (CC-IC) self-renewal through cell-cycle restriction driven
by the cell-cycle inhibitor p21. Regulation of p21 by ID1 and ID3 is a central
mechanism preventing the accumulation of excess DNA damage and subsequent
functional exhaustion of CC-ICs. Additionally, silencing of ID1 and ID3 increases
sensitivity of CC-ICs to the chemotherapeutic agent oxaliplatin, linking tumor
initiation function with chemotherapy resistance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22698403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Dairy Res. 2012 Aug;79(3):310-7. doi: 10.1017/S0022029912000210. Epub 2012 Jun 
12.

Genes of the transforming growth factor-beta signalling pathway are associated
with pre-implantation embryonic development in cattle.

Li G(1), Khateeb K, Schaeffer E, Zhang B, Khatib H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China.

One of the main factors affecting cattle fertility is pre-implantation
development of the bovine embryo, which is a complex process regulated by various
signal-transduction pathways. The transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signalling
system, which is responsible for many biological processes including cell
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, also is involved in embryo
development. We hypothesized that altered expression of TGF-ß genes in
pre-implantation bovine embryos is associated with morphological abnormalities of
these embryos. To test this hypothesis, we produced embryos in vitro and
classified them at the blastocyst stage as either normally developed blastocysts 
or degenerates (growth-arrested embryos). The expression patterns of 25 genes
from the TGF-ß pathway were assessed using quantitative real time PCR. Ten genes 
showed differential expression between the two embryo groups, four genes
displayed similar expressional profiles, and 11 genes had no detectable
expression. An altered expression profile was statistically significant for 10 of
the 14 expressed genes, and all were up-regulated in degenerate embryos vs.
blastocysts. Furthermore, genomic association analysis of the cows from which
embryos were produced revealed a significant association of ID3 and BMP4
polymorphisms--two of the most significant differentially expressed genes--with
fertilization rate and blastocyst rate, respectively. Taken together, we conclude
that TGF-ß pathway genes, especially BMP4 and ID3 play a vital function in the
regulation of pre-implantation embryo development at both embryo and maternal
levels. Hence, these genes may be suitable as genetic markers for embryo
development and fertility in cattle.

PMID: 22687279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;189(1):174-80. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101582. Epub 2012 May
30.

Purinergic P2X7 receptor drives T cell lineage choice and shapes peripheral <U+03B3>d
cells.

Frascoli M(1), Marcandalli J, Schenk U, Grassi F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine, CH-6500 Bellinzona, Switzerland.

TCR signal strength instructs aß versus <U+03B3>d lineage decision in immature T cells. 
Increased signal strength of <U+03B3>dTCR with respect to pre-TCR results in induction
of the <U+03B3>d differentiation program. Extracellular ATP evokes physiological
responses through purinergic P2 receptors expressed in the plasma membrane of
virtually all cell types. In peripheral T cells, ATP released upon TCR
stimulation enhances MAPK activation through P2X receptors. We investigated
whether extracellular ATP and P2X receptors signaling tuned TCR signaling at the 
aß/<U+03B3>d lineage bifurcation checkpoint. We show that P2X7 expression was
selectively increased in immature <U+03B3>d(+)CD25(+) cells. These cells were much more 
competent to release ATP than pre-TCR-expressing cells following TCR stimulation 
and Ca(2+) influx. Genetic ablation as well as pharmacological antagonism of P2X7
resulted in impaired ERK phosphorylation, reduction of early growth response
(Egr) transcripts induction, and diversion of <U+03B3>dTCR-expressing thymocytes toward 
the aß lineage fate. The impairment of the ERK-Egr-inhibitor of differentiation 3
(Id3) signaling pathway in <U+03B3>d cells from p2rx7(-/-) mice resulted in increased
representation of the Id3-independent NK1.1-expressing <U+03B3>d T cell subset in the
periphery. Our results indicate that ATP release and P2X7 signaling upon <U+03B3>dTCR
expression in immature thymocytes constitutes an important costimulus in T cell
lineage choice through the ERK-Egr-Id3 signaling pathway and contributes to
shaping the peripheral <U+03B3>d T cell compartment.

PMID: 22649196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Angiogenesis. 2012 Sep;15(3):497-509. doi: 10.1007/s10456-012-9277-x. Epub 2012
May 24.

BMP9 induces EphrinB2 expression in endothelial cells through an
Alk1-BMPRII/ActRII-ID1/ID3-dependent pathway: implications for hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia type II.

Kim JH(1), Peacock MR, George SC, Hughes CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

ALK1 (ACVRL1) is a member of the TGFß receptor family and is expressed
predominantly by arterial endothelial cells (EC). Mutations in ACVRL1 are
responsible for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 2 (HHT2), a disease
manifesting as fragile vessels, capillary overgrowth, and numerous arterio-venous
malformations. Arterial EC also express EphrinB2, which has multiple roles in
vascular development and angiogenesis and is known to be reduced in ACVRL1
knockout mice. Using an in vitro angiogenesis model we find that the Alk1 ligand 
BMP9 induces EphrinB2 in EC, and this is entirely dependent on expression of Alk1
and at least one of the co-receptors BMPRII or ActRII. BMP9 induces both ID1 and 
ID3, and both are necessary for full induction of EphrinB2. Loss of Alk1 or
EphrinB2 results in increased arterial-venous anastomosis, while loss of Alk1 but
not EphrinB2 results in increased VEGFR2 expression and enhanced capillary
sprouting. Conversely, BMP9 blocks EC sprouting and this is dependent on Alk1,
BMPRII/ActRII and ID1/ID3. Finally, notch signaling overcomes the loss of
Alk1-restoring EphrinB2 expression in EC, and curbing excess sprouting. Thus, in 
an in vitro model of HHT2, loss of Alk1 blocks BMP9 signaling, resulting in
reduced EphrinB2 expression, enhanced VEGFR2 expression, and misregulated EC
sprouting and anastomosis.

PMCID: PMC3423339
PMID: 22622516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Aug;42(8):2031-41. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242497.

Loss of E protein transcription factors E2A and HEB delays memory-precursor
formation during the CD8+ T-cell immune response.

D'Cruz LM(1), Lind KC, Wu BB, Fujimoto JK, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA.

The transcription factors E2A and HEB (members of the E protein family) have been
shown to play essential roles in lymphocyte development, while their negative
regulators, the Id proteins, have been implicated in both lymphocyte development 
and in the CD8(+) T-cell immune response. Here, we show that E proteins also
influence CD8(+) T cells responding to infection. E protein expression was
upregulated by CD8(+) T cells during the early stages of infection and increased 
E protein DNA-binding activity could be detected upon TCR stimulation. Deficiency
in the E proteins, E2A and HEB, led to increased frequency of terminally
differentiated effector KLRG1(hi) CD8(+) T cells in mice during infection, and
decreased generation of longer-lived memory-precursor cells during the immune
response. These data suggest a model whereby E protein transcription factor
activity favors rapid memory-precursor T-cell formation while their negative
regulators, Id2 and Id3, are both required for robust effector CD8(+) T-cell
response during infection.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3702188
PMID: 22585759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 25;422(1):146-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.126. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

Increased expression of bHLH transcription factor E2A (TCF3) in prostate cancer
promotes proliferation and confers resistance to doxorubicin induced apoptosis.

Patel D(1), Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta
University, 223 James P. Brawley Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA.

E2A (TCF3) is a multifunctional basic helix loop helix (bHLH), transcription
factor. E2A regulates transcription of target genes by homo- or
heterodimerization with cell specific bHLH proteins. In general, E2A promotes
cell differentiation, acts as a negative regulator of cell proliferation in
normal cells and cancer cell lines and is required for normal B-cell development.
Given the diverse biological pathways regulated/influenced by E2A little is known
about its expression in cancer. In this study we investigated the expression of
E2A in prostate cancer. Unexpectedly, E2A immuno-histochemistry demonstrated
increased E2A expression in prostate cancer as compared to normal prostate.
Silencing of E2A in prostate cancer cells DU145 and PC3 led to a significant
reduction in proliferation due to G1 arrest that was in part mediated by
increased CDKN1A(p21) and decreased Id1, Id3 and c-myc. E2A silencing in prostate
cancer cell lines also resulted in increased apoptosis due to increased
mitochondrial permeability and caspase 3/7 activation. Moreover, silencing of E2A
increased sensitivity to doxorubicin induced apoptosis. Based on our results, we 
propose that E2A could be an upstream regulator of Id1 and c-Myc which are highly
expressed in prostate cancer. These results for the first time demonstrate that
E2A could in fact acts as a tumor promoter at least in prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3361642
PMID: 22564737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dig Liver Dis. 2012 Aug;44(8):681-8. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2012.04.002. Epub 2012
May 5.

Sustained liver regeneration after portal vein embolization --a human molecular
pilot study.

Rauchfuss F(1), Lambeck S, Claus RA, Ullmann J, Schulz T, Weber M, Katenkamp K,
Guthke R, Bauer M, Settmacher U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital Jena, Erlanger
Allee 101, Jena, Germany. Falk.Rauchfuss@med.uni-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Portal vein embolization is a treatment option to achieve a
sufficient future remnant liver volume for patients with central liver tumours
requiring an extended resection with an extensive parenchymal loss. However,
molecular mechanisms of this intervention are up to now poorly understood. The
objective of this prospective pilot study was the characterization of molecular
events leading to late hypertrophy of the non-embolized liver tissue in the human
liver.
METHODS: Liver tissue of ten patients was collected before and intraoperatively
more than one month after embolization. Investigation of molecular features was
performed by pangenomic chips, polymerase chain reaction, immunostaining of
proliferation marker Ki-67 and immunofluorescence measurements.
RESULTS: Significantly elevated genes hint towards angiogenesis and signalling by
insulin-like growth factor and associated binding proteins. Increased transcript 
levels of activator protein 1 complex members like c-jun were reflecting
potential molecular events of liver growth after embolization. Immunofluorescence
data confirmed a predominant upregulation of ß-catenin and c-jun (p<0.1)
supported by Ki-67 (p<0.05) in the non-embolized liver. In silico analysis of
transcriptomic dysplasia and hepatocellular carcinoma data showed divergent
signatures compared to embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate a sustained regeneration after portal vein
embolization reflected in hyperplasia and angiogenesis in the human liver and
provide novel molecular mechanisms of interlobe crosstalk.

Copyright © 2012 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22561445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Tree Physiol. 2012 May;32(5):585-98. doi: 10.1093/treephys/tps031. Epub 2012 Apr 
25.

Mistletoe effects on Scots pine decline following drought events: insights from
within-tree spatial patterns, growth and carbohydrates.

Sangüesa-Barreda G(1), Linares JC, Camarero JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Pirenaico de Ecología (CSIC), Avda. Montañana 1005, Apdo. 202, 50192
Zaragoza, Spain.

Forest decline has been attributed to the interaction of several stressors
including biotic factors such as mistletoes and climate-induced drought stress.
However, few data exist on how mistletoes are spatially arranged within trees and
how this spatial pattern is related to changes in radial growth, responses to
drought stress and carbon use. We used dendrochronology to quantify how mistletoe
(Viscum album L.) infestation and drought stress affected long-term growth
patterns in Pinus sylvestris L. at different heights. Basal area increment (BAI) 
trends and comparisons between trees of three different infestation degrees
(without mistletoe, ID1; moderately infested trees, ID2; and severely infested
trees, ID3) were performed using linear mixed-effects models. To identify the
main climatic drivers of tree growth tree-ring widths were converted into indexed
chronologies and related to climate data using correlation functions. We
performed spatial analyses of the 3D distribution of mistletoe individuals and
their ages within the crowns of three severely infested pines to describe their
patterns. Lastly, we quantified carbohydrate and nitrogen concentrations in
needles and sapwood of branches from severely infested trees and from trees
without mistletoe. Mistletoe individuals formed strongly clustered groups of
similar age within tree crowns and their age increased towards the crown apex.
Mistletoe infestation negatively impacted growth but this effect was stronger
near the tree apex than in the rest of sampled heights, causing an average loss
of 64% in BAI (loss of BAI was ~51% at 1.3 m or near the tree base). We found
that BAI of severely infested trees and moderately or non-infested trees diverged
since 2001 and such divergence was magnified by drought. Infested trees had lower
concentrations of soluble sugars in their needles than non-infested ones. We
conclude that mistletoe infestation causes growth decline and increases the
sensitivity of trees to drought stress.

PMID: 22539634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Ceska Gynekol. 2012 Feb;77(1):52-7.

[Non-invasive monitoring of the timing of early embryo cleavages--objectively
measurable predictor of human embryo viability].

[Article in Slovak]

Hlinka D(1), Lazarovská S, Rutarová J, Pichlerová M, Rezácová J, Dudás M.

Author information: 
(1)Prague Fertility Centre, Praha.

OBJECTIVE: The evaluation of the developmental abilities of human embryos
according to the timing of their early mitotic cleavages.
DESIGN: Retrospective study.
SETTING: Prague Fertility Centre and Institute for Care of Mother and Child, CAR,
Prague.
METHODS: The embryos obtained in IVF program were used for further observations
and subjected to automated time-lapse monitoring (PrimoVision, Cryo-Innovation, 1
picture/10 min, intermittent white-light illumination) under standard cultivation
conditions (37.0 degrees C, 5% CO2 in humid air). Image sequences were digitally 
recorded for later use. For intravital spindle detection we used polaryzing
microscopy (Oosight, Research Instruments) and Hoechst 33342 fluorescent dye for 
intravital chromatin visualization. A total number of 180 human embryos which
gave a vital pregnancies (FHB, fetal heart beat) were analysed retrospectively
for timing of early cleavages. In our study, the exact timing of the four
interphases (IP) and synchrony of sister cell divisions (ID, interval division)
occurring after fertilization were identified and manually recorded. Interphases:
IP1 was defined as the period from fertilization till 2 cell stage. IP2 between 2
and 3 cells stages, IP3 between 3 and 5 and IP4 between 5 and 9 cells embryo.
INTERVAL DIVISION: ID2 was recorded as a time interval between 3 and 4 cells, ID3
between 5 and 8 cells and ID4 between 9 and 16 cells stage embryos.
RESULTS: In the embryos giving viable pregnancies, the durations of IP1 was 20-26
hrs. IP2 was 10-12 hrs, IP3 was 14-16 hrs and IP4 was 20-26 hrs. In these
embryos, the sister blastomeres cleaved in a very synchronous manner. The
duration of ID1 was recorded to varry from 120 to 210 min. ID2 from 20 to 60
min., ID3 from 120 to 240 min. and ID4 from 230 to 360 min.
CONCLUSION: The viable embryos cleave in a very similar time pattern which can be
defined and applied as referencial value. Non-invasive monitoring of the timing
of early embryo cleavages can be used as an objectively measurable predictor of
human embryo.

PMID: 22536641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Immunity. 2012 Mar 23;36(3):348-61. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.02.010. Epub 2012 
Mar 15.

E protein transcription factors are required for the development of CD4(+)
lineage T cells.

Jones-Mason ME(1), Zhao X, Kappes D, Lasorella A, Iavarone A, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

The double-positive (DP) to single-positive (SP) transition during T cell
development is initiated by downregulation of the E protein transcription factors
HEB and E2A. Here, we have demonstrated that in addition to regulating the onset 
of this transition, HEB and E2A also play a separate role in CD4(+) lineage
choice. Deletion of HEB and E2A in DP thymocytes specifically blocked the
development of CD4(+) lineage T cells. Furthermore, deletion of the E protein
inhibitors Id2 and Id3 allowed CD4(+) T cell development but blocked CD8(+)
lineage development. Analysis of the CD4(+) lineage transcriptional regulators
ThPOK and Gata3 placed HEB and E2A upstream of CD4(+) lineage specification.
These studies identify an important role for E proteins in the activation of
CD4(+) lineage differentiation as thymocytes undergo the DP to SP transition.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3431168
PMID: 22425249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(9):1671-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06452-11. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

Biochemical and phosphoproteomic analysis of the helix-loop-helix protein E47.

Teachenor R(1), Beck K, Wright LY, Shen Z, Briggs SP, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA.

Numerous in vitro as well as genetic studies have demonstrated that the
activities of the E2A proteins are regulated at multiple levels, including
modulation of DNA binding by the Id proteins, association with the
transcriptional modulators p300 and ETO, and posttranslational modifications.
Here, we use affinity purification of tagged E47 combined with mass spectrometry 
in order to show that E47 interacts with the entire ensemble of Id proteins,
namely, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. Furthermore, we find that the lysine-specific
histone demethylase 1 (LSD1), the protein arginine N-methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5),
the corepressor CoREST, and the chaperones of the 14-3-3 family associate with
affinity-purified E47. We also identify a spectrum of amino acid residues in E47 
that are phosphorylated, including an AKT substrate site. We did, however, find
that mutation of the identified AKT substrate site by itself did not perturb B
cell development. In sum, these studies show that the entire ensemble of Id
proteins has the ability to interact with E47, identify factors that associate
with E47, and reveal a spectrum of phosphorylated residues in E47, including an
AKT substrate site.

PMCID: PMC3347234
PMID: 22354994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Mar 2;419(1):83-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.01.132. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling changes C2C12 myoblast proliferation and differentiation 
by inducing Id3 expression.

Zhang L(1), Shi S, Zhang J, Zhou F, ten Dijke P.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology and Centre for Biomedical Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Canonical Wnt signaling plays important roles in regulating cell proliferation
and differentiation. In this study, we report that inhibitor of differentiation
(Id)3 is a Wnt-inducible gene in mouse C2C12 myoblasts. Wnt3a induced Id3
expression in a ß-catenin-dependent manner. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) also
potently induced Id3 expression. However, Wnt-induced Id3 expression occurred
independent of the BMP/Smad pathway. Functional studies showed that Id3 depletion
in C2C12 cells impaired Wnt3a-induced cell proliferation and alkaline phosphatase
activity, an early marker of osteoblast cells. Id3 depletion elevated myogenin
induction during myogenic differentiation and partially impaired Wnt3a suppressed
myogenin expression in C2C12 cells. These results suggest that Id3 is an
important Wnt/ß-catenin induced gene in myoblast cell fate determination.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22326917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Blood. 2012 Feb 23;119(8):1861-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-370650. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Expression of BMPRIA on human thymic NK cell precursors: role of BMP signaling in
intrathymic NK cell development.

Hidalgo L(1), Martínez VG, Valencia J, Hernández-López C, Vázquez MN, Nuñez JR,
Zapata AG, Sacedón R, Varas A, Vicente A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Complutense University,
Madrid, Spain.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway regulates survival,
proliferation, and differentiation of several cell types in multiple tissues,
including the thymus. Previous reports have shown that BMP signaling negatively
regulates T-cell development. Here, we study the subpopulation of early human
intrathymic progenitors expressing the type IA BMP receptor (BMPRIA) and provide 
evidence that CD34(+)CD1a(-)BMPRIA(+) precursor cells mostly express surface cell
markers and transcription factors typically associated with NK cell lineage.
These CD34(+) cells mostly differentiate into functional CD56(+) natural killer
(NK) cells when they are cocultured with thymic stromal cells in chimeric
human-mouse fetal thymic organ cultures and also in the presence of SCF and
IL-15. Moreover, autocrine BMP signaling can promote the differentiation of
thymic NK cells by regulating the expression of key transcription factors
required for NK cell lineage (eg, Id3 and Nfil3) as well as one of the components
of IL-15 receptor, CD122. Subsequently, the resulting population of
IL-15-responsive NK cell precursors can be expanded by IL-15, whose action is
mediated by BMP signaling during the last steps of thymic NK cell
differentiation. Our results strongly suggest that BMPRIA expression identifies
human thymic NK cell precursors and that BMP signaling is relevant for NK cell
differentiation in the human thymus.

PMID: 22210872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Fitoterapia. 2012 Apr;83(3):461-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2011.12.011. Epub 2011
Dec 16.

Pharmacological mechanisms of black cohosh in Sprague-Dawley rats.

Einbond LS(1), Soffritti M, Esposti DD, Wu HA, Tibaldi E, Lauriola M, He K, Park 
T, Su T, Huggins L, Wang X, Roller M, Brennan R.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032,
USA. lseinbond@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Studies indicate that extracts and purified components from black
cohosh inhibit the growth of human breast cancer cells, but the molecular targets
and signaling pathways have not yet been defined.
PURPOSE: This study examines the pharmacological mechanisms and toxicological
effects in the short term of the herb black cohosh on female Sprague-Dawley rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To assess effects on gene activity and lipid content, we
treated female Sprague-Dawley rats with an extract of black cohosh enriched in
triterpene glycosides (27%) at 35.7 or 0mg/kg. Four animals for each group were
sacrificed at 1, 6 and 24h after treatment; liver tissue and serum samples were
obtained for gene expression and lipid analysis.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis of rat liver tissue indicated that black cohosh
markedly downregulated mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation genes.
Phospholipid biosynthesis and remodeling, PI3-Kinase and sphingosine signaling
were upregulated, driven largely by an upregulation of several isoforms of
phospholipase C. Hierarchical clustering indicated that black cohosh clustered
with antiproliferative compounds, specifically tubulin binding vinca alkaloids
and DNA alkylators. In support of this, black cohosh repressed the expression of 
cyclin D1 and ID3, and inhibited the proliferation of HepG2, p53 positive, liver 
cancer cells. Black cohosh reduced the level of free fatty acids at 6 and 24h and
triglycerides at 6h in the serum, but increased the free fatty acid and
triglyceride content of the treated livers at 24h.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that black cohosh warrants further study for
breast cancer prevention and therapy.

Copyright Â© 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22198559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cell Prolif. 2012 Feb;45(1):1-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2011.00792.x. Epub 2011
Dec 7.

Overexpression of Id3 induces apoptosis of A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Li XJ(1), Zhu CD, Yu W, Wang P, Chen FF, Xia XY, Luo B.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Clinical Laboratory Science, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. lixiaojun62@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVES: Inhibitor of differentiation 3 (Id3) protein has been implicated in
the control of multiple cell death signalling pathways and in aetiology of
numerous diseases. The aims of this study were to construct a recombinant
eukaryotic expression vector (pEGFP/Id3), containing human Id3 (hId3) fused with 
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), and to determine effects of ectopic
Id3 overexpression, on human lung adenocarcinoma cell (A549) proliferation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human Id3 cDNA was inserted into pEGFP-N1 vector to yield 
the recombinant eukaryotic expression vector pEGFP/Id3. Cells were transfected
with pEGFP or pEGFP/Id3, and proliferation of EGFP-expressing cells was monitored
by flow cytometry (FCM) and confocal fluorescence microscopy. RT-PCR,
immunoblotting and immunocytochemistry were used to assess Id3 mRNA transcription
and protein expression. Apoptosis was evaluated by Annexin V/7-AAD staining and
FCM, while nuclear morphology of apoptotic cells was examined using Hoechst 33258
staining.
RESULTS: Over 4 days transfection with pEGFP, the proportion of EGFP-positive
A549 cells peaked at approximately 60% by 48 h and remained stable over the next 
48 h. In contrast, the proportion of EGFP-positive cells in cultures transfected 
with pEGFP/Id3 decreased from a peak of 60% at 48 h to <5% at 96 h, suggesting
that Id3 expression inhibited cell proliferation or survival. Annexin V/7-AAD and
Hoechst 33258 staining revealed significantly higher rates of apoptosis in
pEGFP/Id3-transfected cells.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of Id3 triggered apoptosis in A549 human lung
adenocarcinoma cells, implicating Id3 in negative control of tumour growth. These
Id3-induced pro-apoptotic signalling pathways require further study, but this
preliminary investigation suggests that Id3 regulation could be exploited in
anti-tumour therapies.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22151756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;4(1):59-62. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjr038. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Two-step generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from mouse fibroblasts
using Id3 and Oct4.

Moon JH, Heo JS, Kwon S, Kim J, Hwang J, Kang PJ, Kim A, Kim HO, Whang KY, Yoon
BS, You S.

PMID: 22131360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Feb;32(2):317-24. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.234856. Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Inhibitor of differentiation-3 mediates high fat diet-induced visceral fat
expansion.

Cutchins A(1), Harmon DB, Kirby JL, Doran AC, Oldham SN, Skaflen M, Klibanov AL, 
Meller N, Keller SR, Garmey J, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)MR5 G133, Robert M. Berne Cardiovascular Research Center, 415 Lane Rd,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Feb;32(2):161-2.

OBJECTIVE: Inhibitor of differentiation-3 (Id3) has been implicated in promoting 
angiogenesis, a key determinant of high-fat diet (HFD)-induced visceral
adiposity. Yet the role of Id3 in HFD-induced angiogenesis and visceral adipose
expansion is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Id3(-/-) mice demonstrated a significant attenuation of
HFD-induced visceral fat depot expansion compared to wild type littermate
controls. Importantly, unlike other Id proteins, loss of Id3 did not affect
adipose depot size in young mice fed chow diet or differentiation of adipocytes
in vitro or in vivo. Contrast enhanced ultrasound revealed a significant
attenuation of visceral fat microvascular blood volume in HFD-fed mice null for
Id3 compared to wild type controls. HFD induced Id3 and VEGFA expression in the
visceral stromal vascular fraction and Id3(-/-) mice had significantly lower
levels of VEGFA protein in visceral adipose tissue compared to wild type.
Furthermore, HFD-induced VEGFA expression in visceral adipose tissue was
completely abolished by loss of Id3. Consistent with this effect, Id3 abolished
E12-mediated repression of VEGFA promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Results identify Id3 as an important regulator of HFD-induced
visceral adipose VEGFA expression, microvascular blood volume, and depot
expansion. Inhibition of Id3 may have potential as a therapeutic strategy to
limit visceral adiposity.

PMCID: PMC3262109
PMID: 22075252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nat Immunol. 2011 Nov 6;12(12):1221-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2158.

The transcriptional regulators Id2 and Id3 control the formation of distinct
memory CD8+ T cell subsets.

Yang CY(1), Best JA, Knell J, Yang E, Sheridan AD, Jesionek AK, Li HS, Rivera RR,
Lind KC, D'Cruz LM, Watowich SS, Murre C, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA.

During infection, naive CD8(+) T cells differentiate into effector cells, which
are armed to eliminate pathogens, and memory cells, which are poised to protect
against reinfection. The transcriptional program that regulates terminal
differentiation into short-lived effector-memory versus long-lived memory cells
is not clearly defined. Through the use of mice expressing reporters for the
DNA-binding inhibitors Id2 and Id3, we identified Id3(hi) precursors of
long-lived memory cells before the peak of T cell population expansion or
upregulation of cell-surface receptors that indicate memory potential. Deficiency
in Id2 or Id3 resulted in loss of distinct CD8(+) effector and memory
populations, which demonstrated unique roles for these inhibitors of E-protein
transcription factors. Furthermore, cytokines altered the expression of Id2 and
Id3 differently, which provides insight into how external cues influence gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3872000
PMID: 22057289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Nat Immunol. 2011 Nov 6;12(12):1230-7. doi: 10.1038/ni.2153.

Repression of the DNA-binding inhibitor Id3 by Blimp-1 limits the formation of
memory CD8+ T cells.

Ji Y(1), Pos Z, Rao M, Klebanoff CA, Yu Z, Sukumar M, Reger RN, Palmer DC, Borman
ZA, Muranski P, Wang E, Schrump DS, Marincola FM, Restifo NP, Gattinoni L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, US National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

The transcriptional repressor Blimp-1 promotes the differentiation of CD8(+) T
cells into short-lived effector cells (SLECs) that express the lectin-like
receptor KLRG-1, but how it operates remains poorly defined. Here we show that
Blimp-1 bound to and repressed the promoter of the gene encoding the DNA-binding 
inhibitor Id3 in SLECs. Repression of Id3 by Blimp-1 was dispensable for SLEC
development but limited the ability of SLECs to persist as memory cells. Enforced
expression of Id3 was sufficient to restore SLEC survival and enhanced recall
responses. Id3 function was mediated in part through inhibition of the
transcriptional activity of E2A and induction of genes regulating genome
stability. Our findings identify the Blimp-1-Id3-E2A axis as a key molecular
switch that determines whether effector CD8(+) T cells are programmed to die or
enter the memory pool.

PMCID: PMC3226770
PMID: 22057288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Circ Res. 2012 Jan 6;110(1):e1-12. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.256438. Epub 2011 
Oct 27.

B-cell aortic homing and atheroprotection depend on Id3.

Doran AC(1), Lipinski MJ, Oldham SN, Garmey JC, Campbell KA, Skaflen MD, Cutchins
A, Lee DJ, Glover DK, Kelly KA, Galkina EV, Ley K, Witztum JL, Tsimikas S, Bender
TP, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Virginia, PO Box 801394, 415 Lane Rd, Charlottesville, VA 22908,
USA. cam8c@virginia.edu

RATIONALE: B cells are abundant in the adventitia of normal and diseased vessels.
Yet, the molecular and cellular mechanisms mediating homing of B cells to the
vessel wall and B-cell effects on atherosclerosis are poorly understood.
Inhibitor of differentiation-3 (Id3) is important for atheroprotection in mice
and polymorphism in the human ID3 gene has been implicated as a potential risk
marker of atherosclerosis in humans. Yet, the role of Id3 in B-cell regulation of
atherosclerosis is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if Id3 regulates B-cell homing to the aorta and
atheroprotection and identify molecular and cellular mechanisms mediating this
effect.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Loss of Id3 in Apoe(-/-) mice resulted in early and
increased atherosclerosis. Flow cytometry revealed a defect in Id3(-/-) Apoe(-/-)
mice in the number of B cells in the aorta but not the spleen, lymph nodes, and
circulation. Similarly, B cells transferred from Id3(-/-) Apoe(-/-) mice into
B-cell-deficient mice reconstituted spleen, lymph node, and blood similarly to B 
cells from Id3(+/+) Apoe(-/-) mice, but aortic reconstitution and B-cell-mediated
inhibition of diet-induced atherosclerosis was significantly impaired. In
addition to retarding initiation of atherosclerosis, B cells homed to regions of 
existing atherosclerosis, reduced macrophage content in plaque, and attenuated
progression of disease. The chemokine receptor CCR6 was identified as an
important Id3 target mediating aortic homing and atheroprotection.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results are the first to identify the Id3-CCR6
pathway in B cells and demonstrate its role in aortic B-cell homing and
B-cell-mediated protection from early atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3253259
PMID: 22034493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Nov 4;414(4):826-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.036. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A enhances myogenesis by coordinating 
muscle regulatory factors and myogenic repressors.

Hagiwara H(1), Saito F, Masaki T, Ikeda M, Nakamura-Ohkuma A, Shimizu T,
Matsumura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, 2-11-1 Kaga,
Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-8605, Japan.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are known to promote skeletal muscle
formation. However, their mechanisms that include effects on the expression of
major muscle components such as the dystrophin-associated proteins complex (DAPC)
or myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) remain unknown. In this study, we
investigated the effects of HDACIs on skeletal muscle formation using the C2C12
cell culture system. C2C12 myoblasts were exposed to trichostatin A (TSA), one of
the most potent HDACIs, and differentiation was subsequently induced. We found
that TSA enhances the expression of myosin heavy chain without affecting DAPC
expression. In addition, TSA increases the expression of the early MRFs, Myf5 and
MEF2, whereas it suppresses the expression of the late MRF, myogenin.
Interestingly, TSA also enhances the expression of Id1, Id2, and Id3 (Ids). Ids
are myogenic repressors that inhibit myogenic differentiation. These findings
suggest that TSA promotes gene expression in proliferation and suppresses it in
the differentiation stage of muscle formation. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that TSA enhances myogenesis by coordinating the expression of MRFs
and myogenic repressors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Androl. 2012 Jul-Aug;33(4):667-74. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.111.014522. Epub 2011
Oct 20.

Null mutation of the transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (ID3) in
male mice adversely impacts on fertility and reproductive outcome.

Carroll M(1), Robaire B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Promenade
Sir-William-Osler, Rm 104, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (ID3) protein binds to and inhibits the function of
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. The expression of ID3 protein in
postproliferative Sertoli cells in the testis, as well as its unique, highly
region-specific expression profile along the adult epididymis, implies novel
functional roles for this regulator of transcription. The purpose of this study
was to determine the effect of Id3 deficiency on male fertility and progeny
outcome. We observed that fertility status of Id3(-/-) males is adversely
affected. Males having this null mutation did not sire any litters when crossed
with wild-type C57Bl/6 females; although pregnancies were induced in these
females, these never resulted in the birth of live pups. Additionally, abnormal
reproductive outcomes and developmental phenotypes were observed in gestational
day 18 fetuses resulting from crosses with an Id3-deficient sire and wild-type
CD-1 females; these were characterized by an elevated rate of fetal death,
reduced body weights of live fetuses, a higher rate of external malformations,
and aberrant skeletal development. Importantly, we observed that mutation of this
gene differentially affects the phenotype of resulting offspring, depending on
the genotype of the parent, not necessarily the genotype of the fetus itself.
These results provide novel insight into the role of Id3, suggesting that Id3
might coordinate gene expression programs in the male reproductive system
associated with the generation of healthy offspring.

PMID: 22016354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25163. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025163. Epub 2011 Oct 5.

Spatial segregation of BMP/Smad signaling affects osteoblast differentiation in
C2C12 cells.

Heining E(1), Bhushan R, Paarmann P, Henis YI, Knaus P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are involved in a plethora of
cellular processes in embryonic development and adult tissue homeostasis.
Signaling specificity is achieved by dynamic processes involving BMP receptor
oligomerization and endocytosis. This allows for spatiotemporal control of Smad
dependent and non-Smad pathways. In this study, we investigate the spatiotemporal
regulation within the BMP-induced Smad transcriptional pathway.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we discriminate between Smad signaling
events that are dynamin-dependent (i.e., require an intact endocytic pathway) and
dynamin-independent. Inhibition of dynamin-dependent endocytosis in fluorescence 
microscopy and fractionation studies revealed a delay in Smad1/5/8
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation after BMP-2 stimulation of C2C12 cells.
Using whole genome microarray and qPCR analysis, we identified two classes of
BMP-2 induced genes that are differentially affected by inhibition of
endocytosis. Thus, BMP-2 induced gene expression of Id1, Id3, Dlx2 and Hey1 is
endocytosis-dependent, whereas BMP-2 induced expression of Id2, Dlx3, Zbtb2 and
Krt16 is endocytosis-independent. Furthermore, we demonstrate that short term
inhibition of endocytosis interferes with osteoblast differentiation as measured 
by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) production and qPCR analysis of osteoblast marker
gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study demonstrates that dynamin-dependent
endocytosis is crucial for the concise spatial activation of the BMP-2 induced
signaling cascade. Inhibition of endocytic processes during BMP-2 stimulation
leads to altered Smad1/5/8 signaling kinetics and results in differential target 
gene expression. We show that interfering with the BMP-2 induced transcriptional 
network by endocytosis inhibition results in an attenuation of osteoblast
differentiation. This implies that selective sensitivity of gene expression to
endocytosis provides an additional mechanism for the cell to respond to BMP in a 
context specific manner. Moreover, we suggest a novel Smad dependent signal
cascade induced by BMP-2, which does not require endocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3187766
PMID: 21998639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2011 Jun;23(3):170-4.

Differential gene expression of FoxO1, ID1, and ID3 between young and older men
and associations with muscle mass and function.

Buford TW(1), Cooke MB, Shelmadine BD, Hudson GM, Redd LL, Willoughby DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32607, USA. tbuford@aging.ufl.edu

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Aging is associated with significant losses of skeletal
muscle mass and function. Numerous biochemical molecules have been implicated in 
the development of these age-related changes, however evidence from human models 
is sparse. Assessment of transcript expression is useful as it requires minimal
tissue and may potentially be used in clinical trials. This study aimed to
compare mRNA expression of proteolytic genes in skeletal muscle of young (18-35
yrs) and older (55-75 yrs) men.
METHODS: Muscle tissue was obtained from young (n=14, 21.35±1.03 yrs) and older
(n=13, 63.85±1.83 yrs) men using percutaneous biopsy, and transcript expression
was quantified using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Lower limb muscle mass 
was assessed using DEXA while concentric peak torque (PT) and power were assessed
via isokinetic dynamometer. When age-related differences in mRNA expression were 
observed, Pearson correlation coefficients were obtained to examine the
relationship of transcripts to muscle mass and function.
RESULTS: Older muscle contained significantly more transcript for Forkhead Box O 
1 (FoxO1, p=0.001), Inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (ID1, p=0.009), and Inhibitor of
DNA Binding 3 (ID3, p=0.043) than young muscle. FoxO1 was significantly
correlated with lean mass (R=-0.44, p=0.023) and PT (R=-0.40, p=0.046) while ID3 
was significantly correlated with PT (R=-0.58, p=0.001) and power (R=-0.65,
p<0.001). Moreover, ID1 was significantly correlated with all assessed measures
of muscle function - mass (R=-0.39, p=0.046), PT (R=-0.53, p=0.005), and power
(R=-0.520, p=0.005).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that FoxO1, ID1, and ID3 are potentially useful as
clinical biomarkers of age-related muscle atrophy and dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3683395
PMID: 21993163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Cell Sci. 2011 Oct 15;124(Pt 20):3399-404. doi: 10.1242/jcs.086710. Epub 2011
Oct 7.

MicroRNA-21 is an important downstream component of BMP signalling in epidermal
keratinocytes.

Ahmed MI(1), Mardaryev AN, Lewis CJ, Sharov AA, Botchkareva NV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Skin Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of Bradford,
Richmond Road, Bradford, BD7 1DP, UK.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play essential roles in the control of skin
development, postnatal tissue remodelling and tumorigenesis. To explore whether
some of the effects of BMP signalling are mediated by microRNAs, we performed
genome-wide microRNA (miRNA) screening in primary mouse keratinocytes after BMP4 
treatment. Microarray analysis revealed substantial BMP4-dependent changes in the
expression of distinct miRNAs, including miR-21. Real-time PCR confirmed that
BMP4 dramatically inhibits miR-21 expression in the keratinocytes. Consistently, 
significantly increased levels of miR-21 were observed in transgenic mice
overexpressing the BMP antagonist noggin under control of the K14 promoter
(K14-noggin). By in situ hybridization, miR-21 expression was observed in the
epidermis and hair follicle epithelium in normal mouse skin. In K14-noggin skin, 
miR-21 was prominently expressed in the epidermis, as well as in the peripheral
portion of trichofolliculoma-like hair follicle-derived tumours that contain
proliferating and poorly differentiated cells. By transfecting keratinocytes with
a miR-21 mimic, we identified the existence of two groups of the BMP target
genes, which are differentially regulated by miR-21. These included selected
BMP-dependent tumour-suppressor genes (Pten, Pdcd4, Timp3 and Tpm1) negatively
regulated by miR-21, as well as miR-21-independent Id1, Id2, Id3 and Msx2 that
predominantly mediate the effects of BMPs on cell differentiation. In primary
keratinocytes and HaCaT cells, miR-21 prevented the inhibitory effects of BMP4 on
cell proliferation and migration. Thus, our study establishes a novel mechanism
for the regulation of BMP-induced effects in the skin and suggests miRNAs are
important modulators of the effects of growth factor signalling pathways on skin 
development and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3196856
PMID: 21984808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 15;71(22):7125-34. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1330. Epub 
2011 Oct 5.

EGFR-AKT-Smad signaling promotes formation of glioma stem-like cells and tumor
angiogenesis by ID3-driven cytokine induction.

Jin X(1), Yin J, Kim SH, Sohn YW, Beck S, Lim YC, Nam DH, Choi YJ, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. jinx2354@korea.ac.kr

Aberrant activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) is causally linked to the 
pathobiological traits of glioblastoma and genesis of glioma stem-like cells
(GSC), but the underlying mechanism is still unknown. Here, we show that
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling regulates the proliferation,
angiogenesis, and acquisition of GSC characteristics by inducing inhibitor of
differentiation 3 (ID3) and ID3-regulated cytokines [GRO1 and interleukins (IL)-6
and 8] induction. We found that EGFR-mediated ID3 expression was regulated by
Smad5, which was directly phosphorylated by AKT. Furthermore, ID3 alone imparted 
GSC features to primary astrocytes derived from Ink4a/Arf-deficient mouse, and
EGFR-ID3-IL-6 signaling axis gave rise to tumor cell heterogeneity. Conversely,
EGFR inhibitors suppressed EGFR-AKT-Smad5-driven induction of ID3, which led to a
decrease in the tumorsphere forming ability of GSCs and U87MG cells that possess 
an active mutant EGFR, EGFRvIII, without obvious cytotoxic effects. However,
these cells seemed to regain colonogenic ability after removal of the EGFR
inhibitors. Together, the results delineate a novel integrative molecular
mechanism in which the RTK-ID signaling pathway governs genesis and maintenance
of GBM histopathologic features, such as GSCs-based tumor initiation,
progression, and angiogenesis.

©2011 AACR

PMID: 21975932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Islets. 2011 Nov-Dec;3(6):358-66. doi: 10.4161/isl.3.6.17923. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Id3 upregulates BrdU incorporation associated with a DNA damage response, not
replication, in human pancreatic ß-cells.

Lee SH(1), Hao E, Levine F, Itkin-Ansari P.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford Children's Health Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Institute for
Medical Research, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Elucidating mechanisms of cell cycle control in normally quiescent human
pancreatic ß-cells has the potential to impact regeneration strategies for
diabetes. Previously we demonstrated that Id3, a repressor of basic
Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) proteins, was sufficient to induce cell cycle entry in
pancreatic duct cells, which are closely related to ß-cells developmentally. We
hypothesized that Id3 might similarly induce cell cycle entry in primary human
ß-cells. To test this directly, adult human ß-cells were transduced with
adenovirus expressing Id3. Consistent with a replicative response, ß-cells
exhibited BrdU incorporation. Further, Id3 potently repressed expression of the
cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p57 (Kip2 ) , a gene which is also silenced in 
a rare ß-cell hyperproliferative disorder in infants. Surprisingly however, BrdU 
positive ß-cells did not express the proliferation markers Ki67 and pHH3.
Instead, BrdU uptake reflected a DNA damage response, as manifested by
hydroxyurea incorporation, <U+03B3>H2AX expression, and 53BP1 subcellular
relocalization. The uncoupling of BrdU uptake from replication raises a
cautionary note about interpreting studies relying solely upon BrdU incorporation
as evidence of ß-cell proliferation. The data also establish that loss of p57
(Kip2) is not sufficient to induce cell cycle entry in adult ß-cells. Moreover,
the differential responses to Id3 between duct and ß-cells reveal that ß-cells
possess intrinsic resistance to cell cycle entry not common to all quiescent
epithelial cells in the adult human pancreas. The data provide a much needed
comparative model for investigating the molecular basis for this resistance in
order to develop a strategy for improving replication competence in ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3329516
PMID: 21964314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Int Immunol. 2011 Nov;23(11):661-8. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr078. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

Transcriptional control of T-cell development.

Naito T(1), Tanaka H, Naoe Y, Taniuchi I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, RIKEN Research Institute for Allergy
and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan.

T lymphocytes, which are central players in orchestrating immune responses,
consist of several subtypes with distinct functions. The thymus is an organ where
hematopoietic progenitors undergo sequential developmental processes to give rise
to this variety of T-cell subsets with diverse antigen specificity. In the
periphery, naive T cells further differentiate into effector cells upon
encountering antigens. There are several developmental checkpoints during T-cell 
development, where regulation by a combination of transcription factors imprints 
specific functional properties on precursors. The transcription factors E2A,
GATA-binding protein 3 (Gata3) and RUNT-related transcription factor (Runx) are
involved at various stages in the differentiation of double-negative thymocytes
and in ß-selection, as are transcription factors from the Notch signaling
pathway; other transcription factors such as B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11b
(Bcl11b), myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (Myb) and inhibitor of DNA
binding 3 (Id3) are involved at specific stages. Differentiation of T cells into 
helper versus cytotoxic cells involves not only antagonistic interplay between
Runx and T(h) inducing POZ-Kruppel factor (ThPOK) but also complex interactions
between MAZR, Gata3 and Myb in the activation and silencing of genes such as Cd4 
and Cd8 as well as the gene that encodes ThPOK itself. A wide range of
well-defined transcription factors, including signal transducer and activator of 
transcriptions (STATs), T-bet, Gata3, nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT), 
adaptor-related protein complex 1 (AP-1) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), are known
to shape T(h)1/T(h)2 differentiation. Runx and Gata3 also operate in this
process, as do c-Maf and recombining binding protein for immunoglobulin J<U+03BA> region
(RBP-J) and the chromatin-reorganizing protein special AT-rich sequence-binding
protein 1 (SATB1). In this review, we briefly discuss how T-cell characteristics 
are acquired and become divergent from the point of view of transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 21948191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 26;4:370. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-370.

Unveiling novel genes upregulated by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during early
osteoblastic transdifferentiation of C2C12 cells.

Bustos-Valenzuela JC(1), Fujita A, Halcsik E, Granjeiro JM, Sogayar MC.

Author information: 
(1)Chemistry Institute, Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Therapy
Centre (NUCEL), University of São Paulo, Avenida Prof, Lineu Prestes, 748 Bloco
9S, São Paulo, SP 05508-000, Brazil. mcsoga@iq.usp.br.

FINDINGS: We set out to analyse the gene expression profile of pre-osteoblastic
C2C12 cells during osteodifferentiation induced by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 using
DNA microarrays. Induced and repressed genes were intercepted, resulting in 1,318
induced genes and 704 repressed genes by both rhBMP2 and rhBMP7. We selected and 
validated, by RT-qPCR, 24 genes which were upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7; of
these, 13 are related to transcription (Runx2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, Id1, Id2, Id3,
Fkhr1, Osx, Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3 and Cfdp1), four are associated with cell
signalling pathways (Lrp6, Dvl1, Ecsit and PKCd) and seven are associated with
the extracellular matrix (Ltbp2, Grn, Postn, Plod1, BMP1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10). 
The novel identified genes include: Hoxc8, Glis1, Glis3, Ecsit, PKCd, LrP6, Dvl1,
Grn, BMP1, Ltbp2, Plod1, Htra1 and IGFBP-rP10.
BACKGROUND: BMPs (bone morphogenetic proteins) are members of the TGFß
(transforming growth factor-ß) super-family of proteins, which regulate growth
and differentiation of different cell types in various tissues, and play a
critical role in the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts. In
particular, rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 promote osteoinduction in vitro and in vivo, and
both proteins are therapeutically applied in orthopaedics and dentistry.
CONCLUSION: Using DNA microarrays and RT-qPCR, we identified both previously
known and novel genes which are upregulated by rhBMP2 and rhBMP7 during the onset
of osteoblastic transdifferentiation of pre-myoblastic C2C12 cells. Subsequent
studies of these genes in C2C12 and mesenchymal or pre-osteoblastic cells should 
reveal more details about their role during this type of cellular differentiation
induced by BMP2 or BMP7. These studies are relevant to better understanding the
molecular mechanisms underlying osteoblastic differentiation and bone repair.

PMCID: PMC3196718
PMID: 21943021  [PubMed]


192. Aging Cell. 2011 Dec;10(6):1038-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00746.x. Epub
2011 Oct 7.

Smurf2-mediated ubiquitination and degradation of Id1 regulates p16 expression
during senescence.

Kong Y(1), Cui H, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

The inhibitor of differentiation or DNA binding (Id) family of transcription
regulators plays an important role in cell proliferation, differentiation, and
senescence. However, regulation of Id expression during these processes is poorly
understood. Id proteins are known to undergo rapid turnover mediated by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Anaphase-promoting complex has been shown to
ubiquitinate Id2, but E3 ubiquitin ligase(s) that ubiquitinate other Id family
members are not known. Here, we report for the first time the identification of
Smurf2 as the E3 ligase that ubiquitinates Id1 and Id3. Smurf2-mediated
ubiquitination and consequent degradation of Id1 or Id3 plays an important role
in the regulation of Id expression in senescent cells. Furthermore, we found that
Id1 is the mediator through which Smurf2 regulates p16 expression, providing a
mechanistic link between Smurf2 and p16 expression during senescence.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3215897
PMID: 21933340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Cell. 2011 Sep 16;146(6):918-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.040.

USP1 deubiquitinates ID proteins to preserve a mesenchymal stem cell program in
osteosarcoma.

Williams SA(1), Maecker HL, French DM, Liu J, Gregg A, Silverstein LB, Cao TC,
Carano RA, Dixit VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Genentech, Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;12(11):691.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Nov;11(11):757.

Inhibitors of DNA binding (IDs) antagonize basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors to inhibit differentiation and maintain stem cell fate. ID 
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation occur in differentiated tissues, but
IDs in many neoplasms appear to escape degradation. We show that the
deubiquitinating enzyme USP1 promotes ID protein stability and stem cell-like
characteristics in osteosarcoma. USP1 bound, deubiquitinated, and thereby
stabilized ID1, ID2, and ID3. A subset of primary human osteosarcomas
coordinately overexpressed USP1 and ID proteins. USP1 knockdown in osteosarcoma
cells precipitated ID protein destabilization, cell-cycle arrest, and osteogenic 
differentiation. Conversely, ectopic USP1 expression in mesenchymal stem cells
stabilized ID proteins, inhibited osteoblastic differentiation, and enhanced
proliferation. Consistent with USP1 functioning in normal mesenchymal stem cells,
USP1-deficient mice were osteopenic. Our observations implicate USP1 in
preservation of the stem cell state that characterizes osteosarcoma and identify 
USP1 as a target for differentiation therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21925315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Immunol. 2011 Oct;49(1-2):227-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.08.012. Epub
2011 Sep 14.

Contribution of IL-13 to early exocrinopathy in Id3-/- mice.

Mahlios J(1), Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Id3-/- mice represent a model for T cell mediated primary Sjogren's syndrome
(PSS). An intriguing feature of this disease model is the early appearance of
impaired salivary function or exocrinopathy prior to lymphocytic infiltration of 
the salivary glands. This phenomenon prompted us to examine the role of cytokines
produced by T cells in the systemic regulation of gland function. A comprehensive
examination of serum cytokine profiles revealed elevated levels of IL-13 in
Id3-/- mice. We found that the increase in serum IL-13 levels in Id3-/- mice was 
largely dependent on aß T cells. Removal of aß T cells in Id3-/- mice also
eliminates disease symptoms, including lymphocytic infiltration in the gland
tissues, and impaired saliva production. We further show that the number of mast 
cells in the salivary glands of Id3-/- mice is significantly increased, in a
trend inversely related to the saliva production. This increase in the number of 
mast cells is also dependent on the presence of aß T cells. Treatment of young
Id3-/- mice with anti-IL-13 antibodies over a two-month period resulted in a
reduction of both serum IL-13 levels and the number of mast cells in the salivary
gland tissues, as well as correspondingly improved saliva production. These
findings indicate a potentially important role for IL-13 in gland regulation and 
disease pathology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3205188
PMID: 21924496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Oct;35(10):1463-72. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318224d2cd.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors express stem cell factors, which relate to the
expression of EZH2 and Id proteins.

Venneti S(1), Le P, Martinez D, Xie SX, Sullivan LM, Rorke-Adams LB, Pawel B,
Judkins AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are highly aggressive pediatric tumors
associated with loss of expression of SMARCB1, commonly occurring in the central 
nervous system [referred to as atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs)] and in
the kidney and soft tissues. Histologically, MRTs are characterized by
immunohistochemical evidence of primitive neuroectodermal, mesenchymal, and
epithelial differentiation. The ability of MRTs to differentiate along multiple
lines, as evidenced by both histologic features and polyphenotypic
immunohistochemical staining, and the proliferative nature of MRT cells are
characteristics shared with the self-renewal and plasticity of embryonic stem
cells (ES). To test the hypothesis that MRTs share similarities with ES, we used 
immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expression of various stem cell markers in a
tissue microarray containing 26 AT/RTs and 16 non-central nervous system MRTs
(NCMRTs). Staining intensity was scored as negative (0), low (1+), moderate (2+),
and strong (3+) and was multiplied by the percentage of positive tumor cells to
establish a semiquantitative measure for each marker. In AT/RT, strong-to-low
expression was noted with glypican-3 (20 of 26, 77%), Sall4 (23 of 26, 88%),
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (25 of 26, 96%), and undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (19 of 26, 73%). Markers that showed low expression in
AT/RT were Sox2 (8 of 26, 31%), Nanog (7 of 26, 27%), Klf4 (10 of 26, 38%),
Zfp206 (5 of 26, 19%), and musashi-1 (21 of 26, 81%). Similarly, in NCMRT,
expression was noted with glypican-3 (12 of 16, 75%), Sall4 (13 of 16, 81%),
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (16 of 16, 100%), undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (12 of 16, 75%), Sox2 (5 of 16, 31%), Nanog (8 of 16,
50%), Klf4 (8 of 16, 50%), Zfp206 (13 of 16, 81%), and musashi-1 (11 of 16, 75%).
Placental alkaline phosphatase, Oct4, c-KIT, CD30, a-fetoprotein, and ß- -human
chorionic gonadotrophin were not expressed in all cases. Markers that regulate
the expression of stem cell transcription factors were also expressed in MRT.
AT/RT cases showed expression of Id proteins: Id1 (17 of 26, 65%), Id2 (24 of 26,
92%), Id3 (22 of 26, 85%), and Id4 (22 of 26, 85%). Low expression was observed
with EZH2 (15 of 26, 58%). Similarly, NCMRT cases showed expression of Id1 (15 of
16, 94%), Id2 (16 of 16, 100%), Id3 (16 of 16, 100%), Id4 (13 of 16, 81%), and
EZH2 (13 of 16, 81%). Finally, regression analysis revealed a significant
relationship between the expression of stem cell markers and EZH2 (P<0.0001), Id1
(P=0.0087), Id2 (P=0.0002), Id3 (P=0.0033), and Id4 (P<0.0001). These data
suggest that MRTs express many stem cell-associated transcription factors, which 
may be regulated by the expression of EZH2 and the Id family of proteins. This
study underscores similarities between MRTs and stem cells and may help elucidate
common biologic pathways that could serve in advancing more effective therapeutic
strategies to treat MRTs.

PMID: 21921784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nat Immunol. 2011 Aug 21;12(10):992-1001. doi: 10.1038/ni.2086.

The opposing roles of the transcription factor E2A and its antagonist Id3 that
orchestrate and enforce the naive fate of T cells.

Miyazaki M(1), Rivera RR, Miyazaki K, Lin YC, Agata Y, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):413.

It is established that the transcription factor E2A and its antagonist Id3
modulate the checkpoints consisting of the precursor to the T cell antigen
receptor (pre-TCR) and the TCR. Here we demonstrate that Id3 expression was
higher beyond the pre-TCR checkpoint, remained high in naive T cells and showed a
bimodal pattern in the effector-memory population. We show how E2A promoted T
lineage specification and how pre-TCR-mediated signaling affected E2A genome-wide
occupancy. Thymi in Id3-deficient mice had aberrant development of
effector-memory cells, higher expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR5 and the 
transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 and, unexpectedly, T cell-B cell conjugates and B
cell follicles. Collectively, our data show how E2A acted globally to orchestrate
development into the T lineage and that Id3 antagonized E2A activity beyond the
pre-TCR checkpoint to enforce the naive fate of T cells.

PMCID: PMC3178719
PMID: 21857655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 15;187(6):3133-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101097. Epub 2011
Aug 15.

Development and function of innate polyclonal TCRalphabeta+ CD8+ thymocytes.

Rafei M(1), Hardy MP, Williams P, Vanegas JR, Forner KA, Dulude G, Labrecque N,
Galipeau J, Perreault C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada.

Innate CD8 T cells are found in mutant mouse models, but whether they are
produced in a normal thymus remains controversial. Using the RAG2p-GFP mouse
model, we found that ~10% of TCRaß(+) CD4(-)CD8(+) thymocytes were innate
polyclonal T cells (GFP(+)CD44(hi)). Relative to conventional T cells, innate CD8
thymocytes displayed increased cell surface amounts of B7-H1, CD2, CD5, CD38,
IL-2Rß, and IL-4Ra and downmodulation of TCRß. Moreover, they overexpressed
several transcripts, including T-bet, Id3, Klf2, and, most of all, Eomes. Innate 
CD8 thymocytes were positively selected, mainly by nonhematopoietic MHCIa(+)
cells. They rapidly produced high levels of IFN-<U+03B3> upon stimulation and readily
proliferated in response to IL-2 and IL-4. Furthermore, low numbers of innate CD8
thymocytes were sufficient to help conventional CD8 T cells expand and secrete
cytokine following Ag recognition. This helper effect depended on CD44-mediated
interactions between innate and conventional CD8 T cells. We concluded that
innate TCRaß(+) CD8 T cells represent a sizeable proportion of normal thymocytes 
whose development and function differ in many ways from those of conventional CD8
T cells.

PMID: 21844388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2011 May;17(5):410-3.

[Expression of ID3 protein in prostate cancer and its clinicopathological
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang K(1), Li XJ, Yin HL, Zhou HB, Chen FF, Wang H, Ma HH.

Author information: 
(1)PLA Research Institute of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Nanjing General
Hospital of Nanjing Military Region, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of the ID3 protein in prostate cancer and its 
clinicopathological significance.
METHODS: We detected the expression of the ID3 protein in PC-3M cells by indirect
immunofluorescence, and that in 29 prostate cancer and 15 prostate hyperplasia
specimens by immunohistochemistry. Then we analyzed the correlation between the
expression level of ID3 and the clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: The ID3 protein was expressed predominantly in the nucleus of PC-3M
cells. Its expression rate was 82.7% (24/29) in the prostate cancer specimens,
significantly higher than 6.6% (1/15) in prostate hyperplasia (P < 0.05), and was
positively correlated with the Gleason score of prostate cancer (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The ID3 protein is expressed in prostate cancer, and is elevated with
the increase of Gleason score.

PMID: 21837949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Am J Pathol. 2011 Aug;179(2):651-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.04.029. Epub 2011
Jun 14.

Deficiency of a transcriptional regulator, inhibitor of differentiation 3,
induces glomerulonephritis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice: a model linking
hyperlipidemia and renal disease.

Bagavant H(1), Scindia Y, Nackiewicz D, Nandula SR, Doran A, Cutchins A, Oldham
S, Deshmukh U, McNamara C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Center for Immunity, Inflammation and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
hb5u@virginia.edu

The clinical association between hyperlipidemia and renal disease is well
established, yet hyperlipidemia as a cause for renal disease is rare.
Apolipoprotein E-deficient (ApoE(-/-)) mice develop hyperlipidemia and are a
model for atherosclerosis. Introducing deficiency of inhibitor of differentiation
3 (Id3) in ApoE(-/-) mice further exacerbates atherosclerosis. ID3 is a
transcription regulator expressed in multiple cell types. Id3(-/-) mice develop
antibodies to self-antigens and salivary gland autoimmunity. This study was
undertaken to investigate a link between hyperlipidemia, autoimmunity, and renal 
disease. ApoE(-/-), Id3(-/-), and ApoE(-/-)Id3(-/-) double-knockout (DKO) mice
were studied at different ages for renal pathological features and function.
Serum samples were analyzed for the presence of autoantibodies. At 16 weeks, DKO 
mice developed mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis (GN), leading to severe
proteinuria. GN was associated with glomerular deposition of lipids and immune
complexes and with macrophage infiltration. DKO mice had high levels of
circulating autoantibodies. Although ApoE(-/-) mice had glomerular lipid deposits
and Id3(-/-) mice had circulating autoantibodies, neither group of age-matched
single-knockout mice developed GN. These data provide support for the hypothesis 
that induction of renal disease in hyperlipidemia is dictated by additional
factors. Our study shows that some of these factors are regulated by ID3. Thus,
ID3 is a novel risk factor linking cardiovascular and renal disease.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3157169
PMID: 21801865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cereb Cortex. 2012 Jan;22(1):175-90. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr104. Epub 2011 May
25.

The insula of Reil revisited: multiarchitectonic organization in macaque monkeys.

Gallay DS(1), Gallay MN, Jeanmonod D, Rouiller EM, Morel A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Research, Hospital Zürich, CH-8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

The insula of Reil represents a large cortical territory buried in the depth of
the lateral sulcus and subdivided into 3 major cytoarchitectonic domains:
agranular, dysgranular, and granular. The present study aimed at reinvestigating 
the architectonic organization of the monkey's insula using multiple
immunohistochemical stainings (parvalbumin, PV; nonphosphorylated neurofilament
protein, with SMI-32; acetylcholinesterase, AChE) in addition to Nissl and
myelin. According to changes in density and laminar distributions of the
neurochemical markers, several zones were defined and related to 8
cytoarchitectonic subdivisions (Ia1-Ia2/Id1-Id3/Ig1-Ig2/G). Comparison of the
different patterns of staining on unfolded maps of the insula revealed: 1)
parallel ventral to dorsal gradients of increasing myelin, PV- and
AChE-containing fibers in middle layers, and of SMI-32 pyramidal neurons in
supragranular layers, with merging of dorsal and ventral high-density bands in
posterior insula, 2) definition of an insula "proper" restricted to two-thirds of
the "morphological" insula (as bounded by the limiting sulcus) and characterized 
most notably by lower PV, and 3) the insula proper is bordered along its dorsal, 
posterodorsal, and posteroventral margin by a strip of cortex extending beyond
the limits of the morphological insula and continuous architectonically with
frontoparietal and temporal opercular areas related to gustatory, somatosensory, 
and auditory modalities.

PMCID: PMC3236796
PMID: 21613468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Jun;9(6):782-90. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0535. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

The Id3/E47 axis mediates cell-cycle control in human pancreatic ducts and
adenocarcinoma.

Lee SH(1), Hao E, Kiselyuk A, Shapiro J, Shields DJ, Lowy A, Levine F,
Itkin-Ansari P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Universityof California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has a 5-year survival rate of less than
5%, and therapeutic advances have been hampered by gaps in our understanding of
cell-cycle control in the adult pancreas. Previously, we reported that basic
Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) transcription factors regulate cell fate specification in
the pancreas. In the present study, we found that a repressor of bHLH activity,
Id3, was profoundly upregulated in ductal cells in murine models of pancreatitis 
and pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). Id3 was also pervasively
expressed in neoplastic lesions in human PDA in situ. We hypothesized that an
imbalance in bHLH versus Id activity controlled cell growth in PDA. Consistent
with this model, cell-cycle progression in PDA cells was impeded by
siRNA-mediated depletion of Id3 or overexpression of the bHLH protein E47. The
precursors of human PDA are normally quiescent duct cells which do not
proliferate in response to high serum or growth factors. The finding that Id3 was
expressed in pancreatitis, as well as PDA, suggested that Id3 might induce
cell-cycle entry in ducts. To test this hypothesis, primary human pancreatic duct
cells were transduced with an adenovirus-expressing Id3. Remarkably, Id3
expression alone was sufficient to trigger efficient cell-cycle entry, as
manifested by expression of the proliferation markers Ki67, phospho-cyclin E, and
phospho-histone H3. Collectively, the data establish dysregulation of the Id/bHLH
axis as an early and sustained feature of ductal pathogenesis and mark this axis 
as a potential therapeutic target for intervention in pancreatitis and PDA.

PMCID: PMC3954712
PMID: 21498546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 1;124(Pt 9):1445-52. doi: 10.1242/jcs.077511. Epub 2011 Apr 
12.

ID1 and ID3 represent conserved negative regulators of human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cell hematopoiesis.

Hong SH(1), Lee JH, Lee JB, Ji J, Bhatia M.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8N 3Z5, Canada.

Mechanisms that govern hematopoietic lineage specification, as opposed to the
expansion of committed hematopoietic progenitors, from human pluripotent stem
cells (hPSCs) have yet to be fully defined. Here, we show that within the family 
of genes called inhibitors of differentiation (ID), ID1 and ID3 negatively
regulate the transition from lineage-specified hemogenic cells to committed
hematopoietic progenitors during hematopoiesis of both human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) and human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSCs). Upon hematopoietic
induction of hPSCs, levels of ID1 and ID3 transcripts rapidly increase, peaking
at the stage of hemogenic precursor emergence, and then exclusively decrease
during subsequent hematopoietic commitment. Suppression of ID1 and ID3 expression
in hemogenic precursors using specific small interfering RNAs augments
differentiation into committed hematopoietic progenitors, with dual suppression
of ID1 and ID3 further increasing hematopoietic induction compared with upon
knockdown of each gene alone. This inhibitory role of ID1 and ID3 directly
affects hemogenic precursors and is not dependent on non-hemogenic cells of other
lineages within developing human embryoid bodies from hESCs or hiPSCs. Our study 
uniquely identifies ID1 and ID3 as negative regulators of the hPSC-hematopoietic 
transition from a hemogenic to a committed hematopoietic fate, and demonstrates
that this is conserved between hESCs and hiPSCs.

PMID: 21486943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):18104-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.208488. Epub
2011 Mar 18.

Protein kinase Ca signaling regulates inhibitor of DNA binding 1 in the
intestinal epithelium.

Hao F(1), Pysz MA, Curry KJ, Haas KN, Seedhouse SJ, Black AR, Black JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.

Increasing evidence supports a role for PKCa in growth arrest and tumor
suppression in the intestinal epithelium. In contrast, the Id1 transcriptional
repressor has pro-proliferative and tumorigenic properties in this tissue. Here, 
we identify Id1 as a novel target of PKCa signaling. Using a highly specific
antibody and a combined morphological/biochemical approach, we establish that Id1
is a nuclear protein restricted to proliferating intestinal crypt cells. A
relationship between PKCa and Id1 was supported by the demonstration that (a)
down-regulation of Id1 at the crypt/villus junction coincides with PKCa
activation, and (b) loss of PKCa in intestinal tumors is associated with
increased levels of nuclear Id1. Manipulation of PKCa activity in IEC-18
nontransformed intestinal crypt cells determined that PKCa suppresses Id1 mRNA
and protein via an Erk-dependent mechanism. PKCa, but not PKCd, also inhibited
Id1 expression in colon cancer cells. Id1 was found to regulate cyclin D1 levels 
in IEC-18 and colon cancer cells, pointing to a role for Id1 suppression in the
antiproliferative/tumor suppressive activities of PKCa. Notably, Id1 expression
was elevated in the intestinal epithelium of PKCa-knock-out mice, confirming that
PKCa regulates Id1 in vivo. A wider role for PKCa in control of inhibitor of DNA 
binding factors is supported by its ability to down-regulate Id2 and Id3 in
IEC-18 cells, although their suppression is more modest than that of Id1. This
study provides the first demonstrated link between a specific PKC isozyme and
inhibitor of DNA binding factors, and it points to a role for a PKCa <U+2192> Erk <U+22A3> Id1 
<U+2192> cyclin D1 signaling axis in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3093883
PMID: 21454537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):G156-64. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00362.2010. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Dietary fiber enhances TGF-ß signaling and growth inhibition in the gut.

Cao Y(1), Gao X, Zhang W, Zhang G, Nguyen AK, Liu X, Jimenez F, Cox CS Jr,
Townsend CM Jr, Ko TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
77026, USA.

Dietary fiber intake links to decreased risk of colorectal cancers. The
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Recently, we found that butyrate, a
short-chain fatty acid produced in gut by bacterial fermentation of dietary
fiber, enhances TGF-ß signaling in rat intestinal epithelial cells (RIE-1).
Furthermore, TGF-ß represses inhibitors of differentiation (Ids), leading to
apoptosis. We hypothesized that dietary fiber enhances TGF-ß's growth inhibitory 
effects on gut epithelium via inhibition of Id2. In this study, Balb/c and DBA/2N
mice were fed with a regular rodent chow or supplemented with a dietary fiber
(20% pectin) and Smad3 level in gut epithelium was measured. In vitro, RIE-1
cells were treated with butyrate and TGF-ß(1), and cell functions were evaluated.
Furthermore, the role of Ids in butyrate- and TGF-ß-induced growth inhibition was
investigated. We found that pectin feeding increased Smad3 protein levels in the 
jejunum (1.47 ± 0.26-fold, P = 0.045, in Balb/c mice; 1.49 ± 0.19-fold, P =
0.016, in DBA/2N mice), and phospho-Smad3 levels (1.92 ± 0.27-fold, P = 0.009, in
Balb/c mice; 1.83 ± 0.28-fold, P = 0.022, in DBA/2N mice). Butyrate or TGF-ß
alone inhibited cell growth and induced cell cycle arrest. The combined treatment
of butyrate and TGF-ß synergistically induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in 
RIE-1 cells and repressed Id2 and Id3 levels. Furthermore, knockdown of Id2 gene 
expression by use of small interfering RNA caused cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. We conclude that dietary fiber pectin enhanced Smad3 expression and
activation in the gut. Butyrate and TGF-ß induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis, which may be mediated by repression of Id2. Our results implicate a
novel mechanism of dietary fiber in reducing the risk of colorectal cancer
development.

PMCID: PMC3129933
PMID: 21454444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Apr;46(4):770-80. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.02.010. Epub
2011 Feb 24.

ß-Catenin signaling regulates the timing of cell differentiation in mouse retinal
progenitor cells.

Ouchi Y(1), Baba Y, Koso H, Taketo MM, Iwamoto T, Aburatani H, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, 108-8639 Tokyo,
Japan.

Wnt signaling is important in development and carcinogenesis. We previously
showed that active ß-catenin or Lef-1 in the mammalian retinal culture prevents
differentiation of retinal cells without modifying cellular proliferation. In
this study, we investigated the in vivo role of ß-catenin in mouse retinal
differentiation in transgenic mice, in which retinal-specific activation or
inactivation of ß-catenin was achieved with Cre recombinase. The gain-of-function
mice exhibited small eyes and large cell aggregates consisting of early
progenitor cells labeled with SSEA-1 in the peripheral retina. In the
loss-of-function mice, we observed a reduced number of SSEA-1-positive progenitor
cells and the presence of differentiated cells in the ß-catenin ablated retinal
region. Interestingly, the number of proliferating cells in the ß-catenin
gain-of-function mice was highly downregulated, and the proliferation index
detected by Ki67 expression was slightly lower than that of control mice in the
ß-catenin loss-of-function mice. The Gsk-3ß inhibitor BIO induced expression of
Id3, which was highly expressed in SSEA-1-positive cells, and transiently
maintained SSEA-1-positive retinal progenitor cells (RPCs). Forced expression of 
Id3 in RPCs mimicked the effects of BIO. Taken together, ß-catenin signaling
regulates the timing of differentiation in RPCs by inhibiting premature
differentiation of them partly through the regulation of Id3 expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Biosyst. 2011 May;7(5):1481-6. doi: 10.1039/c0mb00192a. Epub 2011 Feb 19.

Magnetite (Fe3O4) nanocrystals affect the expression of genes involved in the
TGF-beta signalling pathway.

Khan JA(1), Mandal TK, Das TK, Singh Y, Pillai B, Maiti S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, CSIR, Mall Road, New Delhi
110007, India.

An understanding of interaction of nanomaterials with living systems is
fundamental to address nanosafety issues, which, in turn will dictate the future 
prospects of nanomedicine. Herein, we examine the molecular effects of uptake of 
Magnetite (Fe(3)O(4)) Nanocrystals (MNC) using a transcriptomics approach. The
uptake of MNC was studied by electron microscopy. This was followed by
transcriptional profiling using whole genome microarrays, functional analysis of 
microarray data, real time PCR and biochemical assay for CASP9. Transcriptional
profiling revealed 69 genes to be differentially expressed upon MNC treatment.
Many of these genes are associated with TGF-beta signaling and include ID1, ID2, 
ID3, CASP9, SMAD6 and SMAD7, which are important negative regulators of signaling
pathways involved in development and tumorigenesis. Moreover, upon treatment with
MNC, expression of CASP9 was also found to decrease in a dose dependent manner.
This approach could help us to identify specific effects of MNC upon cells and
give us simultaneous clues about their biocompatibility and therapeutic
potential. The MNC can specifically interfere with TGF-beta signaling by
inhibiting the expression of ID and SMAD genes. As TGF-beta signaling invokes
different responses in undifferentiated cells and adult tissues in a cell-type
specific manner, our findings have far reaching implications in cellular
development, differentiation and cancer.

PMID: 21336377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):2048-59. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1219. Epub 2011 Feb 
15.

Prenatal androgen exposure leads to alterations in gene and protein expression in
the ovine fetal ovary.

Hogg K(1), McNeilly AS, Duncan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproductive Biology, The Queen's Medical Research Institute, 47
Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4SA, UK. k.hogg@sms.ed.ac.uk

Exposure of a female fetus to increased androgens in utero results in an adult
phenotype reminiscent of polycystic ovary syndrome. We investigated whether
prenatal androgens could directly alter the structure and function of the fetal
ovary. We examined fetal ovarian cell proliferation, germ cell volume, and the
expression of steroid receptors and steroidogenic enzymes. In addition, we
studied the inhibitors of differentiation (Ids) and the SLIT/Roundabout
developmental pathways. Female fetuses were collected from ewes treated with 100 
mg testosterone propionate (TP) or vehicle control (C), twice weekly from d 60 to
70 (C = 3, TP = 6) or d 90 (C = 6, TP = 8). Female fetuses were also collected at
d 70 after a single injection of TP (20 mg) or vehicle C into the fetal flank at 
d 60 (C = 4, TP = 8). Prenatal androgenization had no effect on fetal ovarian
morphology, cell proliferation, or germ cell volume. However, there was a
reduction in the expression of StAR, CYP11A, CYP17, and LHR at d 90 of gestation.
There was also an increase in Id1 immunostaining at d 90 and an increase in Id3
immunostaining at d 70. Direct injection of TP into the fetus down-regulated
ovarian CYP11A, estrogen receptor a and ß mRNA, and ROBO1 and up-regulated CYP19,
androgen receptor immunostaining, and Id3 mRNA and protein. Although at d 90
prenatal androgenization does not result in structural changes of the fetal
ovary, there are functional changes that may impact on ovarian development. TP
has direct actions on the fetal ovary, and these may contribute to the adult
ovarian phenotype in the ovine model of polycystic ovary syndrome.

PMID: 21325046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Trends Immunol. 2011 Feb;32(2):50-6. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2010.12.004. Epub 2011 Feb
1.

Alternative memory in the CD8 T cell lineage.

Lee YJ(1), Jameson SC, Hogquist KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

A prominent population of innate CD8+ T cells develops in the thymus of several
gene-deficient mouse strains, including Itk, KLF2, CBP and Id3. These cells have 
the phenotype and function of memory CD8+ T cells, without previous exposure to
antigen. Surprisingly, the cytokine IL-4 plays a key role in their development.
As this developmental mechanism was discovered, it came to light that innate CD8+
T cells exist also in normal mice and in humans. In this review, we discuss how
these cells develop, compare and contrast them to other CD8 memory cells, and
discuss their potential physiological relevance.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039080
PMID: 21288770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Mar;25(3):474-81. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0305. Epub 2011 Jan
14.

Suppression of BMP-Smad signaling axis-induced osteoblastic differentiation by
small C-terminal domain phosphatase 1, a Smad phosphatase.

Kokabu S(1), Ohte S, Sasanuma H, Shin M, Yoneyama K, Murata E, Kanomata K, Nojima
J, Ono Y, Yoda T, Fukuda T, Katagiri T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathophysiology, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical University, 1397-1 Yamane, Hidaka-shi, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) induce osteoblastic differentiation in
myogenic cells via the phosphorylation of Smads. Two types of Smad
phosphatases--small C-terminal domain phosphatase 1 (SCP1) and protein
phosphatase magnesium-dependent 1A--have been shown to inhibit BMP activity.
Here, we report that SCP1 inhibits the osteoblastic differentiation induced by
BMP-4, a constitutively active BMP receptor, and a constitutively active form of 
Smad1. The phosphatase activity of SCP1 was required for this suppression, and
the knockdown of SCP1 in myoblasts stimulated the osteoblastic differentiation
induced by BMP signaling. In contrast to protein phosphatase magnesium-dependent 
1A, SCP1 did not reduce the protein levels of Smad1 and failed to suppress
expression of the Id1, Id2, and Id3 genes. Runx2-induced osteoblastic
differentiation was suppressed by SCP1 without affecting the transcriptional
activity or phosphorylation levels of Runx2. Taken together, these findings
suggest that SCP1 may inhibit the osteoblastic differentiation induced by the
BMP-Smad axis via Runx2 by suppressing downstream effector(s).

PMID: 21239611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 1;186(3):1521-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002940. Epub 2010
Dec 29.

Lung cancer-derived galectin-1 mediates dendritic cell anergy through inhibitor
of DNA binding 3/IL-10 signaling pathway.

Kuo PL(1), Hung JY, Huang SK, Chou SH, Cheng DE, Jong YJ, Hung CH, Yang CJ, Tsai 
YM, Hsu YL, Huang MS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, 807 Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Lung cancer, one of the leading causes of death worldwide, is often associated
with a state of immune suppression, but the molecular and functional basis
remains enigmatic. Evidence is provided in this paper supporting the role of lung
cancer-derived soluble lectin, galectin-1, as a culprit in dendritic cell (DC)
anergy. We have shown that galectin-1 is highly expressed in lung cancer cell
lines, together with the serum and surgical samples from lung cancer patients.
Functionally, lung cancer-derived galectin-1 has been shown to alter the
phenotypes of monocyte-derived DCs (MdDCs) and impair alloreactive T cell
response, concomitant with the increase of CD4(+)CD25(+)FOXP3(+) regulatory T
cells. The regulatory effect of galectin-1 is mediated, in part, through its
ability to induce, in an Id3 (inhibitor of DNA binding 3)-dependent manner, the
expression of IL-10 in monocytes and MdDCs. This effect is inhibited by the
addition of lactose, which normalizes the phenotypic and functional alterations
seen in MdDCs. Of note, significant upregulation of IL-10 was seen in
tumor-infiltrating CD11c(+) DCs in human lung cancer samples. This was also noted
in mice transplanted with lung cancer cells, but not in those receiving tumor
cells with galectin-1 knockdown. Furthermore, a significant reduction was noted
in lung cancer incidence and in the levels of IL-10-expressing,
tumor-infiltrating DCs, in mice receiving galectin-1-silenced tumor cells. These 
results thus suggest that the galectin-1/IL-10 functional axis may be crucial in 
lung cancer-mediated immune suppression, and that galectin-1 may serve as a
target in the development of lung cancer immunotherapy.

PMID: 21191065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):496-510. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.017. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

Fgf15-mediated control of neurogenic and proneural gene expression regulates
dorsal midbrain neurogenesis.

Fischer T(1), Faus-Kessler T, Welzl G, Simeone A, Wurst W, Prakash N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, Technical
University Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.

The balanced proliferation and cell cycle exit of neural progenitors, by
generating the appropriate amount of postmitotic progeny at the correct time and 
in the proper location, is required for the establishment of the highly ordered
structure of the adult brain. Little is known about the extrinsic signals
regulating these processes, particularly in the midbrain. Fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) 15, the mouse ortholog of FGF19 and member of an atypical Fgf
subfamily, is prominently expressed in the dorsolateral midbrain of the
midgestational mouse embryo. In the absence of Fgf15, dorsal midbrain neural
progenitors fail to exit the cell cycle and to generate the proper amount of
postmitotic neurons. We show here that this is due to the altered expression of
inhibitory/neurogenic and proneural/neuronal differentiation helix-loop-helix
transcription factor (TF) genes. The expression of Id1, Id3, and Hes5 was
strongly increased and ectopically expanded, whereas the expression of Ascl1
(Mash1), Neurog1 (Ngn1) and Neurog2 (Ngn2) was strongly decreased and
transcription of Neurod1 (NeuroD) was completely abolished in the dorsolateral
midbrain of Fgf15(-/-) mice. These abnormalities were not caused by the
mis-expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins such as cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitors or retinoblastoma proteins. Furthermore, human FGF19 promotes cell
cycle exit of murine dorsal neural progenitors in vitro. Therefore, our data
suggest that Fgf15 is a crucial signaling molecule regulating the postmitotic
transition of dorsal neural progenitors and thus the initiation and proper
progression of dorsal midbrain neurogenesis in the mouse, by controlling the
expression of neurogenic and proneural TFs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21172336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Cell. 2010 Dec 14;18(6):655-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.023.

TGF-ß Receptor Inhibitors Target the CD44(high)/Id1(high) Glioma-Initiating Cell 
Population in Human Glioblastoma.

Anido J(1), Sáez-Borderías A, Gonzàlez-Juncà A, Rodón L, Folch G, Carmona MA,
Prieto-Sánchez RM, Barba I, Martínez-Sáez E, Prudkin L, Cuartas I, Raventós C,
Martínez-Ricarte F, Poca MA, García-Dorado D, Lahn MM, Yingling JM, Rodón J,
Sahuquillo J, Baselga J, Seoane J.

Author information: 
(1)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Dec 14;18(6):543-5.

Glioma-initiating cells (GICs), also called glioma stem cells, are responsible
for tumor initiation, relapse, and therapeutic resistance. Here, we show that
TGF-ß inhibitors, currently under clinical development, target the GIC
compartment in human glioblastoma (GBM) patients. Using patient-derived
specimens, we have determined the gene responses to TGF-ß inhibition, which
include inhibitors of DNA-binding protein (Id)-1 and -3 transcription factors. We
have identified a cell population enriched for GICs that expresses high levels of
CD44 and Id1 and tend to be located in a perivascular niche. The inhibition of
the TGF-ß pathway decreases the CD44(high)/Id1(high) GIC population through the
repression of Id1 and Id3 levels, therefore inhibiting the capacity of cells to
initiate tumors. High CD44 and Id1 levels confer poor prognosis in GBM patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21156287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biol Reprod. 2011 Apr;84(4):765-74. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088344. Epub 2010
Dec 8.

Null mutation of the transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (id3)
affects spermatozoal motility parameters and epididymal gene expression in mice.

Carroll M(1), Luu T, Robaire B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

ID3 is a transcription factor that acts as a dominant-negative regulator of other
transcription factors by sequestering them, thus rendering them unable to bind
DNA. We have shown previously that ID3 is expressed in a unique, region-specific 
manner along the epididymis, a highly specialized tissue of the male reproductive
tract that functions in the transport and maturation of spermatozoa. The goal of 
these studies was to test the hypothesis that ID3 plays a role in the epididymis 
in the region-specific regulation of gene expression that is responsible for
establishing the microenvironment required to carry out sperm-related functions. 
The consequences of ID3 deficiency on epididymal histology and gene expression
profiles, as well as spermatozoal motility parameters, were determined. Although 
ID3 deficiency (Id3(-/-) mice) had no noticeable impact on epididymal histology, 
the targeted mutation adversely affected sperm motility parameters. Moreover,
principal component analysis of microarray data indicated that the gene
expression signatures for tissues obtained from Id3(-/-) mice and their genotypic
controls were distinct from each other in each epididymal region. The predominant
effect of the Id3 null mutation was in the cauda region where the expression of
many transcription factors, including Hoxb8 and Bclaf1, was markedly affected.
ID3 may play an important role in the molecular circuitry involved in the
establishment and maintenance of the region-specific differences in gene
expression that are characteristic of the epididymis.

PMCID: PMC4574637
PMID: 21148110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Neuroscience. 2011 Feb 23;175:367-79. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.12.007.
Epub 2010 Dec 9.

The expression and roles of inhibitor of DNA binding helix-loop-helix proteins in
the developing and adult mouse retina.

Du Y(1), Yip HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) proteins bind to and inhibit the function of basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors including those that regulate
retinal development. However, little is known about the role of Id proteins in
the growth and differentiation of the retina during development. The purpose of
this study is to observe the expression of Id proteins in the developing and
adult mouse retinas as the first step in investigating the functions of Id family
members in the eye. The expression of Id1-4 was examined by real-time PCR,
Western blot, and immunohistochemistry in wild-type and Id1/Id3 double-knockout
mice. Id1-4 genes and proteins showed high expression levels in the retina at
embryonic and early postnatal stages, whereas declined in the adult. Expression
of Id proteins was observed in the inner neuroblastic layer (NBL) at embryonic
(E) day 13.5 through 16.5. Id4 expression began at E18.5. By E18.5 and postnatal 
day 1, the expression of Id1-4 exhibited distinct yet overlapping patterns in the
ganglion cell layer and inner part of NBL. In the adult, Ids were expressed in
retinal ganglion cells, amacrine cells, bipolar cells, and horizontal cells. No
Id expression was found in Müller cells. Id1 and Id3 double-knockout mice
(Id1(-/-)/Id3(-/-)) showed smaller retinal size compared to wild-type or
heterozygous littermates. However, histological analyses in Id1 and Id3
single-knockout retinas revealed no obvious defects in developmental phenotype.
Our results indicate that the expression of the Id family may play an important
role in regulating retinal progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):86-95. doi: 10.1038/ni.1965. Epub 2010 Dec 5.

Control of the differentiation of regulatory T cells and T(H)17 cells by the
DNA-binding inhibitor Id3.

Maruyama T(1), Li J, Vaque JP, Konkel JE, Wang W, Zhang B, Zhang P, Zamarron BF, 
Yu D, Wu Y, Zhuang Y, Gutkind JS, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunology Unit, Oral Infection and Immunity Branch, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jan;12(1):14-6.

The molecular mechanisms that direct transcription of the gene encoding the
transcription factor Foxp3 in CD4(+) T cells remain ill-defined. We show here
that deletion of the DNA-binding inhibitor Id3 resulted in the defective
generation of Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (T(reg) cells). We identify two
transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1)-dependent mechanisms that were vital for
activation of Foxp3 transcription and were defective in Id3(-/-) CD4(+) T cells. 
Enhanced binding of the transcription factor E2A to the Foxp3 promoter promoted
Foxp3 transcription. Id3 was required for relief of inhibition by the
transcription factor GATA-3 at the Foxp3 promoter. Furthermore, Id3(-/-) T cells 
showed greater differentiation into the T(H)17 subset of helper T cells in vitro 
and in a mouse asthma model. Therefore, a network of factors acts in a
TGF-ß-dependent manner to control Foxp3 expression and inhibit the development of
T(H)17 cells.

PMCID: PMC3140164
PMID: 21131965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Feb 1;317(3):356-66. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.11.001. Epub
2010 Nov 9.

IGF-I and vitamin C promote myogenic differentiation of mouse and human skeletal 
muscle cells at low temperatures.

Shima A(1), Pham J, Blanco E, Barton ER, Sweeney HL, Matsuda R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 309A Building 15, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902,
Japan. cc087710@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

In a previous study investigating the effects of low temperature on skeletal
muscle differentiation, we demonstrated that C2C12 mouse myoblasts cultured at
30°C do not express myogenin, a myogenic regulatory factor (MRF), or fuse into
multinucleated myotubes. At this low temperature, the myoblasts continuously
express Id3, a negative regulator of MRFs, and do not upregulate muscle-specific 
microRNAs. In this study, we examined if insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and
a stable form of vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid phosphate) could alleviate the low
temperature-induced inhibition of myogenic differentiation in C2C12 cells.
Although the addition of either IGF-I or vitamin C alone could promote myogenin
expression in C2C12 cells at 30°C, elongated multinucleated myotubes were not
formed unless both IGF-I and vitamin C were continuously administered. In human
skeletal muscle cells, low temperature-induced blockage of myogenic
differentiation was also ameliorated by exogenous IGF-I and vitamin C. In
addition, we demonstrated that satellite cells of IGF-I overexpressing transgenic
mice in single-fiber culture expressed myogenin at a higher level than those of
wild-type mice at 30°C. This study suggests that body temperature plays an
important role in myogenic differentiation of endotherms, but the sensitivity to 
low temperature could be buffered by certain factors in vivo, such as IGF-I and
vitamin C.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9106-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1119. Epub 
2010 Nov 9.

Insulin-like growth factor I suppresses bone morphogenetic protein signaling in
prostate cancer cells by activating mTOR signaling.

Wahdan-Alaswad RS(1), Song K, Krebs TL, Shola DT, Gomez JA, Matsuyama S,
Danielpour D.

Author information: 
(1)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center Research Laboratories, The Division of
General Medical Sciences-Oncology, Department of Pharmacology, Case Western
Reserve University, and Department of Urology, University Hospitals of Cleveland,
Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) are
critical regulators of prostate tumor cell growth. In this report, we offer
evidence that a critical support of IGF-I in prostate cancer is mediated by its
ability to suppress BMP4-induced apoptosis and Smad-mediated gene expression.
Suppression of BMP4 signaling by IGF-I was reversed by chemical inhibitors of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), Akt, or mTOR; by enforced expression of
wild-type PTEN or dominant-negative PI3K; or by small hairpin RNA-mediated
silencing of mTORC1/2 subunits Raptor or Rictor. Similarly, IGF-I suppressed
BMP4-induced transcription of the Id1, Id2, and Id3 genes that are crucially
involved in prostate tumor progression through PI3K-dependent and
mTORC1/2-dependent mechanisms. Immunohistochemical analysis of non-malignant and 
malignant prostate tissues offered in vivo support for our model that
IGF-I-mediated activation of mTOR suppresses phosphorylation of the BMP-activated
Smad transcription factors. Our results offer the first evidence that IGF-I
signaling through mTORC1/2 is a key homeostatic regulator of BMP4 function in
prostate epithelial cells, acting at two levels to repress both the proapoptotic 
and pro-oncogenic signals of BMP-activated Smads. We suggest that deregulation of
this homeostatic control may be pivotal to the development and progression of
prostate cancer, providing important implications and new potential targets for
the therapeutic intervention of this malignancy.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3285447
PMID: 21062988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Dyn. 2010 Dec;239(12):3368-79. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22467.

Expression of ventral diencephalon-enriched genes in zebrafish.

Li S(1), Yin M, Liu S, Chen Y, Yin Y, Liu T, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Shanghai,
China.

Dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the vertebrate di- and mesencephalon play essential 
roles in movement control, endocrine modulation and many other important
physiological activities. To identify genes that may regulate the specification
and differentiation of diencephalic DA neurons in zebrafish, the spatial and
temporal expression pattern of a set of genes was investigated. In situ
hybridization analysis revealed that expression of DNA binding inhibitor 3 (Id3),
early B cell factor 2 (Ebf2), Ebf3, Iroquois related homeobox 1 (Irx1),
Kruppel-like factor 7 (Klf7), mab-21-like 1 (Mab21l1), fatty acid binding protein
7 (Fabp7) and stathmin-like 4 (Stmn4), were enriched in the diencephalon of
zebrafish. Among these genes, Id3 was expressed specifically in a subset of DA
neurons in the ventral diencephalon, with co-expression of neurogenin1 (Ngn1).
Alteration of expression levels of Id3 inhibited maturation of developing DA
neurons. Taken together, our study provides genetic characteristics of DA neurons
in the diencephalon of zebrafish.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21061380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 30;332(1-2):242-52. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.10.019.
Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Mechanisms of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) stimulated inhibitor of DNA
binding 3 (Id3) transcription.

Ho CC(1), Zhou X, Mishina Y, Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Promenade
Sir William Osler, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) stimulates expression of the inhibitors of
DNA binding (Id) 1, 2, and 3 in a variety of cell types. Here, we examined
mechanisms mediating BMP2-stimulated Id3 transcription in murine gonadotropes.
Using a combination of quantitative RT-PCR, promoter-reporter analyses,
over-expression, and RNA interference approaches, we demonstrate that BMP2
signals via the BMPR2 and BMPR1A (ALK3) receptors and intracellular signaling
proteins SMADs 1 and 5 to stimulate Id3 transcription. We further define a novel 
6-bp cis-element mediating BMP2- and SMAD-dependent transcription, though this
site does not appear to bind SMADs directly. A specific DNA binding protein
complex binds to this element, but its constituent protein(s) remain
undetermined. Recently, a more distal enhancer was shown to mediate
BMP4-induction of the human ID3 gene in ovarian cancer cells. This enhancer is
conserved in the murine gene and we demonstrate its role in BMP2-induced Id3
promoter activity in gonadotropes. Conversely, the proximal cis-element defined
here is also conserved in human ID3 and we demonstrate its functional role in
BMP2-induction of ID3 transcription. Finally, we show that the two regulatory
elements also mediate BMP2-induction of Id3 promoter activity in murine
fibroblasts. Collectively, we have defined a general mechanism whereby BMP2
regulates Id3/ID3 transcription in different cell types and in different species.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21056086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Dec;60(3):138-42. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.09.002. Epub 
2010 Sep 24.

ID3 mediates X-ray-induced apoptosis of keratinocytes through the regulation of
ß-catenin.

Lee YS(1), Mollah ML, Sohn KC, Shi G, Kim DH, Kim KH, Cho MJ, Kim S, Lee YH, Kim 
CD, Lee JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Research Institute for Medical Sciences, Chungnam
National University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Ionizing radiation is used to treat many of cancers, however, it also
produces unwanted side effect on normal tissues, such as radiodermatitis. We
previously established an animal model for radiodermatitis, and found that X-ray 
irradiation induced the expression of ID3 in hairless mouse skin by cDNA
microarray.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to investigate the functional role of ID3 in 
X-ray irradiated keratinocytes.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR and Western blot were performed to
demonstrate the ID3 induction by X-ray irradiation. HaCaT keratinocytes were
transduced with the recombinant adenovirus expressing HA-ID3, and then effects on
apoptosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: X-ray irradiation increased markedly the ID3 protein level in epidermis 
of mouse skin. X-ray irradiation also induced the expression of ID3 in HaCaT
keratinocytes cultured in vitro, at both mRNA and protein levels. When ID3 was
overexpressed by recombinant adenovirus, apoptosis of keratinocytes were induced 
even in the absence of X-ray irradiation. Furthermore, overexpression of ID3
sensitized X-ray-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, X-ray irradiation
significantly reduced the endogenous ß-catenin level, which was related with
induction of apoptosis. Similarly, overexpression of ID3 led to remarkable
reduction in ß-catenin level.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that ID3 plays a role as an apoptosis inducer
in response to X-ray irradiation via the regulation of endogenous ß-catenin
level.

Copyright © 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21030215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Immunol Rev. 2010 Nov;238(1):169-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-065X.2010.00947.x.

aß versus <U+03B3>d fate choice: counting the T-cell lineages at the branch point.

Kreslavsky T(1), Gleimer M, Garbe AI, von Boehmer H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Both aß and <U+03B3>d T cells develop in the thymus from a common progenitor.
Historically distinguished by their T-cell receptor (TCR), these lineages are now
defined on the basis of distinct molecular programs. Intriguingly, in many
transgenic and knockout systems these programs are mismatched with the TCR type, 
leading to the development of <U+03B3>d lineage cells driven by aßTCR and vice versa.
These puzzling observations were recently explained by the demonstration that TCR
signal strength, rather than TCR type per se, instructs lineage fate, with
stronger TCR signal favoring <U+03B3>d and weaker signal favoring aß lineage fates.
These studies also highlighted the ERK (extracellular signal regulated
kinase)-Egr (early growth response)-Id3 (inhibitor of differentiation 3) axis as 
a potential molecular switch downstream of TCR that determines lineage choice.
Indeed, removal of Id3 was sufficient to redirect TCR<U+03B3>d transgenic cells to the
aß lineage, even in the presence of strong TCR signal. However, in TCR
non-transgenic Id3 knockout mice the overall number of <U+03B3>d lineage cells was
increased due to an outgrowth of a V<U+03B3>1Vd6.3 subset, suggesting that not all <U+03B3>d T 
cells depend on this molecular switch for lineage commitment. Thus, the <U+03B3>d
lineage may in fact be a collection of two or more lineages not sharing a common 
molecular program and thus equipollent to the aß lineage. TCR signaling is not
the only factor that is required for development of aß and <U+03B3>d lineage cells;
other pathways, such as signaling from Notch and CXCR4 receptors, cooperate with 
the TCR in this process.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3031133
PMID: 20969592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Theriogenology. 2011 Jan 15;75(2):362-76. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.09.008. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Identification of genes targeted by FSH and oocytes in porcine granulosa cells.

Verbraak EJ(1), van 't Veld EM, Groot Koerkamp M, Roelen BA, van Haeften T,
Stoorvogel W, Zijlstra C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 2,
3584 CM Utrecht, the Netherlands.

In the mammalian ovarian follicle maturing oocytes are nurtured and supported by 
surrounding somatic cells, the mural granulosa cells and the cumulus cells. These
cells are regulated by follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), originating from the
pituitary, and paracrine factors derived from the oocyte. To gain insight into
the mechanisms involved in the regulation of granulosa cell function, this study 
aimed to identify genes in mural granulosa cells that are regulated by FSH and
oocyte secreted factors using the pig as a model organism. Mural granulosa cells 
were collected from 3-6 mm follicles from sow ovaries and cultured in serum free 
medium in the presence or absence of FSH and/or isolated cumulus oocyte complexes
(COCs). FSH significantly increased both the metabolic activity and progesterone 
production of granulosa cells, while the presence of COCs reversed these FSH
effects. Expression levels of mRNA in the absence/presence of FSH and COCs were
analyzed on porcine specific microarrays representing 11,300 genes. Both
previously identified and novel FSH target genes as well as some oocyte affected 
genes were found. Expression of inhibitor of DNA binding protein 2 and 3, ID2 and
ID3, was decreased by FSH but increased by COCs, as validated by quantitative
PCR. These proteins function as dominant negative basic helix loop helix (bHLH)
transcription factors and since all regulated genes contain the consensus E-box
sequence that can bind bHLH factors, our data suggest that FSH and COCs may
regulate granulosa cell function by tuning the activity of bHLH factors, through 
ID2 and ID3.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20965553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Jan;31(1):110-6. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.212068. Epub 2010 Oct 14.

Increased 12/15-lipoxygenase enhances cell growth, fibronectin deposition, and
neointimal formation in response to carotid injury.

Deliri H(1), Meller N, Kadakkal A, Malhotra R, Brewster J, Doran AC, Pei H,
Oldham SN, Skaflen MD, Garmey JC, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22904, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether increased 12/15-lipoxygenase (12/15LO) expression
in vivo enhances neointimal formation in response to injury.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 12/15LO expression in the vessel wall is increased in animal
models of metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus. Increased expression of
12/15LO enhances cultured vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation, an
effect mediated by the helix-loop-helix factor inhibitor of differentiation 3
(Id3). Carotid endothelial denudation was performed on apolipoprotein (Apo)
E(-/-), ApoE(-/-)/12/15LO(-/-), C57BL/6, and 12/15LO-overexpressing transgenic
mice. ApoE(-/-)/12/15LO(-/-) mice had attenuated and 12/15LO-overexpressing
transgenic mice had enhanced neointimal formation compared with control mice.
12/15LO-overexpressing transgenic mice had greater postinjury carotid Id3 and
Ki-67 expression, cell number, and fibronectin deposition compared with C57BL/6
mice. Loss of 12/15LO attenuated proliferation of cultured ApoE(-/-) VSMCs,
whereas 12/15LO overexpression induced VSMC proliferation. Loss of Id3 enhanced
immunoglobulin trascription factor (ITF)-2b binding to and activation of the
p21(cip1) promoter and abrogated 12/15LO-induced VSMC proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, these data are the first demonstration that
increased expression of 12/15LO in the vessel wall enhances Id3-dependent cell
proliferation, fibronectin deposition, and neointimal formation in response to
injury. Results identify p21(cip1) as a potential target of the 12/15LO-Id3
pathway and suggest that modulation of this pathway may have therapeutic
implications for targeting the increased risk of restenosis in patients with
diabetes.

PMID: 20947825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 1;349(1):53-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.004. Epub 2010
Oct 23.

Developmental ablation of Id1 and Id3 genes in the vasculature leads to postnatal
cardiac phenotypes.

Zhao Q(1), Beck AJ, Vitale JM, Schneider JS, Gao S, Chang C, Elson G, Leibovich
SJ, Park JY, Tian B, Nam HS, Fraidenraich D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ 07107-1709, USA.

The Id1 and Id3 genes play major roles during cardiac development, despite their 
expression being confined to non-myocardial layers
(endocardium-endothelium-epicardium). We previously described that Id1Id3 double 
knockout (dKO) mouse embryos die at mid-gestation from multiple cardiac defects, 
but early lethality precluded the studies of the roles of Id in the postnatal
heart. To elucidate postnatal roles of Id genes, we ablated the Id3 gene and
conditionally ablated the Id1 gene in the endothelium to generate conditional KO 
(cKO) embryos. We observed cardiac phenotypes at birth and at 6 months of age.
Half of the Id cKO mice died at birth. Postnatal demise was associated with
cardiac enlargement and defects in the ventricular septum, trabeculation and
vasculature. Surviving Id cKO mice exhibited fibrotic vasculature, cardiac
enlargement and decreased cardiac function. An abnormal vascular response was
also observed in the healing of excisional skin wounds of Id cKO mice. Expression
patterns of vascular, fibrotic and hypertrophic markers were altered in the Id
cKO hearts, but addition of Insulin-Like Growth Factor binding protein-3 (IGFbp3)
reversed gene expression profiles of vascular and fibrotic, but not hypertrophic 
markers. Thus, ablation of Id genes in the vasculature leads to distinct
postnatal cardiac phenotypes. These findings provide important insights into the 
role/s of the endocardial network of the endothelial lineage in the development
of cardiac disease, and highlight IGFbp3 as a potential link between Id and its
vascular effectors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2993814
PMID: 20937270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Immunol Lett. 2011 Mar 30;135(1-2):34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2010.09.009.

Modeling Sjögren's syndrome with Id3 conditional knockout mice.

Guo Z(1), Li H, Han M, Xu T, Wu X, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, School of Life
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

The Id3 gene has been shown to play important roles in the development and
function of broad tissue types including B and T cells. Id3 deficient mice
develop autoimmune disease similar to human Sjögren's syndrome. Both B and T
lymphocytes have been implicated to contribute to the disease phenotype in this
disease model. In order to gain a better understanding of individual cell types
in this disease model, we generated an Id3 conditional allele. An LckCre
transgene was used to induce Id3 deletion in developing T cells. We showed that
the Id3 gene was efficiently disrupted in early thymocyte development prior to T 
cell receptor (TCR)-mediated positive selection. Consequently, thymocyte
maturation was impaired in the conditional knockout mice. These mice developed
exocrinopathy starting at two months of age and subsequently exhibited high
incidence of lymphocyte infiltration to salivary glands between eight and 12
months of age. This progressive feature of disease development is very similar to
those observed in Id3 germline knockout mice. This study establishes a new model 
for investigating the relationship between T cell development and autoimmune
disease. Our observation provides an experimental case that autoimmune disease
may be induced by acquired mutation in developing T cells.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3025308
PMID: 20932862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Oct;222(2):121-9.

Investigating bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling in a newly established
human cell line expressing BMP receptor type II.

Kudo TA(1), Kanetaka H, Watanabe A, Okumoto A, Asano M, Zhang Y, Zhao F, Kano M, 
Shimizu Y, Tamura S, Hayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Physiology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry,
Sendai, Japan. tkudo@m.tohoku.ac.jp

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), members of the transforming growth factor ß
cytokine superfamily, elicit various biological effects in different tissues. BMP
receptor type II (BMPRII) contains a unique carboxyl-terminal region that
interacts with multiple signaling molecules. However, expression of endogenous
BMPRII is low in various mammalian cell lines, which hampers the analysis of BMP 
signaling. Therefore, we established a human cell line expressing BMPRII tagged
with a Flag epitope (BMPRII-Flag) using the tetracycline-controlled Flp-In T-REx 
gene expression system. The BMPRII-Flag gene was introduced into the Flp-In T-REx
293 (FT293) cell line, a derivative of human 293 embryonic kidney fibroblasts.
Then we analyzed the expression of key BMP target genes, inhibitors of DNA
binding (Id) family members (Id1, Id2, and Id3) and the inhibitory Smads Smad6
and Smad7, in parental FT293 cells and an established cell line, FT293-BMPRII, by
quantitative real-time PCR. Tetracycline treatment significantly increased the
expression of BMPRII-Flag mRNA and protein in FT293-BMPRII cells, but induced no 
significant changes in expression of Id1, Id2, Id3, Smad6, or Smad7 mRNA. In
contrast, treatment with a BMPRII ligand BMP2 induced the expression of Id1, Id2,
Id3, and Smad6 in parental FT293 cells and FT293-BMPRII cells.
Tetracycline-induced BMPRII-Flag expression significantly enhanced the induction 
of Id1, Id3, and Smad6 mRNA expression in FT293-BMPRII cells treated with BMP2.
These findings provide evidence that although BMPRII has no obvious effect on the
expression of representative BMP target genes, it differentially modulates the
responsiveness of target genes to BMP2.

PMID: 20919447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):R1463-77. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00866.2009. Epub 2010 Sep 29.

ID family protein expression and regulation in hypoxic pulmonary hypertension.

Lowery JW(1), Frump AL, Anderson L, DiCarlo GE, Jones MT, de Caestecker MP.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Univ. Medical Center, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling has been linked to the development of 
pulmonary hypertension (PH). Inhibitors of differentiation (ID) proteins (ID1-4) 
are a family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are downstream 
targets of the BMP signaling pathway, but the role that ID proteins play in the
development of PH is unknown. To address this, we evaluated pulmonary expression 
of ID proteins in a mouse model of hypoxia-induced PH. There is selective
induction of ID1 and ID3 expression in hypoxic pulmonary vascular smooth muscle
cells (VSMCs) in vivo, and ID1 and ID3 expression are increased by hypoxia in
cultured pulmonary VSMCs in a BMP-dependent fashion. ID4 protein is barely
detectable in the mouse lung, and while ID2 is induced in hypoxic peripheral
VSMCs in vivo, it is not increased by hypoxia or BMP signaling in cultured
pulmonary VSMCs. In addition, the PH response to chronic hypoxia is
indistinguishable between wild type and Id1 null mice. This is associated with a 
compensatory increase in ID3 but not ID2 expression in pulmonary VSMCs of Id1
null mice. These findings indicate that ID1 is dispensable for mounting a normal 
pulmonary vascular response to hypoxia, but suggest that ID3 may compensate for
loss of ID1 expression in pulmonary VSMCs. Taken together, these findings
indicate that ID1 and ID3 expression are regulated in a BMP-dependent fashion in 
hypoxic pulmonary VSMCs, and that ID1 and ID3 may play a cooperative role in
regulating BMP-dependent VSMC responses to chronic hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3007180
PMID: 20881097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):38987-9000. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.175182. Epub
2010 Sep 22.

The transcriptional repressor ID2 can interact with the canonical clock
components CLOCK and BMAL1 and mediate inhibitory effects on mPer1 expression.

Ward SM(1), Fernando SJ, Hou TY, Duffield GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Galvin Life Science Center, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA.

ID2 is a rhythmically expressed HLH transcriptional repressor. Deletion of Id2 in
mice results in circadian phenotypes, highlighted by disrupted locomotor activity
rhythms and an enhanced photoentrainment response. ID2 can suppress the
transactivation potential of the positive elements of the clock, CLOCK-BMAL1, on 
mPer1 and clock-controlled gene (CCG) activity. Misregulation of CCGs is observed
in Id2(-/-) liver, and mutant mice exhibit associated alterations in lipid
homeostasis. These data suggest that ID2 contributes to both input and output
components of the clock and that this may be via interaction with the bHLH clock 
proteins CLOCK and BMAL1. The aim of the present study was to explore this
potential interaction. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed the capability of 
ID2 to complex with both CLOCK and BMAL1, and mammalian two-hybrid analysis
revealed direct interactions of ID2, ID1 and ID3 with CLOCK and BMAL1. Deletion
of the ID2 HLH domain rendered ID2 ineffective at inhibiting CLOCK-BMAL1
transactivation, suggesting that interaction between the proteins is via the HLH 
region. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed overlapping localization of ID2 with
CLOCK and BMAL1 in the cytoplasm. Overexpression of CLOCK and BMAL1 in the
presence of ID2 resulted in a significant reduction in their nuclear
localization, revealing that ID2 can sequester CLOCK and BMAL1 to the cytoplasm. 
Serum stimulation of Id2(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts resulted in an enhanced
induction of mPer1 expression. These data provide the basis for a molecular
mechanism through which ID2 could regulate aspects of both clock input and output
through a time-of-day specific interaction with CLOCK and BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC2998095
PMID: 20861012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Blood. 2010 Dec 16;116(25):5615-21. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-274506. Epub 2010 
Sep 17.

Mutation of inhibitory helix-loop-helix protein Id3 causes <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma in 
mice.

Li J(1), Maruyama T, Zhang P, Konkel JE, Hoffman V, Zamarron B, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Human <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma is a rare clinicopathologic entity with aggressive
course and poor prognosis. The etiology and pathogenesis of <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma is
unknown. We show here that mice with deficiency in inhibitory helix-loop-helix
protein Id3 (Id3(-/-)) developed <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma that resembled human <U+03B3>d
T-cell lymphoma. The Id3(-/-) mice with lymphoma showed splenomegaly,
hepatomegaly, and lymphadenopathy with involvement of bone marrow, thymus,
kidney, and lungs between 6 and 15 months of age. Phenotypic analysis revealed
that lymphomatous cells were cluster of differentiation (CD)3(+), <U+03B3>d T-cell
receptor (TCR)(+), and aß TCR(-), and expressed CD8(+)CD4(-), CD4(+)CD8(-), or a 
mixture of the two. Id3(-/-) <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma used predominantly V<U+03B3>1.1, some
V<U+03B3>3, yet no V<U+03B3>2 TCR, and some showed increased levels of the oncogene c-Myc.
Strikingly, adoptive transfer of the <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma into syngeneic Rag1(-/-) 
mice resulted in aggressive <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma, identical to the Id3(-/-) donor. 
Thus, our data demonstrate that Id3 regulates the development of <U+03B3>d T-cell
lymphoma in mice, raising a possibility of Id3 gene mutation in human <U+03B3>d T-cell
lymphoma. Our model will provide a tool for studying the molecular mechanisms and
development of human <U+03B3>d T-cell lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3031408
PMID: 20852128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Br J Cancer. 2010 Oct 12;103(8):1237-44. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605897. Epub 2010
Sep 14.

Inhibition of Id proteins by a peptide aptamer induces cell-cycle arrest and
apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells.

Mern DS(1), Hasskarl J, Burwinkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
d.mern@dkfz-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Inhibitors of DNA-binding proteins (Id1-4), lacking the basic
DNA-binding domain, function as dominant inhibitors of cell-cycle regulators.
Overexpression of Id proteins promotes cancer cell proliferation and resistance
against apoptosis. Level of Id protein expression, especially of Id1, correlates 
with poor differentiation, enhanced malignant potential and more aggressive
clinical behaviour of ovarian tumours. Although overexpression of Ids has been
found and shown to correlate with poor clinical outcome, their inhibition at
protein level has never been studied.
METHODS: A peptide aptamer, Id1/3-PA7, targeting Id1 and Id3, was isolated from a
randomised combinatorial expression library using yeast and mammalian two-hybrid 
systems. Id1/3-PA7 was fused, expressed and purified with a cell-penetrating
protein transduction domain.
RESULTS: Intracellular-delivered Id1/3-PA7 colocalised to Id1 and Id3. It induced
cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells ES-2 and PA-1. It
activated the E-box promoter and increased the expression level of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKN2A) in a dose-dependent manner that is
paralleled by the cleavage of poly-ADP ribose polymerase. These effects were
counteracted by ectopically overexpressed Id1 and Id3.
CONCLUSION: Id1/3-PA7 could represent an exogenous anti-tumour agent that can
significantly trigger cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2967066
PMID: 20842131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jul 15;129(2):295-306. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25668. Epub 2010 Nov
3.

Id3 modulates cellular localization of bHLH Ptf1-p48 protein.

Dufresne M(1), Clerc P, Dieng M, Edir A, Couvelard A, Delisle MB, Fourmy D,
Gigoux V.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U858, F-31432 Toulouse, France.

Ptf1-p48 is a pancreas-specific bHLH transcriptional protein, which, in the
normal adult pancreas, shows a restricted expression in acinar cells where it is 
predominantly localized in the nucleus and activates the transcription of
exocrine-specific genes. Ptf1-p48 partners with two proteins to form the PTF1
active complex: a bHLH E-protein and suppressor of hairless RBP-J. Cytoplasmic
mislocalization of Ptf1-p48 has been reported in pancreatic pathologies,
suggesting its contribution in the early steps of pancreatic carcinogenesis. The 
aim of the our work was to elucidate the mechanisms regulating Ptf1-p48
subcellular localization. We hypothesized a role of Id proteins acting in a
dominant-negative fashion by heterodimerizing with bHLH proteins. We reproduced
Ptf1-p48 cytoplasmic mislocalization in acinar AR4-2J cells and demonstrated that
a proliferative signal elicited by gastrin leads to increases in Id3 protein
expression and levels of Id3/E47 and Id3/Ptf1-p48 interactions, and a decrease in
the level of E47/Ptf1-p48 interaction. By contrast, Id3 silencing reversed the
cytoplasmic mislocalization of Ptf1-p48 induced by gastrin. As E47 is responsible
for the nuclear import of the PTF1 complex, disruption of this complex via Id3
interactions with both E47 and Ptf1-p48 appears to induce cytoplasmic
mislocalization of Ptf1-p48. We then found that Ptf1-p48 is either absent or
mislocalized in the cytoplasm and Id3 is overexpressed in human and murine
pancreatic preneoplastic lesions. Our data provide novel insight into the
regulation of Ptf1-p48 function and provide evidence that Ptf1-p48 cytoplasmic
mislocalization and Id3 overexpression are early events in pancreatic cancer
progression.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20830706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;26(9):871-3.

[Preparation of rabbit antibody against human Id3 and identification of
intracellular localization of Id3 in tumor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XJ(1), Zhong AF, Wang K, Jia L, Chen FF, Yu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing 210002,
China. lixiaojun62@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To express and purify the recombinant human inhibitor of differentiation 3
(Id3) in E.coli and prepare rabbit polyclonal antibody against Id3.
METHODS: The expression vector Id3/pET32a was transformed into E.coli BL21(DE3)
and expression of histidine (His)-tagged Id3 fusion protein was induced with IPTG
and confirmed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot techniques. Id3 fusion protein was
purified through immolbilized Ni(2+); absorption chromatographic column.The
purified protein was used to immunize rabbits.The titer and specificity of rabbit
antisera were evaluated by immunodouble gel diffusion, ELISA and Western blot
techniques. The collected rabbit antisera were purified with polypeptide affinity
column. The intracellular distributions of Id3 expression in human human breast
cancer cells (MCF7), prostate cancer cells (PC-3M) and lung adenocarcinoma cells 
(A549) were observed by indirect immunofluorescence assay(IFA).
RESULTS: Id3 fusion protein with 6xhis-tag was successfully expressed in E.coli
BL 21. The expressed Id3 with the relative molecular mass size of 34 kD was
purified specifically through affinity chromatographic column and confirmed by
Western blot. The titers of the rabbit anti-Id3 polyclonal antibodies were 1:8 by
immunodouble gel diffusion and 1:8 000 by ELISA. Western blot revealed that the
prepared antisera reacted specifically with Id3. IFA showed that in A549 , MCF7
and PC-3M cells, Id3 was mainly distributed in nucleoplasm and the Id3 expression
level was significantly higher in MCF7 and PC-3M than in A549 cells.
CONCLUSION: The expression and purification of human Id3 protein and preparation 
of polyclonal antibody against Id3 provide useful tools for the further study of 
Id3.

PMID: 20815983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;26(9):852-5.

[Effect of down-regulation of Id3 expression by microRNA on proliferation and
apoptosis of A549 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen FF(1), Li XJ, Pang XJ, Zhao XQ, Wang K, Luo B, Yu W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing 210002,
China.

AIM: To investigate the effect of microRNA-mediated exogenous Id3 gene silencing 
on proliferation and apoptosis of human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells in vitro.
METHODS: A recombinant miRNA expression vector (pcDNA6.2-GW/EmGFPmiR-Id3,
pcDNA/miRId3) which targets human Id3 gene was constructed. After 24 h of
transfection, the transfection efficiency was monitored by inverted fluorescence 
microscopy.EGFP expression efficiency in A549 cells was analyzed by flow
cytometry (FCM).Id3 expression vector pEGFP/Id3 and pcDNA/miRId3 were
cotransfected into A549 cells by liposome-mediated method. After 24 h of
transfection, the transfection efficiency was monitored by inverted fluorescence 
microscopy.Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot were used for identifying
Id3 mRNA and protein expression respectively in A549 cells after transfection.
Cell proliferation rate and apoptosis ratio were evaluated by MTT assay and
Annexin V/7-ADD staining followed by FCM to observe the down-regulatory effect of
Id3 expression by miRNA-mediated RNA interference (RNAi).
RESULTS: pcDNA/miRId3 and pEGFP/Id3 were successfully transfected into A549
cells. RT-PCR and Western blot results showed that after 24 h of cotransfection
of pEGFP/Id3 and pcDNA/miRId3 in A549 cells, the exogenous expression of Id3 both
at mRNA and protein levels were significantly reduced compared with the pEGFP/Id3
group. MTT assay and Annexin V/7-AAD staining showed that after 24 h of
transfection with pEGFP/Id3, the proliferation rates were significantly reduced
and apoptotic cell ratios were significantly higher than those of
pEGFP-transfected cells.Whereas there were not any significant differences in
proliferation rates or apoptotic cell ratios between pcDNA/miRId3+pEGFP/Id3
cotransfected group and pEGFP or miRNA negative controls.
CONCLUSION: Exogenous expression of Id3 in A549 cells could inhibit proliferation
and induce apoptosis of A549 cells. Cotransfection of pcDNA/miRId3 and pEGFP/Id3 
into A549 could reverse the Id3-induced proliferation inhibition and apoptosis.
Construction and application of Id3-targeting miRNA expression vector may build
some foundations for investigation the mechanisms of Id3-induced proliferation
inhibition and apoptosis in A549 cells.

PMID: 20815981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 25;30(34):11426-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2570-10.2010.

Id gene regulation and function in the prosensory domains of the chicken inner
ear: a link between Bmp signaling and Atoh1.

Kamaid A(1), Neves J, Giráldez F.

Author information: 
(1)Department de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, 08003-Barcelona, Spain.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (Bmps) regulate the expression of the proneural gene 
Atoh1 and the generation of hair cells in the developing inner ear. The present
work explored the role of Inhibitor of Differentiation genes (Id1-3) in this
process. The results show that Id genes are expressed in the prosensory domains
of the otic vesicle, along with Bmp4 and Bmp7. Those domains exhibit high levels 
of the phosphorylated form of Bmp-responding R-Smads (P-Smad1,5,8), and of
Bmp-dependent Smad transcriptional activity as shown by the BRE-tk-EGFP reporter.
Increased Bmp signaling induces the expression of Id1-3 along with the inhibition
of Atoh1. Conversely, the Bmp antagonist Noggin or the Bmp-receptor inhibitor
Dorsomorphin elicit opposite effects, indicating that Bmp signaling is necessary 
for Id expression and Atoh1 regulation in the otocyst. The forced expression of
Id3 is sufficient to reduce Atoh1 expression and to prevent the expression of
hair cell differentiation markers. Together, these results suggest that Ids are
part of the machinery that mediates the regulation of hair cell differentiation
exerted by Bmps. In agreement with that, during hair cell differentiation Bmp4
expression, P-Smad1,5,8 levels and Id expression are downregulated from hair
cells. However, Ids are also downregulated from the supporting cells which
contrarily to hair cells exhibit high levels of Bmp4 expression, P-Smad1,5,8, and
BRE-tk-EGFP activity, suggesting that in these cells Ids escape from Bmp/Smad
signaling. The differential regulation of Ids in time and space may underlie the 
multiple functions of Bmp signaling during sensory organ development.

PMID: 20739564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):203-15. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.07.013. Epub 2010 
Jul 30.

SAP protein-dependent natural killer T-like cells regulate the development of
CD8(+) T cells with innate lymphocyte characteristics.

Verykokakis M(1), Boos MD, Bendelac A, Kee BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2010 Sep;10(9):618.

CD8(+) T cells are selected via low-affinity interaction with MHC class I
molecules on thymic epithelial cells (TECs). However, compromised T cell receptor
signaling was proposed to force CD8(+) T cell selection on hematopoietic cells
through a SLAM-associated protein (SAP)-dependent mechanism similar to NKT cells.
The outcome is an unconventional CD8(+) T cell with phenotypic and functional
characteristics of innate lymphocytes. Here we showed that Id3(-/-) CD8(+) T
cells had an innate-like phenotype and required SAP for their development.
However, like conventional CD8(+) T cells, Id3(-/-) CD8(+) thymocytes were
selected on TECs. The requirement for SAP and the innate-like phenotype was not
intrinsic to Id3(-/-) CD8(+) thymocytes. Rather, an expanded population of
NKT-like cells induced the innate phenotype on CD8(+) T cells through production 
of interleukin-4. Our findings reveal that accumulation of NKT-like cells
promotes conventional CD8(+) thymocytes to acquire innate lymphocyte
characteristics.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2933745
PMID: 20674402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Int J Oncol. 2010 Sep;37(3):595-603.

Inhibition of tumourigenicity of small cell lung cancer cells by suppressing Id3 
expression.

Kamalian L(1), Forootan SS, Bao ZZ, Zhang Y, Gosney JR, Foster CS, Ke Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, School of Cancer Studies, University of
Liverpool, 6th Floor, Duncan Building, Daulby Street, Liverpool, L69 3GA, UK.

Id3 is over-expressed in small cell lung cancer (SCLC). To test whether the
tumourigenicity of SCLC cells can be inhibited by suppressing Id3 expression, we 
transfected siRNA into SCLC cell line GLC-19 and established two sublines
(G-Id3-1 and G-Id3-7) which expressed only 30% of the level of Id3 measured in
control transfectants. Suppression of Id3 expression in both G-Id3-1 and G-Id3-7 
cells produced significant reductions in proliferation rates and in numbers of
colonies formed in soft agar assay. When G-Id3-1, G-Id3-7 and the control
transfectants were inoculated subcutaneously into 3 groups (8 each) of nude mice,
respectively, all (100%) inoculated animals produced tumours. Although there was 
no difference in tumour incidents amongst the 3 groups, significant reductions
were observed in both size and weight of tumours produced by either G-Id3-1 or
G-Id3-7 cells. While the final average volume of tumours produced in control
group was 1012.1+/-394 mm(3), it was significantly reduced (p<0.001, p<0.01) by
2.1- and 2.9-fold to 475.7+/-167 mm(3) and 354.3+/-218 mm(3) in groups inoculated
with G-Id3-1 and G-Id3-7 cells, respectively. Similar differences were also
observed in average weight of tumours. Upon induction of apoptosis by cytotoxin
camptothecin, the percentages of apoptotic cells in G-Id3-1 and G-Id3-7 were,
respectively >2.4-fold higher than that in control. The results in this study
suggest that highly expressed Id3 in SCLC cells may be an important therapeutic
target for tumour suppression.

PMID: 20664928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Reproduction. 2010 Oct;140(4):551-8. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0211. Epub 2010 Jul 16.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 inhibits FSH responsiveness in hen granulosa cells.

Haugen MJ(1), Johnson AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556, USA.

Prior to follicle selection into the preovulatory hierarchy, hen granulosa cells 
from prehierarchal follicles remain undifferentiated, as defined in part by the
virtual absence of LHR mRNA expression and inability to produce progesterone. It 
has previously been proposed that prior to follicle selection, granulosa cells
are actively maintained in an undifferentiated state by epidermal growth factor
receptor ligands (EGFRL) signaling via the MAP kinase/extracellular regulated
kinase pathway. Moreover, there is recent evidence that EGFRL/MAP kinase
signaling modulates FSH receptor (FSHR) transcription, in part, via inhibitor of 
differentiation/DNA-binding (ID) proteins. In the present studies with
undifferentiated granulosa, recombinant human (rh) bone morphogenetic protein 2
(BMP2) induced the phosphorylation of SMAD1/5/8, and blocked transforming growth 
factor ß and FSH-induced FSHR expression and progesterone production.
Significantly, BMP2 rapidly induced mRNAs encoding betacellulin and EGF, plus ID 
proteins (ID1, ID3, and ID4). Alternatively, the bioactivity of BMPs can be
modulated by one or more BMP antagonists, including noggin (NOG). NOG mRNA is
expressed by both hen granulosa and theca tissues from prehierarchal follicles.
Pretreatment of cultured granulosa with rh NOG reversed both the stimulatory
effects of BMP2 on ID1, ID3, and ID4 expression and the inhibitory effects of
BMP2 on FSHR mRNA levels and progesterone production. Collectively, these data
provide evidence that prior to follicle selection, BMP2 signaling contributes
toward maintaining granulosa cells in an undifferentiated state. The actions of
BMP2 are, at least in part, mediated indirectly via enhanced EGFRL expression and
ERBB receptor-mediated MAP kinase signaling, and can be modulated by the
autocrine/paracrine production of NOG.

PMID: 20639315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 29;5(6):e11364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011364.

Altered intra-nuclear organisation of heterochromatin and genes in ICF syndrome.

Jefferson A(1), Colella S, Moralli D, Wilson N, Yusuf M, Gimelli G, Ragoussis J, 
Volpi EV.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

The ICF syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, the most common symptoms
of which are immunodeficiency, facial anomalies and cytogenetic defects involving
decondensation and instability of chromosome 1, 9 and 16 centromeric regions. ICF
is also characterised by significant hypomethylation of the classical satellite
DNA, the major constituent of the juxtacentromeric heterochromatin. Here we
report the first attempt at analysing some of the defining genetic and epigenetic
changes of this syndrome from a nuclear architecture perspective. In particular, 
we have compared in ICF (Type 1 and Type 2) and controls the large-scale
organisation of chromosome 1 and 16 juxtacentromeric heterochromatic regions,
their intra-nuclear positioning, and co-localisation with five specific genes
(BTG2, CNN3, ID3, RGS1, F13A1), on which we have concurrently conducted
expression and methylation analysis. Our investigations, carried out by a
combination of molecular and cytological techniques, demonstrate the existence of
specific and quantifiable differences in the genomic and nuclear organisation of 
the juxtacentromeric heterochromatin in ICF. DNA hypomethylation, previously
reported to correlate with the decondensation of centromeric regions in metaphase
described in these patients, appears also to correlate with the heterochromatin
spatial configuration in interphase. Finally, our findings on the relative
positioning of hypomethylated satellite sequences and abnormally expressed genes 
suggest a connection between disruption of long-range gene-heterochromatin
associations and some of the changes in gene expression in ICF. Beyond its
relevance to the ICF syndrome, by addressing fundamental principles of chromosome
functional organisation within the cell nucleus, this work aims to contribute to 
the current debate on the epigenetic impact of nuclear architecture in
development and disease.

PMCID: PMC2894064
PMID: 20613881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Neuroscience. 2010 Sep 15;169(4):1527-34. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.06.030. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Id1, Id2 and Id3 are induced in rat melanotrophs of the pituitary gland by
dopamine suppression under continuous stress.

Konishi H(1), Ogawa T, Nakagomi S, Inoue K, Tohyama M, Kiyama H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Osaka City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

In rats under continuous stress (CS) there is decreased hypothalamic dopaminergic
innervation to the intermediate lobe (IL) of the pituitary gland, which causes
hyperactivation and subsequent degeneration of melanotrophs in the IL. In this
study, we investigated the molecular basis for the changes that occur in
melanotrophs during CS. Using microarray analysis, we identified several genes
differentially expressed in the IL under CS conditions. Among the genes
up-regulated under CS conditions, we focused on the inhibitor of DNA
binding/differentiation (Id) family of dominant negative basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factors. RT-PCR, Western blotting and in situ hybridization 
confirmed the significant inductions of Id1, Id2 and Id3 in the IL of CS rats.
Administration of the dopamine D2 receptor agonist bromocriptine prevented the
inductions of Id1-3 in the IL of CS rats, whereas application of the dopamine D2 
antagonist sulpiride induced significant expressions of Id1-3 in the IL of normal
rats. Moreover, an in vitro study using primary cultured melanotrophs
demonstrated a direct effect on Id1-3 inductions by dopamine suppression. These
results suggest that the decreased dopamine levels in the IL during CS induce
Id1-3 expressions in melanotrophs. Because Id family members inhibit various bHLH
transcription factors, it is conceivable that the induced Id1-3 would
cooperatively modulate gene expressions in melanotrophs under CS conditions to
induce hormone secretion.

(c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20600660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct;343(1-2):83-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0501-y. Epub
2010 May 29.

Human herpesvirus 8 viral FLICE-inhibitory protein retards cell proliferation via
downregulation of Id2 and Id3 expression.

Wang YF(1), Wang LY, Li YL, Shyu HW, Chiou YH, Chou MC, Lin KH, Tai MH, Chen CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, Fooyin University, Ta-Liao, Kaohsiung Hsien,
Taiwan, ROC. yfwang@mail.fy.edu.tw

Death receptor-mediated apoptosis is potently inhibited by viral FLIP
(FLICE/caspase 8 inhibitory protein) through reduced activation of procaspase 8. 
In this study, we show that the human herpesvirus 8-encoded vFLIP retards cell
proliferation. Overexpression of vFLIP caused cell cycle arrest, with an apparent
decrease of cells in the S phase. The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) proteins are 
considered as dominant negative regulators of differentiation pathways, but
positive regulators of cellular proliferation. The mechanisms by which Id
proteins promote the cell cycle are diverse, but appear to involve affecting the 
expression of cell cycle regulators. RT-PCR results demonstrated that the
expression of vFLIP decreased the expression levels of Id2 and Id3 as well as
cyclin E and cyclin A compared with the vFLIP-null cells. These indicate that
vFLIP affects cell proliferation by decreasing the expression levels of cell
cycle regulatory proteins.

PMID: 20512523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 25;11:324. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-324.

Genomic profiling of tumor initiating prostatospheres.

Duhagon MA(1), Hurt EM, Sotelo-Silveira JR, Zhang X, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, 1050 Boyles Street, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
mduhagon@fcien.edu.uy

BACKGROUND: The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis proposes that a population of
tumor cells bearing stem cell properties is responsible for the origin and
maintenance of tumors. Normal and cancer stem cells possess the ability to grow
in vitro as self-renewing spheres, but the molecular basis of this phenotype
remains largely unknown. We intended to establish a comprehensive culture system 
to grow prostatospheres (PSs) from both cancer cell lines and patient tumors. We 
then used gene expression microarrays to gain insight on the molecular pathways
that sustain the PS tumor initiating cell (TIC) phenotype.
RESULTS: Traditional stem cell medium (SCM) supplemented with KnockoutSR (KO)
allows the propagation of monoclonal PSs from cell lines and primary cells. PSs
display gene expression and tumorigenicity hallmarks of TICs. Gene expression
analysis defined a gene signature composed of 66 genes that characterize LNCaP
and patient PSs. This set includes novel prostate TIC growth factors (NRP1, GDF1,
JAG1), proteins implicated in cell adhesion and cytoskeletal maintenance,
transcriptional regulators (MYCBP, MYBL1, ID1, ID3, FOS, ELF3, ELF4, KLF2, KLF5) 
and factors involved in protein biosynthesis and metabolism. Meta-analysis in
Oncomine reveals that some of these genes correlate with prostate cancer status
and/or progression. Reporter genes and inhibitors indicate that the Notch pathway
contributes to prostatosphere growth.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a model for the culture of PSs, and provide a
genomic profile that support CSCs identity. This signature identifies novel
markers and pathways that are predicted to correlate with prostate cancer
evolution.

PMCID: PMC2900264
PMID: 20500816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Anim Genet. 2010 Oct;41(5):558-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2010.02065.x.

Partial genomic structure, mutation analysis and mapping of the porcine inhibitor
of DNA binding genes ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4.

Stratil A(1), Horák P, Filkuková J, Van Poucke M, Bartenschlager H, Peelman LJ,
Geldermann H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech 
Republic, Libechov, Czech Republic. stratil@iapg.cas.cz

PMID: 20477796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Endocrinology. 2010 Jul;151(7):3445-53. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0071. Epub 2010 May 
12.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 acts via inhibitor of DNA binding proteins to
synergistically regulate follicle-stimulating hormone beta transcription with
activin A.

Ho CC(1), Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, 3655 Promenade
Sir William Osler, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

We recently reported that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) 2 and 4 can
stimulate FSHbeta-subunit (Fshb) transcription alone and in synergy with
activins. We further showed that BMP2 signals via the BMP type IA receptor (or
activin receptor-like kinase 3) to mediate its effects. However, the
intracellular mechanisms through which BMP2 regulates Fshb are unknown. In the
current study, we used cDNA microarray analyses (and validation by real-time
quantitative RT-PCR) to identify BMP2 target genes in the murine gonadotrope cell
line, LbetaT2. Short-interfering RNA-mediated knockdown, overexpression, and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments were used to examine the potential functional
roles of selected gene products. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis largely confirmed
the results of the array analyses, and inhibitors of DNA binding 1, 2, and 3
(Id1, Id2, and Id3) were selected for functional analyses. Knockdown of
endogenous Id2 or Id3, but not Id1, diminished the synergistic effects of BMP2
and activin A on Fshb transcription. Overexpression of Id1, Id2, or Id3 alone had
no effect, but all three potentiated activin A or mothers against decapentaplegic
homolog (SMAD)3 induction of Fshb transcription. Though the precise mechanism
through which Ids produce their effects are not yet known, we observed physical
interactions between Id1, Id2, or Id3 and SMAD3. Collectively, the data suggest
that BMP2 synergistically regulates Fshb transcription with activins, at least in
part, through the combined actions of Ids 2 or 3 and SMAD3.

PMID: 20463050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Cell Sci. 2010 Jun 1;123(Pt 11):1922-30. doi: 10.1242/jcs.065912. Epub 2010 May
11.

LRP2 in ependymal cells regulates BMP signaling in the adult neurogenic niche.

Gajera CR(1), Emich H, Lioubinski O, Christ A, Beckervordersandforth-Bonk R,
Yoshikawa K, Bachmann S, Christensen EI, Götz M, Kempermann G, Peterson AS,
Willnow TE, Hammes A.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, D-13125
Berlin, Germany.

The microenvironment of growth factors in the subependymal zone (SEZ) of the
adult brain provides the instructive milieu for neurogenesis to proceed in this
germinal niche. In particular, tight regulation of bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) signaling is essential to balance proliferative and non-proliferative cell 
fate specification. However, the regulatory pathways that control BMP signaling
in the SEZ are still poorly defined. We demonstrate that LRP2, a clearance
receptor for BMP4 is specifically expressed in ependymal cells of the lateral
ventricles in the adult brain. Intriguingly, expression is restricted to the
ependyma that faces the stem cell niche. Expression is not seen in ependyma
elsewhere in the lateral ventricles or in the dentate gyrus, the second major
neurogenic zone of the adult brain. We further show that lack of LRP2 expression 
in adult mice results in impaired proliferation of neural precursor cells in the 
SEZ resulting in decreased numbers of neuroblasts reaching the olfactory bulb.
Reduced neurogenesis coincides with increased BMP4 expression and enhanced
activation of downstream mediators phospho-SMAD1/5/8 and ID3 in the stem cell
niche. Our findings suggest a novel mechanism whereby LRP2-mediated catabolism of
BMP4 in the ependyma modulates the microenvironment of the SEZ and enables adult 
neurogenesis to proceed.

PMID: 20460439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Virol. 2010 Jul;84(13):6318-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00635-10. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

MicroRNA miR-155 inhibits bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling and
BMP-mediated Epstein-Barr virus reactivation.

Yin Q(1), Wang X, Fewell C, Cameron J, Zhu H, Baddoo M, Lin Z, Flemington EK.

Author information: 
(1)Tulane Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

MicroRNA miR-155 is expressed at elevated levels in human cancers including
cancers of the lung, breast, colon, and a subset of lymphoid malignancies. In B
cells, miR-155 is induced by the oncogenic latency gene expression program of the
human herpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Two other oncogenic herpesviruses,
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and Marek's disease virus, encode
functional homologues of miR-155, suggesting a role for this microRNA in the
biology and pathogenesis of these viruses. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling is involved in an array of cellular processes, including
differentiation, growth inhibition, and senescence, through context-dependent
interactions with multiple signaling pathways. Alteration of this pathway
contributes to a number of disease states including cancer. Here, we show that
miR-155 targets the 3' untranslated region of multiple components of the BMP
signaling cascade, including SMAD1, SMAD5, HIVEP2, CEBPB, RUNX2, and MYO10.
Targeting of these mediators results in the inhibition of BMP2-, BMP6-, and
BMP7-induced ID3 expression as well as BMP-mediated EBV reactivation in the
EBV-positive B-cell line, Mutu I. Further, miR-155 inhibits SMAD1 and SMAD5
expression in the lung epithelial cell line A549, it inhibits BMP-mediated
induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21, and it reverses
BMP-mediated cell growth inhibition. These results suggest a role for miR-155 in 
controlling BMP-mediated cellular processes, in regulating BMP-induced EBV
reactivation, and in the inhibition of antitumor effects of BMP signaling in
normal and virus-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC2903268
PMID: 20427544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Sep 1;87(4):723-31. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq117. Epub 2010 Apr
26.

MEOX2 regulates nuclear factor-kappaB activity in vascular endothelial cells
through interactions with p65 and IkappaBbeta.

Chen Y(1), Rabson AB, Gorski DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA.

AIMS: Tumours secrete proangiogenic factors to induce the ingrowth of blood
vessels, the end targets of which are vascular endothelial cells (ECs). The MEOX2
homeoprotein inhibits nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) signalling and EC
activation in response to serum and proangiogenic factors. We hypothesize that
MEOX2 interacts with components of this pathway in vascular ECs to modulate
NF-kappaB activity and EC activation and that these interactions depend upon
specific domains within the MEOX2 protein.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To test our hypothesis, we transduced ECs with MEOX2
expression constructs. MEOX2 protein localized to the nuclear fraction, as did
IkappaBbeta and p65. By co-immunoprecipitation, MEOX2 bound to both p65 and
IkappaBbeta. Immunofluorescence demonstrated that MEOX2 colocalizes in the
nucleus with both p65 and IkappaBbeta and that this colocalization requires the
MEOX2 homeodomain and N-terminal domain. Finally, promoter assays revealed that
MEOX2 expression has a biphasic effect on NF-kappaB-dependent promoters. At low
levels, MEOX2 stimulates NF-kappaB activity, whereas at high levels, it
represses, effects that also depend upon the homeodomain and the N-terminal
domain.
CONCLUSION: Our results represent the first report of an interaction between a
homeobox protein and IkappaBbeta and suggest that MEOX2 modulates the activity of
the RelA complex through direct interaction with its components. These
observations implicate MEOX2 as a potentially important regulatory gene
inhibiting not only the angiogenic response of ECs to proangiogenic factors, but 
also their response to chronic inflammatory stimulation that normally activates
NF-kappaB, suggesting MEOX2 as a possible molecular target for the therapy of
angiogenesis-dependent diseases such as cancer.

PMCID: PMC2920806
PMID: 20421348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Development. 2010 May;137(10):1601-11. doi: 10.1242/dev.051219. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Opposing Fgf and Bmp activities regulate the specification of olfactory sensory
and respiratory epithelial cell fates.

Maier E(1), von Hofsten J, Nord H, Fernandes M, Paek H, Hébert JM, Gunhaga L.

Author information: 
(1)Umeå Center for Molecular Medicine, Building 6M, 4th Floor, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden.

The olfactory sensory epithelium and the respiratory epithelium are derived from 
the olfactory placode. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating the
differential specification of the sensory and the respiratory epithelium have
remained undefined. To address this issue, we first identified Msx1/2 and Id3 as 
markers for respiratory epithelial cells by performing quail chick
transplantation studies. Next, we established chick explant and intact chick
embryo assays of sensory/respiratory epithelial cell differentiation and analyzed
two mice mutants deleted of Bmpr1a;Bmpr1b or Fgfr1;Fgfr2 in the olfactory
placode. In this study, we provide evidence that in both chick and mouse, Bmp
signals promote respiratory epithelial character, whereas Fgf signals are
required for the generation of sensory epithelial cells. Moreover, olfactory
placodal cells can switch between sensory and respiratory epithelial cell fates
in response to Fgf and Bmp activity, respectively. Our results provide evidence
that Fgf activity suppresses and restricts the ability of Bmp signals to induce
respiratory cell fate in the nasal epithelium. In addition, we show that in both 
chick and mouse the lack of Bmp or Fgf activity results in disturbed placodal
invagination; however, the fate of cells in the remaining olfactory epithelium is
independent of morphological movements related to invagination. In summary, we
present a conserved mechanism in amniotes in which Bmp and Fgf signals act in an 
opposing manner to regulate the respiratory versus sensory epithelial cell fate
decision.

PMCID: PMC2860246
PMID: 20392740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Genome Med. 2010 Apr 7;2(4):23. doi: 10.1186/gm144.

Investigation of post-transcriptional gene regulatory networks associated with
autism spectrum disorders by microRNA expression profiling of lymphoblastoid cell
lines.

Sarachana T(1), Zhou R, Chen G, Manji HK, Hu VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, 2300 Eye St NW, Washington, DC 20037, USA.
tewazz@gwmail.gwu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental disorders
characterized by abnormalities in reciprocal social interactions and language
development and/or usage, and by restricted interests and repetitive behaviors.
Differential gene expression of neurologically relevant genes in lymphoblastoid
cell lines from monozygotic twins discordant in diagnosis or severity of autism
suggested that epigenetic factors such as DNA methylation or microRNAs (miRNAs)
may be involved in ASD.
METHODS: Global miRNA expression profiling using lymphoblasts derived from these 
autistic twins and unaffected sibling controls was therefore performed using
high-throughput miRNA microarray analysis. Selected differentially expressed
miRNAs were confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis, and the putative target genes of two of the
confirmed miRNA were validated by knockdown and overexpression of the respective 
miRNAs.
RESULTS: Differentially expressed miRNAs were found to target genes highly
involved in neurological functions and disorders in addition to genes involved in
gastrointestinal diseases, circadian rhythm signaling, as well as steroid hormone
metabolism and receptor signaling. Novel network analyses of the putative target 
genes that were inversely expressed relative to the relevant miRNA in these same 
samples further revealed an association with ASD and other co-morbid disorders,
including muscle and gastrointestinal diseases, as well as with biological
functions implicated in ASD, such as memory and synaptic plasticity. Putative
gene targets (ID3 and PLK2) of two RT-PCR-confirmed brain-specific miRNAs
(hsa-miR-29b and hsa-miR-219-5p) were validated by miRNA overexpression or
knockdown assays, respectively. Comparisons of these mRNA and miRNA expression
levels between discordant twins and between case-control sib pairs show an
inverse relationship, further suggesting that ID3 and PLK2 are in vivo targets of
the respective miRNA. Interestingly, the up-regulation of miR-23a and
down-regulation of miR-106b in this study reflected miRNA changes previously
reported in post-mortem autistic cerebellum by Abu-Elneel et al. in 2008. This
finding validates these differentially expressed miRNAs in neurological tissue
from a different cohort as well as supports the use of the lymphoblasts as a
surrogate to study miRNA expression in ASD.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study strongly suggest that dysregulation of
miRNA expression contributes to the observed alterations in gene expression and, 
in turn, may lead to the pathophysiological conditions underlying autism.

PMCID: PMC2873801
PMID: 20374639  [PubMed]


249. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(2):R59. doi: 10.1186/ar2972. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Olf1/EBF associated zinc finger protein interfered with antinuclear antibody
production in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Feng X(1), Li R, Huang J, Zhang H, Zhu L, Hua B, Tsao BP, Sun L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, the Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing,
210008, PR China. fengxuebing@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to determine whether Olf1/EBF associated
zinc finger protein (OAZ), a transcription factor encoded by a positional
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) candidate gene, plays a functional role in the
pathogenesis in SLE.
METHODS: Gene expression levels in peripheral blood cells (PBLs) measured using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) were assessed for
association with disease activity and the presence of specific autoantibodies.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were incubated with specific siRNAs
for three days, then cells were harvested for measuring mRNA levels using qPCR,
and supernatants for levels of total immunoglobulin (Ig)G and IgM as well as
secreted cytokines, chemokine and antinuclear antibodies (ANA) using ELISA.
Indirect immunofluorescence was also applied for ANA detection.
RESULTS: OAZ gene expressions in PBLs from 40 ANA-positive SLE patients were
significantly increased than those from 30 normal controls (P < 0.0001) and 18
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (P < 0.01). In SLE patients, OAZ transcripts
were positively correlated with SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI) score (r =
0.72, P < 0.0001) and higher in those positive for anti-dsDNA or anti-Sm
antibodies (both P < 0.05). Co-culturing with OAZ siRNAs reduced mRNA levels of
OAZ by 74.6 +/- 6.4% as compared to those co-cultured with non-targeting siRNA
and OAZ silencing resulted in reduced total IgG, ANA, interferon (IFN)-gamma,
interleukin (IL)-10, IL-12 and IL-21, but elevated CCL2 levels in culture
supernatants (P < 0.05). The declined ANA levels correlated with inhibited OAZ
expression (r = 0.88, P = 0.05), reduced IL-21 levels (r = 0.99, P < 0.01), and
elevated chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 levels (r = -0.98, P < 0.01). Expressions
of ID1-3 were significantly down-regulated by 68.7%, 70.2% and 67.7% respectively
after OAZ silence, while ID3 was also highly expressed in SLE PBLs (P < 0.0001)
and associated with disease activity (r = 0.76, P < 0.0001) as well as anti-dsDNA
or anti-Sm antibodies (both P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated expression of OAZ transcripts in SLE PBLs were strongly
correlated with disease activity. Suppression of OAZ expression inhibited
downstream ID levels, and secretion of ANA and IL-21, implicating a role of OAZ
pathway in the pathogenesis of SLE.

PMCID: PMC2888210
PMID: 20359360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Curr Opin Immunol. 2010 Apr;22(2):193-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2010.02.002. Epub
2010 Mar 23.

Multiple hats for natural killers.

Ramirez K(1), Kee BL.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Immunology and Cancer Biology, Department of Pathology, The
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, United States.

Natural killer (NK) cells are a subset of lymphocytes that kill virus-infected or
cancerous cells and influence adaptive immune responses via production of
inflammatory cytokines. Unlike B and T lymphocytes, no transcription factors have
been identified that are essential for the emergence of NK cell progenitors from 
their multipotent precursors. We argue that this dearth of essential factors is
because of the expression of redundant transcription factors that function at the
earliest stages of development. However, multiple essential transcription factors
have been identified at later stages of development. Recent studies have revealed
novel subsets of NK cells with differing potential for target cell lysis and
cytokine production. How these subsets arise from the conventional pathway of NK 
cell development and identification of the transcriptional networks that control 
their development are major challenges for future studies.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3388277
PMID: 20335012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Lab Invest. 2010 May;90(5):724-38. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2010.66. Epub 2010 Mar 
8.

Rhabdoid tumor: gene expression clues to pathogenesis and potential therapeutic
targets.

Gadd S(1), Sredni ST, Huang CC, Perlman EJ; Renal Tumor Committee of the
Children's Oncology Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University's Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

Rhabdoid tumors (RT) are aggressive tumors characterized by genetic loss of
SMARCB1 (SNF5, INI-1), a component of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex.
No effective treatment is currently available. This study seeks to shed light on 
the SMARCB1-mediated pathogenesis of RT and to discover potential therapeutic
targets. Global gene expression of 10 RT was compared with 12 cellular
mesoblastic nephromas, 16 clear cell sarcomas of the kidney, and 15 Wilms tumors.
In all, 114 top genes were differentially expressed in RT (P<0.001, fold change
>2 or <0.5). Among these were downregulation of SMARCB1 and genes previously
associated with SMARCB1 (ATP1B1, PTN, DOCK4, NQO1, PLOD1, PTP4A2, PTPRK); 28/114 
top differentially expressed genes were involved with neural or neural crest
development and were all sharply downregulated. This was confirmed by Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Neural and neural crest stem cell marker proteins
SOX10, ID3, CD133, and Musashi were negative by immunohistochemistry, whereas
Nestin was positive. Decreased expression of CDKN1A, CDKN1B, CDKN1C, CDKN2A, and 
CCND1 was identified, while MYC-C was upregulated. GSEA of independent gene sets 
associated with bivalent histone modification and polycomb group targets in
embryonic stem cells showed significant negative enrichment in RT. Several
differentially expressed genes were associated with tumor suppression, invasion, 
and metastasis, including SPP1 (osteopontin), COL18A1 (endostatin), PTPRK, and
DOCK4. We conclude that RTs arise within early progenitor cells during a critical
developmental window in which loss of SMARCB1 directly results in repression of
neural development, loss of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibition, and
trithorax/polycomb dysregulation.

PMCID: PMC2868345
PMID: 20212451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Dec;124(3):623-33. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0810-6. 
Epub 2010 Feb 27.

Targeting Id1 and Id3 by a specific peptide aptamer induces E-box promoter
activity, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis in breast cancer cells.

Mern DS(1), Hoppe-Seyler K, Hoppe-Seyler F, Hasskarl J, Burwinkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
d.mern@dkfz-heidelberg.de

Inhibitors of differentiation or DNA binding (Id) proteins have been shown to be 
involved in tumor growth, invasiveness, metastasis, and angiogenesis.
Overexpression of Id proteins, especially Id1, correlates with unfavorable
clinical prognosis. Thus, they are attractive molecular targets for anticancer
therapy. Overexpression of Id proteins mediates breast cancer metastasis to lung.
Targeting Id1 and Id3 expression in breast cancer cells reduces breast cancer
metastasis in animal models. Different breast tumors failed to grow and/or
metastasize in Id1 (+/-) Id3 (-/-) mice. Id1 and Id3 preferentially dimerize with
the key regulatory E-proteins which inhibit the expression of different tumor
suppressor genes. Nevertheless, the inhibition of tumorigenic activities of Id1
and Id3 at protein level has never been studied. Here, we isolated a novel
peptide aptamer, Id1/3-PA7, specifically interacting with Id1 and Id3 from
randomized combinatorial expression library using yeast and mammalian two-hybrid 
systems. Intracellular delivered Id1/3-PA7 co-localized to Id1 and Id3 and
interfered with their functions. It repressed E47 protein sequestration by Id1
and Id3, activated the E-box promoter and increased the expression level of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKN1A and CDKN1B) in a dose-dependent
fashion, paralleled by the cleavage of poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). These
effects were counteracted by ectopically overexpressed Id1 and Id3. Peptide
aptamer Id1/3-PA7 induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells 
MCF7 and MDA-MB-231. In conclusion, Id1/3-PA7 could represent a nontoxic
exogenous agent that can significantly provoke antiproliferative and apoptotic
effects in breast cancer cells, which are associated with deregulated expression 
of Id1 and Id3.

PMID: 20191379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Circ Res. 2010 Apr 16;106(7):1303-11. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.210294. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

Id3 is a novel atheroprotective factor containing a functionally significant
single-nucleotide polymorphism associated with intima-media thickness in humans.

Doran AC(1), Lehtinen AB, Meller N, Lipinski MJ, Slayton RP, Oldham SN, Skaflen
MD, Yeboah J, Rich SS, Bowden DW, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA.

RATIONALE: The gene encoding the helix-loop-helix transcription factor Id3
(inhibitor of differentiation-3) is located within atherosclerosis susceptibility
loci of both mice and humans, yet its influence on atherosclerosis is not known.
OBJECTIVE: The present study sought to determine whether polymorphisms in the ID3
gene were associated with indices of atherosclerosis in humans and if loss of Id3
function modulated atherogenesis in mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Six tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (tagSNPs)
in the human ID3 gene were assessed in participants of the Diabetes Heart Study. 
One tagSNP, rs11574, was independently associated with carotid intima-media
thickness (IMT). The human ID3 variant at rs11574 results in an alanine to
threonine substitution in the C terminus. To determine the effect of this
polymorphism on the basic function of Id3, site-directed mutagenesis of the human
ID3 gene at rs11574 was performed. Results demonstrated a significant reduction
in coimmunoprecipitation of the known E-protein partner, E12, with Id3 when it
contains the sequence encoded by the risk allele (Id3105T). Further, Id3105T had 
an attenuated ability to modulate E12-mediated transcriptional activation
compared to Id3 containing the ancestral allele (Id3105A). Microarray analysis of
vascular smooth muscle cells from WT and Id3(-/-) mice revealed significant
modulation of multiple gene pathways implicated in atherogenesis. Moreover,
Id3(-/-)ApoE(-/-) mice developed significantly more atherosclerosis in response
to 32 weeks of Chow or Western diet feeding than Id3(+/+)ApoE(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, results provide novel evidence that Id3 is an
atheroprotective factor and link a common SNP in the human ID3 gene to loss of
Id3 function and increased IMT.

PMCID: PMC2860382
PMID: 20185798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 May;298(5):C1087-99. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00388.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Inefficient skeletal muscle repair in inhibitor of differentiation knockout mice 
suggests a crucial role for BMP signaling during adult muscle regeneration.

Clever JL(1), Sakai Y, Wang RA, Schneider DB.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Francisco, 94143-0222, USA.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway is known to be involved in limb
myogenesis during development, but whether it is involved in postnatal muscle
regeneration is unclear. We have found that adult inhibitor of differentiation
(Id)-mutant (Id1(+/-)Id3(-/-)) mice display delayed and reduced skeletal muscle
regeneration after injury compared with either wild-type littermates or Id3-null 
mice. Immunoblotting of wild-type muscle lysates revealed that, not only were Id1
and Id3 highly upregulated within 24 h after injury, but other upstream
components of the BMP pathway were as well, including the BMP receptor type II
and phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (pSmad1/5/8). Inhibition of BMP signaling in injured
skeletal muscle by Noggin injection reduced pSmad1/5/8, Id1, and Id3 protein
levels. The mouse myoblast-derived cell line C2C12 also expressed Id1, Id3, BMP
receptor type II, and pSmad1/5/8 during proliferation, but all were reduced upon 
differentiation into myotubes. In addition, these cells secreted mature BMP-4,
and BMP signaling could be inhibited with exogenous Noggin, causing a reduction
in pSmad1/5/8, Id1, and Id3 levels. Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy
revealed that activated Pax7(+) myoblasts coexpressed nuclear pSmad1/5/8, Id1,
and Id3 in injured mouse skeletal muscle sections. Although we did not observe
differences in the numbers of quiescent Pax7(+) satellite cells in adult
uninjured hindlimb muscles, we did observe a significant reduction in the number 
of proliferating Pax7(+) cells in the Id-mutant mice after muscle injury compared
with either wild-type or Id3-null mice. These data suggest a model in which BMP
signaling regulates Id1 and Id3 in muscle satellite cells, which directs their
proper proliferation before terminal myogenic differentiation after skeletal
muscle injury in postnatal animals.

PMCID: PMC2867391
PMID: 20181926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 19;5(2):e9303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009303.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 3 limits development of murine slam-associated adaptor
protein-dependent "innate" gammadelta T cells.

Verykokakis M(1), Boos MD, Bendelac A, Adams EJ, Pereira P, Kee BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Id3 is a dominant antagonist of E protein transcription factor
activity that is induced by signals emanating from the alphabeta and gammadelta T
cell receptor (TCR). Mice lacking Id3 were previously shown to have subtle
defects in positive and negative selection of TCRalphabeta+ T lymphocytes. More
recently, Id3(-/-) mice on a C57BL/6 background were shown to have a dramatic
expansion of gammadelta T cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report that mice lacking Id3 have reduced
thymocyte numbers but increased production of gammadelta T cells that express a
Vgamma1.1+Vdelta6.3+ receptor with restricted junctional diversity. These
Vgamma1.1+Vdelta6.3+ T cells have multiple characteristics associated with
"innate" lymphocytes such as natural killer T (NKT) cells including an activated 
phenotype, expression of the transcription factor PLZF, and rapid production of
IFNg and interleukin-4. Moreover, like other "innate" lymphocyte populations,
development of Id3(-/-) Vgamma1.1+Vdelta6.3+ T cells requires the signaling
adapter protein SAP.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide novel insight into the requirements for development
of Vgamma1.1+Vdelta6.3+ T cells and indicate a role for Id3 in repressing the
response of "innate" gammadelta T cells to SAP-mediated expansion or survival.

PMCID: PMC2824806
PMID: 20174563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Jun 1;86(3):506-15. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq012. Epub 2010 Jan
18.

Endothelial progenitor cells give rise to pro-angiogenic smooth muscle-like
progeny.

Moonen JR(1), Krenning G, Brinker MG, Koerts JA, van Luyn MJ, Harmsen MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine , NL-9713GZ Groningen, The
Netherlands.

AIMS: Reciprocal plasticity exists between endothelial and mesenchymal lineages. 
For instance, mature endothelial cells adopt a smooth muscle-like phenotype
through transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFbeta1)-driven
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transdifferentiation (EndMT). Peripheral blood
contains circulating endothelial progenitor cells of which the endothelial
colony-forming cells (ECFCs) harbour stem cell-like properties. Given the
plasticity between endothelial and mesenchymal lineages and the stem cell-like
properties of ECFCs, we hypothesized that ECFCs can give rise to smooth
muscle-like progeny.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ECFCs were stimulated with TGFbeta1, after which TGFbeta
signalling cascades and their downstream effects were investigated. Indeed, EndMT
of ECFCs resulted in smooth muscle-like progeniture. TGFbeta1-driven EndMT is
mediated by ALK5 kinase activity, increased downstream Smad2 signalling, and
reduced protein levels of inhibitor of DNA-binding protein 3. ECFCs lost
expression of endothelial markers and endothelial anti-thrombogenic function.
Simultaneously, mesenchymal marker expression was gained, cytoskeletal
rearrangements occurred, and cells acquired a contractile phenotype.
Transdifferentiated ECFCs were phenotypically stable and self-sustaining and,
importantly, showed fibroblast growth factor-2 and angiopoietin-1-mediated
pro-angiogenic paracrine properties.
CONCLUSION: Our study is the first to demonstrate that ECFCs can give rise to
smooth muscle-like progeny, with potential therapeutic benefits. These findings
further illustrate that ECFCs are highly plastic, which by itself has
implications for therapeutical use.

PMID: 20083576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Surg Res. 2011 May 15;167(2):258-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2009.08.006. Epub 2009 
Sep 9.

Expression and prognostic values of Id-1 and Id-3 in gastric adenocarcinoma.

Yang HY(1), Liu HL, Liu GY, Zhu H, Meng QW, Qu LD, Liu LX, Jiang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, P. R. Chin.

BACKGROUND: Id (inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding)-1 and -3 are involved
in neoangiogenesis; they antagonize basic helix-loop-helix proteins, inhibit
differentiation, and enhance cell proliferation. The aim of this study was to
investigate Id-1 and -3 expression in gastric tumors and their clinical relevance
in gastric cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated Id-1 and Id-3 expression in gastric cancer
samples by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting, and further analyzed the
relationship between expression of Id-1 and Id-3 and clinicopathologic
characteristics.
RESULTS: Expression of Id-1 and -3 was found significantly more often in gastric 
cancers than in matched adjacent nonmalignant tissues. Cancer samples with poor
or moderate histologic differentiation showed significantly stronger Id-1 and -3 
expression than cancer samples with high differentiation. In cancer samples,
strong or moderate expression of Id-3, but not Id-1, was a strong independent
predictor for shorter overall survival in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The level of Id-1 and -3 protein expression was associated with the 
malignant potential of gastric tumors. In cancer samples, stronger Id-1 and -3
expression is associated with poor differentiation and more aggressive behavior
of tumor cells, resulting in poor clinical outcome. Consequently, Id-3 might be
used to independently predict survival of patients with gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20080245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Jan 14;11:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-2.

Elevated endogenous expression of the dominant negative basic helix-loop-helix
protein ID1 correlates with significant centrosome abnormalities in human tumor
cells.

Manthey C(1), Mern DS, Gutmann A, Zielinski AJ, Herz C, Lassmann S, Hasskarl J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: ID proteins are dominant negative inhibitors of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors that have multiple functions during
development and cellular differentiation. Ectopic (over-)expression of ID1
extends the lifespan of primary human epithelial cells. High expression levels of
ID1 have been detected in multiple human malignancies, and in some have been
correlated with unfavorable clinical prognosis. ID1 protein is localized at the
centrosomes and forced (over-)expression of ID1 results in errors during
centrosome duplication.
RESULTS: Here we analyzed the steady state expression levels of the four
ID-proteins in 18 tumor cell lines and assessed the number of centrosome
abnormalities. While expression of ID1, ID2, and ID3 was detected, we failed to
detect protein expression of ID4. Expression of ID1 correlated with increased
supernumerary centrosomes in most cell lines analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report that shows that not only ectopic expression
in tissue culture but endogenous levels of ID1 modulate centrosome numbers. Thus,
our findings support the hypothesis that ID1 interferes with centrosome
homeostasis, most likely contributing to genomic instability and associated tumor
aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC2818612
PMID: 20070914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 6;5(1):e8596. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008596.

Increased stathmin1 expression in the dentate gyrus of mice causes abnormal
axonal arborizations.

Yamada K(1), Matsuzaki S, Hattori T, Kuwahara R, Taniguchi M, Hashimoto H,
Shintani N, Baba A, Kumamoto N, Yamada K, Yoshikawa T, Katayama T, Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) is involved in
multiple brain functions. To clarify the cause of abnormal behavior in PACAP
deficient-mice, we attempted the identification of genes whose expression was
altered in the dentate gyrus of PACAP-deficient mice using the differential
display method. Expression of stathmin1 was up-regulated in the dentate gyrus at 
both the mRNA and protein levels. PACAP stimulation inhibited stathmin1
expression in PC12 cells, while increased stathmin1expression in neurons of the
subgranular zone and in primary cultured hippocampal neurons induced abnormal
arborization of axons. We also investigated the pathways involved in PACAP
deficiency. Ascl1 binds to E10 box of the stathmin1 promoter and increases
stathmin1 expression. Inhibitory bHLH proteins (Hes1 and Id3) were rapidly
up-regulated by PACAP stimulation, and Hes1 could suppress Ascl1 expression and
Id3 could inhibit Ascl1 signaling. We also detected an increase of stathmin1
expression in the brains of schizophrenic patients. These results suggest that
up-regulation of stathmin1 in the dentate gyrus, secondary to PACAP deficiency,
may create abnormal neuronal circuits that cause abnormal behavior.

PMCID: PMC2797614
PMID: 20062533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Dev Cell. 2009 Dec;17(6):836-48. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.10.011.

A systems approach reveals that the myogenesis genome network is regulated by the
transcriptional repressor RP58.

Yokoyama S(1), Ito Y, Ueno-Kudoh H, Shimizu H, Uchibe K, Albini S, Mitsuoka K,
Miyaki S, Kiso M, Nagai A, Hikata T, Osada T, Fukuda N, Yamashita S, Harada D,
Mezzano V, Kasai M, Puri PL, Hayashizaki Y, Okado H, Hashimoto M, Asahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems BioMedicine, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

We created a whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH) database, termed EMBRYS,
containing expression data of 1520 transcription factors and cofactors expressed 
in E9.5, E10.5, and E11.5 mouse embryos--a highly dynamic stage of skeletal
myogenesis. This approach implicated 43 genes in regulation of embryonic
myogenesis, including a transcriptional repressor, the zinc-finger protein RP58
(also known as Zfp238). Knockout and knockdown approaches confirmed an essential 
role for RP58 in skeletal myogenesis. Cell-based high-throughput transfection
screening revealed that RP58 is a direct MyoD target. Microarray analysis
identified two inhibitors of skeletal myogenesis, Id2 and Id3, as targets for
RP58-mediated repression. Consistently, MyoD-dependent activation of the myogenic
program is impaired in RP58 null fibroblasts and downregulation of Id2 and Id3
rescues MyoD's ability to promote myogenesis in these cells. Our combined,
multi-system approach reveals a MyoD-activated regulatory loop relying on
RP58-mediated repression of muscle regulatory factor (MRF) inhibitors.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3110151
PMID: 20059953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 1;184(3):1268-79. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903218. Epub 2009
Dec 28.

Development of promyelocytic zinc finger and ThPOK-expressing innate gamma delta 
T cells is controlled by strength of TCR signaling and Id3.

Alonzo ES(1), Gottschalk RA, Das J, Egawa T, Hobbs RM, Pandolfi PP, Pereira P,
Nichols KE, Koretzky GA, Jordan MS, Sant'Angelo DB.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY, 10065, USA.

The broad-complex tramtrack and bric a brac-zinc finger transcriptional regulator
(BTB-ZF), promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF), was recently shown to
control the development of the characteristic innate T cell phenotype and
effector functions of NK T cells. Interestingly, the ectopic expression of PLZF
was shown to push conventional T cells into an activated state that seems to be
proinflammatory. The factors that control the normal expression of PLZF in
lymphocytes are unknown. In this study, we show that PLZF expression is not
restricted to NK T cells but is also expressed by a subset of gammadelta T cells,
functionally defining distinct subsets of this innate T cell population. A second
BTB-ZF gene, ThPOK, is important for the phenotype of the PLZF-expressing
gammadelta T cells. Most importantly, TCR signal strength and expression of
inhibitor of differentiation gene 3 control the frequency of PLZF-expressing
gammadelta T cells. This study defines the factors that control the propensity of
the immune system to produce potentially disease-causing T cell subsets.

PMCID: PMC3991695
PMID: 20038637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1247-56. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0914. Epub 2009 Dec 
23.

Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) genes are expressed in the steroidogenic cells 
of the ovine ovary and are differentially regulated by members of the
transforming growth factor-beta family.

Hogg K(1), Etherington SL, Young JM, McNeilly AS, Duncan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. k.hogg@sms.ed.ac.uk

Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins act during embryogenesis and
development to repress gene transcription required for lineage commitment, while 
promoting cell growth. Growth factors belonging to the TGFbeta superfamily of
signaling molecules, notably the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and activin, 
can regulate Id expression in these tissues. Id expression and function in adult 
physiology is less well determined, and we hypothesized a role for Id proteins in
the adult mammalian ovary. Immunohistochemistry for Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 in the
sheep ovary revealed consistent expression in granulosa and thecal cells of
ovarian follicles throughout development. In atretic follicles, Id proteins were 
selectively down-regulated in thecal cells (P < 0.0001). Additionally, Id1 was
universally up-regulated in the cumulus cells adjacent to the oocyte.
Immunohistochemistry for phospho (p)-smad 1/5/8 signaling components (stimulated 
by BMPs) showed a punctate pattern of expression whereas p-smad 2/3 (stimulated
by activin) was ubiquitously expressed in follicles. Neither pathway, however,
displayed differential staining in line with Id1 cumulus-specific expression,
suggesting a more complex relationship between Id1 expression and TGFbeta
signaling in these cells. Nevertheless, in vitro, stimulation of ovine granulosa 
cells with BMP6 or activin A led to a respective increase and decrease in Id1 (P 
< 0.0001), Id2 (P < 0.0001), Id3 (P < 0.0001), and Id4 (P < 0.05) transcripts,
and Id1 gene expression was further manipulated by the oocyte-secreted factors
BMP15 and growth differentiation factor 9 (P < 0.001). These data confirm that
TGFbeta signaling can regulate Id gene expression in the sheep ovarian follicle
and suggest a functional role for the Id family in the mammalian ovary.

PMCID: PMC2971462
PMID: 20032053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 17;4(12):e8339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008339.

Impaired terminal differentiation of hippocampal granule neurons and defective
contextual memory in PC3/Tis21 knockout mice.

Farioli-Vecchioli S(1), Saraulli D, Costanzi M, Leonardi L, Cinà I, Micheli L,
Nutini M, Longone P, Oh SP, Cestari V, Tirone F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Fondazione S.Lucia, Rome, Italy.

Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the adult hippocampus has been implicated in
neural plasticity and memory, but the molecular mechanisms controlling the
proliferation and differentiation of newborn neurons and their integration into
the synaptic circuitry are still largely unknown. To investigate this issue, we
have analyzed the adult hippocampal neurogenesis in a PC3/Tis21-null mouse model.
PC3/Tis21 is a transcriptional co-factor endowed with antiproliferative and
prodifferentiative properties; indeed, its upregulation in neural progenitors has
been shown to induce exit from cell cycle and differentiation. We demonstrate
here that the deletion of PC3/Tis21 causes an increased proliferation of
progenitor cells in the adult dentate gyrus and an arrest of their terminal
differentiation. In fact, in the PC3/Tis21-null hippocampus postmitotic
undifferentiated neurons accumulated, while the number of terminally
differentiated neurons decreased of 40%. As a result, PC3/Tis21-null mice
displayed a deficit of contextual memory. Notably, we observed that PC3/Tis21 can
associate to the promoter of Id3, an inhibitor of proneural gene activity, and
negatively regulates its expression, indicating that PC3/Tis21 acts upstream of
Id3. Our results identify PC3/Tis21 as a gene required in the control of
proliferation and terminal differentiation of newborn neurons during adult
hippocampal neurogenesis and suggest its involvement in the formation of
contextual memories.

PMCID: PMC2791842
PMID: 20020054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Circ Res. 2010 Feb 19;106(3):611-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.212837. Epub 2009
Dec 17.

Angiotensin II induces a region-specific hyperplasia of the ascending aorta
through regulation of inhibitor of differentiation 3.

Owens AP 3rd(1), Subramanian V, Moorleghen JJ, Guo Z, McNamara CA, Cassis LA,
Daugherty A.

Author information: 
(1)Saha Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY
40536-0509, USA.

RATIONALE: Angiotensin II (Ang II) has diverse effects on smooth muscle cells
(SMCs). The diversity of effects may relate to the regional location of this cell
type.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to define whether Ang II exerted divergent
effects on smooth muscle cells in the aorta and determine the role of blood
pressure and specific oxidant mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ang II (1000 ng/kg per minute) infusion for 28 days into
mice increased systolic blood pressure and promoted medial expansion of
equivalent magnitude throughout the entire aorta. Both effects were ablated by
angiotensin II type 1a (AT(1a)) receptor deficiency. Similar increases in
systolic blood pressure by administration of norepinephrine promoted no changes
in aortic medial thickness. Increased medial thickness was attributable to SMC
expansion owing to hypertrophy in most aortic regions, with the exception of
hyperplasia of the ascending aorta. Deficiency of the p47(phox) component of
NADPH oxidase ablated Ang II-induced medial expansion in all aortic regions.
Analysis of mRNA and protein throughout the aorta revealed a much higher
abundance of the inhibitor of differentiation 3 (Id3) in the ascending aorta
compared to all other regions. A functional role was demonstrated by Id3
deficiency inhibiting Ang II-induced SMC hyperplasia of the ascending aorta.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, Ang II promotes both aortic medial hypertrophy and
hyperplasia in a region-specific manner via an oxidant mechanism. The ascending
aortic hyperplasia is dependent on Id3.

PMCID: PMC2825288
PMID: 20019328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Aug 4;89(29):2068-71.

[Gene expression of OAZ pathway in the patients of systemic lupus erythematosus].

[Article in Chinese]

Li RL(1), Huang J, Sun LY, Feng XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital,
Nanjing Traditional Chinese Medical University, Nanjing 210008, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of Olf/EBF associated zinc finger protein (OAZ)
pathway in the RNA expression level in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE).
METHODS: The expression levels of OAZ, BMP6, BMP4, Id3, Smad6, EHZF genes were
valuated in bone marrow progenitor cells of 5 SLE patients and 5 normal subjects 
and replicated in peripheral blood cells of 30 SLE patients and 20 normal
individuals by using real-time quantitative PCR technique. Relationships of the
expression levels of OAZ, BMP6, BMP4, Id3 mRNA with disease activity and other
clinical indices were analyzed.
RESULTS: The expression levels of OAZ and Id3 mRNA (deltaCt) in the bone marrow
(10.6 +/- 0.5, 5.8 +/- 3.2) and peripheral blood (14.1 +/- 2.7, 7.5 +/- 1.8) of
SLE patients significantly increased than those observed in normal controls (16.5
+/- 0.9, 10.4 +/- 2.6, 16.1 +/- 2.2, 9.5 +/- 1.7), which was found to negatively 
correlate with SLEDAI score, renal lesion index , titers of anti-dsDNA and
anti-RNA antibodies, but positively correlate with serum complement C3.
Expression levels of BMP4 and BMP6 were differentially expressed in peripheral
blood cells but not bone marrow progenitor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: OAZ pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of SLE. Further
investigation is required for the understanding of the function of these
abnormally expressed genes.

PMID: 20017333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Mol Biol. 2010 Feb 26;396(3):747-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.12.008. Epub 2009 
Dec 16.

Molecular determinants required for selective interactions between the thyroid
hormone receptor homodimer and the nuclear receptor corepressor N-CoR.

Kim JY(1), Son YL, Kim JS, Lee YC.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

The unliganded nuclear receptor (NR) generally recruits the NR corepressor
(N-CoR) and the silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor via
its direct binding to the extended helical motif within dual NR-interaction
domains (IDs) of corepressors. Interestingly, N-CoR has a third ID (ID3) upstream
of two IDs (ID1 and ID2) and its core motif (IDVII), rather than an extended
helical motif, is known to be involved directly in the exclusive interaction of
ID3 with the thyroid hormone receptor (TR). Here, we investigated the molecular
determinants of the TR interaction with ID3 to understand the molecular basis of 
the N-CoR preference shown by the TR homodimer. Using a one- plus two-hybrid
system, we identified the specific residues of N-CoR-ID2 and N-CoR-ID3 that are
required for stable association of N-CoR with the TR homodimer. By swapping
experiments and mutagenesis studies, we found that the C-terminally flanked
residues of the core motif of ID3 contribute to the TR preference for N-CoR-ID3, 
suggesting that an extended three-turn helix might form within the ID3 via a
C-terminal extension (IDVIITRQI) and participate directly in the TR-specific
interaction. Structural modeling of the ID3 motif on TR-LBD is consistent with
this conclusion. Notably, we identified a novel interaction between N-CoR-ID3 and
orphan NR RevErb that is mediated by the residues crucial also in TR binding.
These observations raise the intriguing possibility that NR homodimers such as TR
and RevErb display preferential binding to the N-CoR corepressor via their
specific interactions with ID3, which is normally absent from the silencing
mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor.

Copyright (c) 2009. Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20006618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Cancer. 2009 Dec 10;9:430. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-430.

Overexpression of inhibitor of DNA-binding (ID)-1 protein related to angiogenesis
in tumor advancement of ovarian cancers.

Maw MK(1), Fujimoto J, Tamaya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu
University School of Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu City 501-1194, Japan.
minkhinemaw@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: The inhibitor of DNA-binding (ID) has been involved in cell cycle
regulation, apoptosis and angiogenesis. This prompted us to study ID functions in
tumor advancement of ovarian cancers.
METHODS: Sixty patients underwent surgery for ovarian cancers. In ovarian
cancers, the levels of ID-1, ID-2 and ID-3 mRNAs were determined by real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The histoscore with the
localization of ID-1 was determined by immunohistochemistry. Patient prognosis
was analyzed with a 36-month survival rate. Microvessel counts were determined by
immunohistochemistry for CD34 and factor VIII-related antigen.
RESULTS: ID-1 histoscores and mRNA levels both significantly (p < 0.001)
increased in ovarian cancers according to clinical stage, regardless of
histopathological type. Furthermore, 30 patients with high ID-1 expression had a 
lower survival rate (53%) compared to patients with low ID-1 expression (80%).
ID-1 histoscores and mRNA levels significantly (p < 0.0001) correlated with
microvessel counts in ovarian cancers.
CONCLUSION: ID-1 increased in ovarian cancer cells during tumor progression.
Moreover, ID-1 expression levels correlated with microvessel counts. Therefore,
ID-1 might work on tumor advancement via angiogenesis and is considered to be a
candidate for a prognostic indicator in ovarian cancers.

PMCID: PMC2796680
PMID: 20003244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Leukoc Biol. 2010 Mar;87(3):405-14. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0509344. Epub 2009 Dec 1.

Transient beta-catenin stabilization modifies lineage output from human thymic
CD34+CD1a- progenitors.

Valencia J(1), Hernández-López C, Martínez VG, Hidalgo L, Zapata AG, Vicente A,
Varas A, Sacedón R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Complutense University, Madrid, Spain.

Increasing evidence includes Wnt proteins inside the group of master-signaling
pathways that govern immune and nonimmune differentiation systems, fundamental
for normal development and homeostasis. Although their precise functions in bone 
marrow and thymus are still controversial, numerous studies have shown that Wnt
signaling is able to control the proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells and
thymic progenitors and might also affect their cell-fate decisions and subsequent
maturation. In the present work, we analyze the effect of transient stimulation
of the canonical Wnt pathway in the differentiation potential of Lin(-)CD34(+)
CD1a(-) human thymic progenitors, a multipotent and heterogeneous cell population
that has the capacity to develop into T cells, NK cells, monocytes, cDC, and pDC.
Our results demonstrate that giving a boost to canonical Wnt signaling, triggered
by transient exposure to Wnt3a or LiCl, the differentiation capacity of thymic
progenitors changes, enhancing NK cell production. On the contrary, Wnt3a- or
LiCl-pretreated thymic progenitors generate a significantly lower number of
myeloid lineage cells, monocytes, and cDC and exhibit a reduced capacity to
differentiate into pDC lineage. As a possible mechanism for this effect, we show 
that Wnt3a- and LiCl-pretreated progenitors change their membrane levels of
receptors for cytokines pivotal for their expansion and differentiation, such as 
Flt3L. Moreover, canonical Wnt pathway stimulation modifies the transcription
factor profile of CD34(+)CD1(-) thymocytes, increasing Hes-1 and ID3 expression
levels.

PMID: 19952356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 6;29(1):55-67. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.313. Epub 2009 Oct 22.

Self-regulation of Stat3 activity coordinates cell-cycle progression and neural
crest specification.

Nichane M(1), Ren X, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Institut de Biologie et de Médecine
Moléculaires, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Gosselies, Belgium.

A complex set of extracellular signals is required for neural crest (NC)
specification. However, how these signals function to coordinate cell-cycle
progression and differentiation remains poorly understood. Here, we report in
Xenopus a role for the transcription factor signal transducers and activators of 
transcription-3 (Stat3) in this process downstream of FGF signalling. Depletion
of Stat3 inhibits NC gene expression and cell proliferation, whereas
overexpression expands the NC domain and promotes cell proliferation. Stat3 is
phosphorylated and activated in ectodermal cells by FGFs through binding with
FGFR4. Stat3 activation is also modulated by Hairy2 and Id3 proteins that,
respectively, facilitate and disrupt Stat3-FGFR4 complex formation. Furthermore, 
distinct levels of Stat3 activity control Hairy2 and Id3 transcription, leading
to Stat3 self-regulation. Finally, high Stat3 activity maintains cells in an
undifferentiated state, whereas low activity promotes cell proliferation and NC
differentiation. Together, our data suggest that Stat3, downstream of FGFs and
under the positive and negative feedback regulation of Hairy2 and Id3, plays an
essential role in the coordination of cell-cycle progression and differentiation 
during NC specification.

PMCID: PMC2808363
PMID: 19851287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Immunity. 2009 Oct 16;31(4):565-75. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.07.010.

Marked induction of the helix-loop-helix protein Id3 promotes the gammadelta T
cell fate and renders their functional maturation Notch independent.

Lauritsen JP(1), Wong GW, Lee SY, Lefebvre JM, Ciofani M, Rhodes M, Kappes DJ,
Zúñiga-Pflücker JC, Wiest DL.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Cell Development and Cancer Keystone, Immune Cell Development and Host
Defense Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111-2497, USA.

alphabeta and gammadelta T cells arise from a common thymocyte progenitor during 
development in the thymus. Emerging evidence suggests that the pre-T cell
receptor (pre-TCR) and gammadelta T cell receptor (gammadeltaTCR) play
instructional roles in specifying the alphabeta and gammadelta T-lineage fates,
respectively. Nevertheless, the signaling pathways differentially engaged to
specify fate and promote the development of these lineages remain poorly
understood. Here, we show that differential activation of the extracellular
signal-related kinase (ERK)-early growth response gene (Egr)-inhibitor of DNA
binding 3 (Id3) pathway plays a defining role in this process. In particular, Id3
expression served to regulate adoption of the gammadelta fate. Moreover, Id3 was 
both necessary and sufficient to enable gammadelta-lineage cells to differentiate
independently of Notch signaling and become competent IFNgamma-producing
effectors. Taken together, these findings identify Id3 as a central player that
controls both adoption of the gammadelta fate and its maturation in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC2768560
PMID: 19833086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Clin Chem. 2009 Dec;55(12):2162-70. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2009.131433. Epub 2009 
Oct 8.

Quantitative transcription factor analysis of undifferentiated single human
embryonic stem cells.

Ståhlberg A(1), Bengtsson M, Hemberg M, Semb H.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer, Department of Pathology, Sahlgrenska Academy
at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. anders.stahlberg@tataa.com

BACKGROUND: Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) require expression of
transcription factor genes POU5F1 (POU class 5 homeobox 1), NANOG (Nanog
homeobox), and SOX2 [SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 2] to maintain their
capacity for self-renewal and pluripotency. Because of the heterogeneous nature
of cell populations, it is desirable to study the gene regulation in single
cells. Large and potentially important fluctuations in a few cells cannot be
detected at the population scale with microarrays or sequencing technologies. We 
used single-cell gene expression profiling to study cell heterogeneity in hESCs.
METHODS: We collected 47 single hESCs from cell line SA121 manually by glass
capillaries and 57 single hESCs from cell line HUES3 by flow cytometry. Single
hESCs were lysed and reverse-transcribed. Reverse-transcription quantitative
real-time PCR was then used to measure the expression POU5F1, NANOG, SOX2, and
the inhibitor of DNA binding genes ID1, ID2, and ID3. A quantitative noise model 
was used to remove measurement noise when pairwise correlations were estimated.
RESULTS: The numbers of transcripts per cell varied >100-fold between cells and
showed lognormal features. POU5F1 expression positively correlated with ID1 and
ID3 expression (P < 0.05) but not with NANOG or SOX2 expression. When we
accounted for measurement noise, SOX2 expression was also correlated with ID1,
ID2, and NANOG expression (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate an accurate method for transcription profiling of
individual hESCs. Cell-to-cell variability is large and is at least partly
nonrandom because we observed correlations between core transcription factors.
High fluctuations in gene expression may explain why individual cells in a
seemingly undifferentiated cell population have different susceptibilities for
inductive cues.

PMID: 19815608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Jun;19(6):831-41. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0093.

Id proteins facilitate self-renewal and proliferation of neural stem cells.

Jung S(1), Park RH, Kim S, Jeon YJ, Ham DS, Jung MY, Kim SS, Lee YD, Park CH,
Suh-Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon,
Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

Members of helix-loop-helix (HLH) protein family of Id (inhibitor of
differentiation) dimerize with bHLH transcription factors and function as
negative regulators of differentiation during development. Most of inhibitory
roles of Id proteins have been demonstrated in non-neural tissues, and their
roles in the developing nervous system are not clearly demonstrated. In this
study, we show that Id1, Id2, and Id3 increase self-renewing and proliferation
potential of cortical neural stem cells (NSCs) while inhibiting neuronal
differentiation. In electrophoretic mobility gel shift and luciferase assays, Id 
proteins interfered with binding of NeuroD/E47 complexes to the E-box sequences
and inhibited E-box-mediated gene expression. Overexpression of Id proteins in
NSCs increased both the number and the size of neurospheres in colony-forming
assays. Expression of Hes1 and Hes5 was not increased by overexpression of Id
proteins under the condition in which Nestin expression was increased. In utero
electroporation of Id yielded higher numbers of Ki67-positive and Sox2-positive
cells in the mouse embryonic brain. The study suggests Id proteins play
independent roles in the maintenance of neural stem properties.

PMID: 19757990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Transplant. 2009;18(12):1319-40. doi: 10.3727/096368909X12483162197321. Epub
2009 Aug 5.

Sequential hepatogenic transdifferentiation of adipose tissue-derived stem cells:
relevance of different extracellular signaling molecules, transcription factors
involved, and expression of new key marker genes.

Bonora-Centelles A(1), Jover R, Mirabet V, Lahoz A, Carbonell F, Castell JV,
Gómez-Lechón MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, Centro de Investigación, Hospital La Fe,
Valencia, Spain.

Adipose tissue contains a mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) population known as
adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) capable of differentiating into different cell 
types. Our aim was to induce hepatic transdifferentiation of ASCs by sequential
exposure to several combinations of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. The 
most efficient hepatogenic protocol includes fibroblastic growth factors (FGF) 2 
and 4 and epidermal growth factor (EGF) (step 1), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF),
FGF2, FGF4, and nicotinamide (Nic) (step 2), and oncostatin M (OSM),
dexamethasone (Dex), and insulin-tranferrin-selenium (step 3). This protocol
activated transcription factors [GATA6, Hex, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha
and beta (CEBPalpha and beta), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, 
coactivator 1 alpha (PGC1alpha), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4alpha)], which promoted a characteristic hepatic phenotype, as assessed by
new informative markers for the step-by-step hepatic transdifferentiation of hMSC
[early markers: albumin (ALB), alpha-2-macroglobuline (alpha2M), complement
protein C3 (C3), and selenoprotein P1 (SEPP1); late markers: cytochrome P450 3A4 
(CYP3A4), apolipoprotein E (APOE), acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 1
(ACSL1), and angiotensin II receptor, type 1 (AGTR1)]. The loss of adipose adult 
stem cell phenotype was detected by losing expression of Thy1 and inhibitor of
DNA binding 3 (Id3). The reexpression of phosphoenolpyruvate corboxykinase
(PEPCK), apolipoprotein C3 (APOCIII), aldolase B (ALDOB), and cytochrome P450 1A2
(CYP1A2) was achieved by transduction with a recombinant adenovirus for HNF4alpha
and finally hepatic functionality was also assessed by analyzing specific
biochemical markers. We conclude that ASCs could represent an alternative tool in
clinical therapy for liver dysfunction and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 19660180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Jan;333(1-2):33-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0201-7. Epub
2009 Jul 19.

Interaction of Inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (Id3) with Gut-enriched Krüppel-like
factor (GKLF) and p53 regulates proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells.

Wassmann K(1), Mueller CF, Becher UM, Werner C, Jung A, Zimmer S, Steinmetz M,
Nickenig G, Wassmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Innere Medizin, Universitätsklinikum
Bonn, Sigmund Freud Str. 25, 53105, Bonn, Germany.

Enhanced proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is one of the key 
features of the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. The helix-loop-helix protein
Inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (Id3) contributes to regulation of VSMC proliferation 
in a redox-sensitive manner. We investigated the role of Id3 and its interaction 
with other redox-sensitive genes, the transcription factor Gut-enriched
Krüppel-like factor (GKLF, KLF4) and the tumor suppressor gene p53 in the
regulation of VSMC proliferation. Cultured rat aortic VSMCs were transfected with
Id3 sense and antisense constructs. Overexpression of Id3 significantly enhanced 
VSMC proliferation. Id3 antisense transfection inhibited VSMC proliferation
induced by the physiological stimuli insulin and platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF). Because p53 is essential for the regulation of proliferation processes,
the effect of Id3 on p53 expression was investigated. Id3 overexpression led to
decreased p53 protein expression. Co-transfection of p53 sense constructs
inhibited the enhanced VSMC mitogenicity induced by Id3 sense transfection. GKLF 
overexpression, which causes growth arrest in VSMCs, reduced Id3 promoter
activity and led to decreased Id3 expression. Id3-induced VSMC proliferation was 
abolished by GKLF sense co-transfection. Finally, strong Id3 expression was found
in the neointima of human coronary artery atherosclerotic plaques but not in
healthy coronary arteries. These findings reveal a relevant interaction of GKLF, 
Id3, and p53 for VSMC proliferation which might constitute a general mechanism of
growth control in vascular cells.

PMID: 19618124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Leuk Res. 2010 Apr;34(4):521-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.020. Epub 2009 Jul
15.

Multiple mechanisms induce ectopic expression of LYL1 in subsets of T-ALL cell
lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for lymphocytic
differentiation. Here, we have analyzed the complete bHLH family in T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines by expression profiling. Differential
expression was detected for BHLHB2, HES1, HES4, HEY1, ID1, ID2, ID3, LYL1 and
TAL1, highlighting dysregulation of family members with inhibitory activity.
Subsequently we focused on the mechanisms responsible for aberrant expression of 
LYL1 in comparison to TAL1. Quantitative genomic PCR indicated microdeletions
upstream of both, TAL1 and LYL1, targeting STIL/SIL and TRMT1, respectively.
Additionally, one LYL1-expressing cell line exhibited amplification of TRMT1.
While deletion of STIL correlated with expression of the STIL-TAL1 fusion
transcript, no TRMT-LYL1 fusion transcripts were detected in parallel with
genomic rearrangements thereof. Sequence analysis of the LYL1 promoter region
revealed potential binding sites for transcription factors HOXA10, LMO2 and
NKX2-5. Overexpression analysis, reporter gene assays and chromatin
immuno-precipitation confirmed their activating impact on LYL1 expression. In
conclusion, we identified multiple mechanisms which activate LYL1 in leukemic
cells, including structural genomic alterations, namely microdeletion or
amplification, together with the involvement of prominent oncogenic transcription
factors.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19608273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 15;23(14):1665-76. doi: 10.1101/gad.1793709.

Pre-TCR signaling inactivates Notch1 transcription by antagonizing E2A.

Yashiro-Ohtani Y(1), He Y, Ohtani T, Jones ME, Shestova O, Xu L, Fang TC, Chiang 
MY, Intlekofer AM, Blacklow SC, Zhuang Y, Pear WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Abramson Family Cancer
Research Institute, Institute for Medicine and Engineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Precise control of the timing and magnitude of Notch signaling is essential for
the normal development of many tissues, but the feedback loops that regulate
Notch are poorly understood. Developing T cells provide an excellent context to
address this issue. Notch1 signals initiate T-cell development and increase in
intensity during maturation of early T-cell progenitors (ETP) to the DN3 stage.
As DN3 cells undergo beta-selection, during which cells expressing functionally
rearranged TCRbeta proliferate and differentiate into CD4(+)CD8(+) progeny,
Notch1 signaling is abruptly down-regulated. In this report, we investigate the
mechanisms that control Notch1 expression during thymopoiesis. We show that
Notch1 and E2A directly regulate Notch1 transcription in pre-beta-selected
thymocytes. Following successful beta-selection, pre-TCR signaling rapidly
inhibits Notch1 transcription via signals that up-regulate Id3, an E2A inhibitor.
Consistent with a regulatory role for Id3 in Notch1 down-regulation,
post-beta-selected Id3-deficient thymocytes maintain Notch1 transcription,
whereas enforced Id3 expression decreases Notch1 expression and abrogates
Notch1-dependent T-cell survival. These data provide new insights into Notch1
regulation in T-cell progenitors and reveal a direct link between pre-TCR
signaling and Notch1 expression during thymocyte development. Our findings also
suggest new strategies for inhibiting Notch1 signaling in pathologic conditions.

PMCID: PMC2714710
PMID: 19605688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Dis Aquat Organ. 2009 May 27;85(1):31-40. doi: 10.3354/dao02069.

Phylogenetic analysis of spring viraemia of carp virus isolates from Austria
indicates the existence of at least two subgroups within genogroup Id.

Basic A(1), Schachner O, Bilic I, Hess M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Avian, Reptile and Fish Medicine, Department for Farm Animal and
Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna,
Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria.

Genetic relationships between 22 spring viraemia of carp virus (SVCV) isolates
from Austria collected between 1994 and 2007 were determined based on the partial
nucleotide sequence of the glycoprotein gene (G gene). Phylogenetic analyses
located all Austrian isolates except one in genogroup Id. One isolate collected
in 2007 was placed within the SVCV Ia genogroup. More importantly, the study also
revealed 3 distinct clusters within genogroup Id, designated Id1, Id2 and Id3.
Existence of subgroups Id2 and Id3 within the genogroup Id was supported by high 
bootstrap values. The genetic clustering could neither be linked to host species 
nor to geographic localization of fish farms. Furthermore, no clear link could be
established between the pathological lesions and phylogenetic relationship.
However, time-dependent division of the isolates was observed. Viruses from the
Id1 cluster were mainly sampled in Austria in the 1990s and up until 2003,
whereas all viruses from the Id2 subgroup were isolated after 2003.

PMID: 19593931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;23(3):311-21. doi:
10.1111/j.1472-8206.2009.00673.x.

Actein activates stress- and statin-associated responses and is bioavailable in
Sprague-Dawley rats.

Einbond LS(1), Soffritti M, Esposti DD, Park T, Cruz E, Su T, Wu HA, Wang X,
Zhang YJ, Ham J, Goldberg IJ, Kronenberg F, Vladimirova A.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia Universty College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032,
USA. le2012@columbia.edu

The purpose of this study was to assess in rats the pharmacological parameters
and effects on gene expression in the liver of the triterpene glycoside actein.
Actein, an active component from the herb black cohosh, has been shown to inhibit
the proliferation of human breast cancer cells. To conduct our assessment, we
determined the molecular effects of actein on livers from Sprague-Dawley rats
treated with actein at 35.7 mg/kg for 6 and 24 h. Chemogenomic analyses indicated
that actein elicited stress and statin-associated responses in the liver; actein 
altered expression of cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthetic genes, p53 pathway 
genes, CCND1 and ID3. Real-time RT-PCR validated that actein induced three
time-dependent patterns of gene expression in the liver: (i) a decrease followed 
by a significant increase of HMGCS1, HMGCR, HSD17B7, NQO1, S100A9; (ii) a
progressive increase of BZRP and CYP7A1 and (iii) a significant increase followed
by a decrease of CCND1 and ID3. Consistent with actein's statin- and
stress-associated responses, actein reduced free fatty acid and cholesterol
content in the liver by 0.6-fold at 24 h and inhibited the growth of human HepG2 
liver cancer cells. To determine the bioavailability of actein, we collected
serum samples for pharmacokinetic analysis at various times up to 24 h. The serum
level of actein peaked at 2.4 microg/mL at 6 h. Actein's ability to alter
pathways involved in lipid disorders and carcinogenesis may make it a new agent
for preventing and treating these major disorders.

PMID: 19527300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Surg Res. 2010 Jun 1;161(1):76-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.10.031. Epub 2008
Nov 29.

Id1/Id3 knockdown inhibits metastatic potential of pancreatic cancer.

Shuno Y(1), Tsuno NH, Okaji Y, Tsuchiya T, Sakurai D, Nishikawa T, Yoshikawa N,
Sasaki K, Hongo K, Tsurita G, Sunami E, Kitayama J, Tokunaga K, Takahashi K,
Nagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
shuu@tkg.att.ne.jp

BACKGROUND: The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation) proteins belong to 
the helix-loop-helix transcriptional regulatory factors, and play important roles
in tumor development. Previously, we and others have shown that targeting Id in
tumor cells could have important clinical implications. In the present study, we 
aimed to evaluate the effects of Id inhibition in human pancreatic cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Id1 and Id3 were stably double-knockdown in human
pancreatic cancer cell line MIA-Paca2 by means of RNA interference. Expression of
Id and integrins were analyzed by flow-cytometry. Cell proliferation was
evaluated by MTS assay. Migration was measured by wound closure assay. Adhesion
assay was performed to evaluate binding capacity for different extracellular
matrix proteins. Finally, in vivo properties of tumor cells were observed in a
mouse model of peritoneal metastasis.
RESULTS: Id1/Id3 double-knockdown resulted in decreased ability of pancreatic
cancer cells to proliferate and migrate. In addition, Id1/Id3 double-knockdown
caused decreased expression of integrins alpha3, alpha6, and beta1, and
consequently reduced adhesion of tumor cells to laminin. Finally, peritoneal
metastases of Id1/Id3 double-knockdown tumor cells were significantly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: We concluded that the Id proteins play a pivotal role in the
development of peritoneal metastasis of pancreatic cancer, and consequently,
their targeting would be a novel strategy for the prevention and treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19515385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jun 7;9:173. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-173.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4) is a potential tumor suppressor in prostate 
cancer.

Carey JP(1), Asirvatham AJ, Galm O, Ghogomu TA, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA. j_carey84@msn.com

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4), a member of the Id gene family 
is also a dominant negative regulator of basic helix loop helix (bHLH)
transcription factors. Some of the functions of Id4 appear to be unique as
compared to its other family members Id1, Id2 and Id3. Loss of Id4 gene
expression in many cancers in association with promoter hypermethylation has led 
to the proposal that Id4 may act as a tumor suppressor. In this study we provide 
functional evidence that Id4 indeed acts as a tumor suppressor and is part of a
cancer associated epigenetic re-programming.
METHODS: Data mining was used to demonstrate Id4 expression in prostate cancer.
Methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) analysis was performed to
understand molecular mechanisms associated with Id4 expression in prostate cancer
cell lines. The effect of ectopic Id4 expression in DU145 cells was determined by
cell cycle analysis (3H thymidine incorporation and FACS), expression of androgen
receptor, p53 and cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors p27 and p21 by a combination
of RT-PCR, real time-PCR, western blot and immuno-cytochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Id4 expression was down-regulated in prostate cancer. Id4 expression was
also down-regulated in prostate cancer line DU145 due to promoter
hyper-methylation. Ectopic Id4 expression in DU145 prostate cancer cell line led 
to increased apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation due in part by an S-phase
arrest. In addition to S-phase arrest, ectopic Id4 expression in PC3 cells also
resulted in prolonged G2/M phase. At the molecular level these changes were
associated with increased androgen receptor (AR), p21, p27 and p53 expression in 
DU145 cells.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that Id4 acts directly as a tumor suppressor by
influencing a hierarchy of cellular processes at multiple levels that leads to a 
decreased cell proliferation and change in morphology that is possibly mediated
through induction of previously silenced tumor suppressors.

PMCID: PMC2700118
PMID: 19500415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Endocrinology. 2009 Sep;150(9):4044-55. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1797. Epub 2009 May 
28.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 reactivates G1 checkpoint in SK-N-MC cells via
regulation of p21, inhibitor of differentiation genes (Id1-3), and
epithelium-mesenchyme transition-like events.

Higgins S(1), Wong SH, Richner M, Rowe CL, Newgreen DF, Werther GA, Russo VC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Hormone Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Parkville 3052, Victoria, Australia.

We have recently demonstrated that fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 promotes
neuroblastoma cell differentiation and overrides their mitogenic response to
IGF-I. However, the mechanisms involved are unknown. SK-N-MC cells were cultured 
with FGF-2 (50 ng/ml) and/or IGF-I (100 ng/ml) up to 48 h. Fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis indicated that FGF-2 promotes G1/G0 cell cycle phase
arrest. Gene expression by RT2-PCR and cellular localization showed up-regulation
of p21. We then investigated whether FGF-2-induced differentiation of SK-N-MC
cells (by GAP43 and NeuroD-6 expression) involves epithelium-mesenchyme
transition interconversion. Real-time PCR (RT2-PCR) showed modulation of genes
involved in maintenance of the epithelial phenotype and cell-matrix interactions 
(E-cadherin, Snail-1, MMPs). Zymography confirmed FGF-2 up-regulated MMP2 and
induced MMP9, known to contribute to neuronal differentiation and neurite
extension. Id1-3 expression was determined by RT2-PCR. FGF-2 induced Id2, while
down-regulating Id1 and Id3. FGF-2 induced nuclear accumulation of ID2 protein,
while ID1 and ID3 remained cytoplasmic. RNA interference demonstrated that Id3
regulates differentiation and cell cycle (increased Neuro-D6 and p21 mRNA), while
d Id2 modulates epithelium-mesenchyme transition-like events (increased
E-cadherin mRNA). In conclusion, we have shown for the first time that FGF-2
induces differentiation of neuroblastoma cells via activation of a complex gene
expression program enabling modulation of cell cycle, transcription factors, and 
suppression of the cancer phenotype. The use of RNA interference indicated that
Id-3 is a key regulator of these events, thus pointing to a novel therapeutic
target for this devastating childhood cancer.

PMID: 19477940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Jul;20(14):3170-7. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-12-1185. Epub 2009
May 20.

Id3 is a direct transcriptional target of Pax7 in quiescent satellite cells.

Kumar D(1), Shadrach JL, Wagers AJ, Lassar AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Pax7 is a key regulator of skeletal muscle stem cells and is required along with 
Pax3 to generate skeletal muscle precursors. We have identified a collection of
genes induced by either Pax3 or Pax7 in C2C12 muscle cells. Two notable Pax3/7
targets are the inhibitory helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins inhibitor of DNA
binding (Id) 2 and Id3, both of which are coordinately expressed with Pax7 in
quiescent satellite cells and are induced in quiescent C2C12 myogenic cells after
ectopic expression of either Pax3 or Pax7. Ectopic Pax7 activates expression of a
luciferase reporter driven by the Id3 promoter, and maximal induction of this
reporter requires a conserved Pax7 binding site located upstream of the Id3 gene.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated that Pax7 is bound upstream of the Id3
promoter in quiescent satellite cells. In addition, short hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown of Pax7 expression in cultured satellite cells coordinately decreased
both Id2 and Id3 expression. Together, these findings indicate that Id3 is a
direct transcriptional target for Pax7 in quiescent satellite cells, and they
suggest that Pax7 acts to block premature differentiation of quiescent satellite 
cells by inducing the expression of Id2 and Id3, which in turn may act to block
either the precocious induction of myogenic basic (b)HLH proteins, the activity
of myogenic bHLH proteins, or both.

PMCID: PMC2710837
PMID: 19458195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jun 15;8(12):1964-5. Epub 2009 Jun 2.

Role of E6/E7 onco-proteins of high-risk human papillomaviruses in human
colorectal carcinogenesis.

Ricciardi R(1), Ghabreau L, Yasmeen A, Darnel AD, Akil N, Al Moustafa AE.

Author information: 
(1)Segal Cancer Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer
B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

PMID: 19411835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Immunol. 2009 May 1;182(9):5306-16. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804249.

Id3 restricts the developmental potential of gamma delta lineage during
thymopoiesis.

Ueda-Hayakawa I(1), Mahlios J, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710,
USA.

Most T cell progenitors develop into the alphabeta T cell lineage with the
exception of a small fraction contributing to the gammadelta lineage throughout
postnatal life. T cell progenitors usually commit to the alphabeta lineage upon
the expression of a fully rearranged and functional TCRbeta gene, and most cells 
that fail to produce a functional TCRbeta-chain will die instead of adopting the 
alternative gammadelta T cell fate. What prevents these cells from continuing
TCRgamma rearrangement and adopting the gammadelta T cell fate is not known. In
this study, we show that functional loss of Id3 results in a significant increase
of gammadelta T cell production from progenitor cells undergoing TCRbeta
rearrangement. The enhanced gammadelta T cell development correlated with
increased TCRgamma gene rearrangement involving primarily Vgamma1.1 in Id3
deficient mice. We further show that Id3 deficiency promotes gammadelta T cell
production in a manner independent of TCRbeta-chain expression. Our data
indicates that Id3 suppresses Vgamma1.1 rearrangement and gammadelta lineage
potential among T cell progenitors that have completed TCRbeta gene rearrangement
without producing a functional TCRbeta protein.

PMCID: PMC2688458
PMID: 19380777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Int J Oncol. 2009 May;34(5):1411-5.

Transcriptional regulation of WNT2B based on the balance of Hedgehog, Notch, BMP 
and WNT signals.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

We cloned and characterized human WNT2B in 1996, and then others cloned and
characterized mouse, chicken, and zebrafish WNT2B orthologs. WNT2B is expressed
in several types of human cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer,
breast cancer, head/neck squamous cell carcinoma, cervical cancer and leukemia.
WNT2B is one of canonical WNTs transducing signals through Frizzled (FZD) and
LRP5/LRP6 receptors to beta-catenin-TCF/LEF signaling cascade. Here, refined
integrative genomic analyses on WNT2B orthologs were carried out to elucidate its
transcriptional mechanisms. GLI-, double FOX-, HES/HEY-, bHLH-, and Sp1-binding
sites within mammalian WNT2B promoter were well conserved. Because GLI1, FOXA2,
FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1 and FOXL1 are direct target genes of Hedgehog-GLI2 signaling 
cascade, Hedgehog signals should induce WNT2B upregulation through GLI family
members as well as FOX family members. Notch, BMP and Hedgehog signals inhibit
WNT2B expression via HES/HEY-binding to N-box, whereas BMP and WNT signals
inhibit bHLH transcription factor-induced WNT2B expression via ID1, ID2, ID3,
MSX1 or MSX2. Together these facts indicate that Hedgehog signals and bHLH
transcription factors are involved in WNT2B upregulation, which is counteracted
by BMP, WNT and Notch signals. Mesenchymal BMP induces IHH expression in
gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and then epithelial Hedgehog induces WNT2B and
BMP4 expression in mesenchymal cells. NF-kappaB signals induce SHH upregulation, 
and WNT2B is upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). BMP-IHH and
inflammation-SHH signaling loops are involved in WNT2B up-regulation during
embryogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis, and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19360354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Differentiation. 2009 Jun;77(5):462-72. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2009.02.002. Epub
2009 Apr 5.

Suppression of chondrogenesis by Id helix-loop-helix proteins in murine embryonic
orofacial tissue.

Mukhopadhyay P(1), Rezzoug F, Webb CL, Pisano MM, Greene RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville Birth Defects Center, Department of Molecular
Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University of Louisville, 501 S. Preston
Street, Suite 301, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Inhibitors of differentiation (Id) proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors lacking a DNA-binding domain. Id proteins modulate cell
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation in embryonic/fetal tissue.
Perturbation of any of these processes in cells of the developing orofacial
region results in orofacial anomalies. Chondrogenesis, a process integral to
normal orofacial ontogenesis, is known to be modulated, in part, by Id proteins. 
In the present study, the mRNA and protein expression patterns of Id1, Id2, Id3
and Id4 were examined in developing murine orofacial tissue in vivo, as well as
in murine embryonic maxillary mesenchymal cells in vitro. The functional role of 
Ids during chondrogenesis was also explored in vitro. Results reveal that cells
derived from developing murine orofacial tissue (1) express Id1, Id2, Id3 and Id4
mRNAs and proteins on each of gestational days 12-14, (2) express all four Id
proteins in a developmentally regulated manner, (3) undergo chondrogenesis and
express genes encoding various chondrogenic marker proteins (e.g. Runx2, Type X
collagen, Sox9) when cultured under micromass conditions and (4) can have their
chondrogenic potential regulated via alteration of Id protein function through
overexpression of a basic HLH factor. In summary, results from the current report
reveal for the first time the expression of all four Id proteins in cells derived
from developing murine orofacial tissue, and demonstrate a functional role for
the Ids in regulating the ability of these cells to undergo chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2694226
PMID: 19349107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Sci. 2009 Apr;100(4):617-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01094.x. Epub
2009 Feb 25.

Cellular distributions of molecules with altered expression specific to thyroid
proliferative lesions developing in a rat thyroid carcinogenesis model.

Woo GH(1), Takahashi M, Inoue K, Fujimoto H, Igarashi K, Kanno J, Hirose M,
Nishikawa A, Shibutani M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, National Institute of Health Science, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

To identify differentially regulated molecules related to early and late stages
of tumor promotion in a rat two-stage thyroid carcinogenesis model by an
antithyroid agent, sulfadimethoxine, microarray-based microdissected
lesion-specific gene expression profiling was carried out. Proliferative lesions 
for profiling were divided into two categories: (i) focal follicular cell
hyperplasias (FFCH) and adenomas (Ad) as early lesions; and (ii) carcinomas (Ca) 
as more advanced. In both cases, gene expression was compared with that in
surrounding non-tumor follicular cells. Characteristically, upregulation of cell 
cycle-related genes in FFCH + Ad, downregulation of genes related to tumor
suppression and transcription inhibitors of inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) family 
proteins in Ca, and upregulation of genes related to cell proliferation and tumor
progression in common in FFCH + Ad and Ca, were detected. The immunohistochemical
distributions of molecules included in the altered expression profiles were
further examined. In parallel with microarray data, increased localization of
ceruloplasmin, cyclin B1, and cell division cycle 2 homolog A, and decreased
localization of poliovirus receptor-related 3 and Id3 were observed in all types 
of lesion. Although inconsistent with the microarray data, thyroglobulin
immunoreactivity appeared to reduce in Ca. The results thus suggest cell cycling 
facilitation by induction of M-phase-promoting factor consisting of cyclin B1 and
cell division cycle 2 homolog A and generation of oxidative responses as
evidenced by ceruloplasmin accumulation from an early stage, as well as
suppression of cell adhesion involving poliovirus receptor-related 3 and
inhibition of cellular differentiation regulated by Id3. Decrease of
thyroglobulin in Ca may reflect dedifferentiation with progression.

PMID: 19298605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 May;29(10):2622-35. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01495-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
16.

Analysis of nitric oxide-stabilized mRNAs in human fibroblasts reveals
HuR-dependent heme oxygenase 1 upregulation.

Kuwano Y(1), Rabinovic A, Srikantan S, Gorospe M, Demple B.

Author information: 
(1)RNA Regulation Section, Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, National
Institute on Aging-Intramural Research Program, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

We previously observed that nitric oxide (NO) exposure increases the stability of
mRNAs encoding heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and TIEG-1 in human and mouse fibroblasts.
Here, we have used microarrays to look broadly for changes in mRNA stability in
response to NO treatment. Using human IMR-90 and mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts
treated with actinomycin D to block de novo transcription, microarray analysis
suggested that the stability of the majority of mRNAs was unaffected. Among the
mRNAs that were stabilized by NO treatment, seven transcripts were found in both 
IMR-90 and NIH 3T3 cells (CHIC2, GADD45B, HO-1, PTGS2, RGS2, TIEG, and ID3) and
were chosen for further analysis. All seven mRNAs showed at least one hit of a
signature motif for the stabilizing RNA-binding protein (RBP) HuR; accordingly,
ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that all seven mRNAs
associated with HuR. In keeping with a functional role of HuR in the response to 
NO, a measurable fraction of HuR increased in the cytoplasm following NO
treatment. However, among the seven transcripts, only HO-1 mRNA showed a robust
increase in the level of its association with HuR following NO treatment. In
turn, HO-1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly reduced when HuR levels
were silenced in IMR-90 cells, and they were elevated when HuR was overexpressed.
In sum, our results indicate that NO stabilizes mRNA subsets in fibroblasts,
identify HuR as an RBP implicated in the NO response, reveal that HuR alone is
insufficient for stabilizing several mRNAs by NO, and show that HO-1 induction by
NO is regulated by HuR.

PMCID: PMC2682029
PMID: 19289500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Zoolog Sci. 2008 Nov;25(11):1066-74. doi: 10.2108/zsj.25.1066.

The expression of myogenin, but not of MyoD, is temperature-sensitive in mouse
skeletal muscle cells.

Shima A(1), Matsuda R.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Homothermal animals need to keep their body temperature within a narrow range.
Only a few degrees Celsius change in temperature has a dynamic influence on many 
physiological processes. To investigate the effect of the body temperature on
muscle cell differentiation, we cultured the mouse myoblast cell lines C2C12 and 
Sol8 at lower temperatures than mouse body temperature. At 38 degrees C, the
cells fused into multinucleated myotubes within 4 days after the induction of
differentiation. However, myotube formation was blocked at 30 degrees C, whereas 
it was delayed but relatively normal at 35 degrees C. The myoblasts expressed
MyoD, but not myogenin, at 30 degrees C. Id3, which acts as a negative regulator 
of myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs), was expressed at a higher level at 30
degrees C than at 38 degrees C, whereas the expression level of E2A, which acts
as a positive regulator of MRF expression, exhibited no difference between these 
temperatures. We also found that the expression of muscle-enriched microRNAs
decreased at 30 degrees C. In addition, we investigated the expressions of MyoD
and myogenin during mouse satellite-cell activation in single-fiber culture as an
in-vivo model, and found that the expression of myogenin, but not of MyoD, was
inhibited. These results suggest that skeletal muscle formation can be regulated 
by temperature, and that the physiological body temperature plays a crucial role 
in the myogenesis of homothermal animals.

PMID: 19267618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 15;124(12):2837-44. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24280.

DeltaNp63alpha-dependent expression of Id-3 distinctively suppresses the
invasiveness of human squamous cell carcinoma.

Higashikawa K(1), Yoneda S, Tobiume K, Saitoh M, Taki M, Mitani Y, Shigeishi H,
Ono S, Kamata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Division of
Cervico-Gnathostomatology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. khigashi@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

p63 is a member of the p53 family and DeltaNp63alpha is the dominant-expressing
isoform of p63 in basal layer of normal stratified epithelium and human squamous 
cell carcinoma (SCC) cells. We have previously reported that down-regulation of
p63 was accompanied with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by
Snail-expressing SCC cells, in which re-expression of DeltaNp63alpha diminished
their invasiveness (Higashikawa K, Yoneda S, Tobiume K, Taki M, Shigeishi H,
Kamata N. Snail-induced down-regulation of DeltaNp63alpha acquires invasive
phenotype of human squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Res 2007;67:9207-13). In this 
study, we found that DeltaNp63alpha positively regulated inhibitor of
differentiation-3 (Id-3) expression. Id is a dominant negative regulator of E2A
which is a transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin. Enforced expression of Id-3
was incapable of invoking E-cadherin expression in the SCC cells with EMT
phenotype, whereas it significantly impaired their invasiveness with
down-regulation of matrix-metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) expression. Reporter gene
assay revealed that the Ets-1-induced MMP-2 promoter activity was suppressed by
the Id-3, while the Id-3-dependent E-cadherin promoter activity was remarkably
reduced in the presence of Snail. Furthermore, knockdown of p63 in SCC cells
significantly decreased Id-3 expression, in which up-regulation of MMP-2
expression was concomitant with the acquired invasiveness. These findings propose
a particular role of the off-signaling of the DeltaNp63alpha-Id-3 axis incident
to Snail-mediated EMT for the MMP-2-dependent invasiveness in SCC cells.

Copyright 2008 UICC.

PMID: 19267405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Curr Biol. 2009 Feb 24;19(4):297-304. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.12.052. Epub 2009
Feb 12.

A role for Id2 in regulating photic entrainment of the mammalian circadian
system.

Duffield GE(1), Watson NP, Mantani A, Peirson SN, Robles-Murguia M, Loros JJ,
Israel MA, Dunlap JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
duffield.2@nd.edu

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2009 Apr 14;19(7):R298-300.

Inhibitor of DNA binding genes (Id1-Id4) encode helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcriptional repressors associated with development and tumorigenesis [1, 2], 
but little is known concerning the function(s) of these genes in normal adult
animals. Id2 was identified in DNA microarray screens for rhythmically expressed 
genes [3-5], and further analysis revealed a circadian pattern of expression of
all four Id genes in multiple tissues including the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To
explore an in vivo function, we generated and characterized deletion mutations of
Id2 and of Id4. Id2(-/-) mice exhibit abnormally rapid entrainment and an
increase in the magnitude of the phase shift of the pacemaker. A significant
proportion of mice also exhibit disrupted rhythms when maintained under constant 
darkness. Conversely, Id4(-/-) mice did not exhibit a noticeable circadian
phenotype. In vitro studies using an mPer1 and an AVP promoter reporter revealed 
the potential for ID1, ID2, and ID3 proteins to interact with the canonical basic
HLH clock proteins BMAL1 and CLOCK. These data suggest that the Id genes may be
important for entrainment and operation of the mammalian circadian system,
potentially acting through BMAL1 and CLOCK targets.

PMCID: PMC2648875
PMID: 19217292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2008 Dec;30(6):703-10.

[Relationship between the effect of vascular endothelial growth factor on
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of HK-2 cells and the expressions of bone
morphogenetic protein-7 and inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

He CM(1), Zheng FL, Lian YG, Liu YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, PUMC Hospital, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between effect of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) on epithelial-myofibroblast transition (EMT) of HK-2 cells
and changes in expressions of bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7) and inhibitor 
of DNA binding/differentiation (Id) 2, Id3.
METHODS: The cultured HK-2 cells were co-treated with transforming growth
factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) (5 ng/ml) and VEGF165 (0.1, 1, 10, 100 ng/ml), or with
TGF-beta1 (5 ng/ml) and VEGF receptor-1 neutralized antibody (10 microg/ ml), and
were also co-treated with TGF-beta1 (5 ng/ml) and VEGF165 (100 ng/ml) with or
without activin receptor-like kinase 6 (Alk6)/Fc Chimera (2 microg/ml, to
neutralize endogenous BMP-7) for 48 hours. mRNA and protein expressions of
alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), E-cadherin, BMP-7, Id2 and Id3 of HK-2
cells were assessed with double-stain immunocytochemistry, real-time PCR and
Western blot respectively.
RESULTS: Compared with normal controls, alpha-SMA expression significantly
increased, while E-cadherin, BMP-7, Id2, and Id3 mRNA and protein expressions
markedly decreased in HK-2 cells treated with TGF-beta1 (5 ng/ml) (P < 0.05).
VEGF165 interrupted TGF-beta1 induced alpha-SMA expression in a dose-dependent
manner and upregulated BMP-7, Id2 mRNA and protein expressions of the cells (P < 
0.05). alpha-SMA expression increased, while E-cadherin, BMP-7, and Id2
expressions decreased further in HK-2 cells co-treated with TGF-beta1 and VEGFR1 
antibody compared with normal controls (P < 0.05). When endogenous BMP-7 was
neutralized with Alk6/Fc Chimera in the cells co-treated with TGF-beta1 and
VEGF165, alpha-SMA expression upregulated (P < 0.05), while Id2 was not changed.
CONCLUSIONS: VEGF165 may partially inhibit TGF-beta1-induced EMT of HK-2 cells in
vitro. This effect is related to the upregulated expressions of BMP-7 and Id2.
Id2 may be upregulated directly by VEGF165, but not related to BMP-7.

PMID: 19180920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2008;2008:1206-9. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649379.

Image processing system for ultrasound images of the eye.

Shaw ML(1), Hannoon H, Youmaran R, Adler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ontario, 
Canada.

Closed Angle Glaucoma causes an increase in fluid pressure in the eye due to
decreased fluid flow between the iris and the cornea. To diagnose Glaucoma,
ultrasound images of the eye are taken and a technician studies the images and
takes measurements. This process is time consuming, and results vary among
technicians. In a previous paper, we developed an image processing algorithm to
extract several key landmark features in the iris. In this paper, we extend this 
algorithm to calculate the complete set of diagnostic parameters from ultrasound 
biomicroscopy. A robust algorithm is described to calculate the parameters which 
describe the thickness of iris; ID1, ID2, and ID3. The method is tested on 89
clinical images and compared to the values identified by the technician. Results 
indicate good agreement in 97% of cases.

PMID: 19162882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2009 May;29(3):423-38. doi: 10.1007/s10571-008-9338-2. Epub
2009 Jan 7.

Gene expression profiling of human neural progenitor cells following the
serum-induced astrocyte differentiation.

Obayashi S(1), Tabunoki H, Kim SU, Satoh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8588, Japan.

Neural stem cells (NSC) with self-renewal and multipotent properties could
provide an ideal cell source for transplantation to treat spinal cord injury,
stroke, and neurodegenerative diseases. However, the majority of transplanted NSC
and neural progenitor cells (NPC) differentiate into astrocytes in vivo under
pathological environments in the central nervous system, which potentially cause 
reactive gliosis. Because the serum is a potent inducer of astrocyte
differentiation of rodent NPC in culture, we studied the effect of the serum on
gene expression profile of cultured human NPC to identify the gene signature of
astrocyte differentiation of human NPC. Human NPC spheres maintained in the
serum-free culture medium were exposed to 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 72 h, 
and processed for analyzing on a Whole Human Genome Microarray of 41,000 genes,
and the microarray data were validated by real-time RT-PCR. The serum elevated
the levels of expression of 45 genes, including ID1, ID2, ID3, CTGF, TGFA, METRN,
GFAP, CRYAB and CSPG3, whereas it reduced the expression of 23 genes, such as
DLL1, DLL3, PDGFRA, SOX4, CSPG4, GAS1 and HES5. Thus, the serum-induced astrocyte
differentiation of human NPC is characterized by a counteraction of ID family
genes on Delta family genes. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified ID1 as a
direct binding partner of a proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor MASH1. Luciferase assay indicated that activation of the DLL1 promoter by 
MASH1 was counteracted by ID1. Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) elevated the
levels of ID1 and GFAP expression in NPC under the serum-free culture conditions.
Because the serum contains BMP4, these results suggest that the serum factor(s), 
most probably BMP4, induces astrocyte differentiation by upregulating the
expression of ID family genes that repress the proneural bHLH protein-mediated
Delta expression in human NPC.

PMID: 19130216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jan 13;106(2):552-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0802550106.
Epub 2009 Jan 2.

Ebf1-mediated down-regulation of Id2 and Id3 is essential for specification of
the B cell lineage.

Thal MA(1), Carvalho TL, He T, Kim HG, Gao H, Hagman J, Klug CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Alabama-Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL 35294, USA.

Gene knockout experiments in mice have suggested a hierarchical model of early B 
cell commitment wherein E2A proteins (E47 and E12) activate early B cell factor
(Ebf1), which in turn activates expression of the B cell commitment factor, Pax5.
In IL-7 receptor alpha (IL-7Ralpha) knockout mice, B cell development is blocked 
before B-lineage commitment at the prepro-B cell stage in adult animals. In
IL-7Ralpha(-/-) prepro-B cells, E47 is expressed and yet is insufficient to
transcriptionally activate the putative downstream target gene, Ebf1. In this
study, we show that further increases of E47 expression in IL-7Ralpha(-/-)
prepro-B cells fails to activate Ebf1, but rather leads to a dramatic induction
of the E2A inhibitory factors, Id2 and Id3. In contrast, enforced expression of
Ebf1 in IL-7Ralpha(-/-) bone marrow potently down-regulates Id2 and Id3 mRNA
expression and restores B cell differentiation in vivo. Down-regulation of both
Id2 and Id3 during B cell specification is essential in that overexpression of
either Id2 or Id3 in wild-type bone marrow blocks B cell specification at the
prepro-B cell stage. Collectively, these studies suggest a model where Ebf1
induction specifies the B cell fate by dramatically increasing activity of E47 at
the posttranslational level.

PMCID: PMC2626741
PMID: 19122139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. PLoS One. 2008;3(12):e4007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004007. Epub 2008 Dec 23.

Enforced expression of the transcriptional coactivator OBF1 impairs B cell
differentiation at the earliest stage of development.

Bordon A(1), Bosco N, Du Roure C, Bartholdy B, Kohler H, Matthias G, Rolink AG,
Matthias P.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Novartis Research
Foundation, Basel, Switzerland.

OBF1, also known as Bob.1 or OCA-B, is a B lymphocyte-specific transcription
factor which coactivates Oct1 and Oct2 on B cell specific promoters. So far, the 
function of OBF1 has been mainly identified in late stage B cell populations. The
central defect of OBF1 deficient mice is a severely reduced immune response to T 
cell-dependent antigens and a lack of germinal center formation in the spleen.
Relatively little is known about a potential function of OBF1 in developing B
cells. Here we have generated transgenic mice overexpressing OBF1 in B cells
under the control of the immunoglobulin heavy chain promoter and enhancer.
Surprisingly, these mice have greatly reduced numbers of follicular B cells in
the periphery and have a compromised immune response. Furthermore, B cell
differentiation is impaired at an early stage in the bone marrow: a first block
is observed during B cell commitment and a second differentiation block is seen
at the large preB2 cell stage. The cells that succeed to escape the block and to 
differentiate into mature B cells have post-translationally downregulated the
expression of transgene, indicating that expression of OBF1 beyond the normal
level early in B cell development is deleterious. Transcriptome analysis
identified genes deregulated in these mice and Id2 and Id3, two known negative
regulators of B cell differentiation, were found to be upregulated in the EPLM
and preB cells of the transgenic mice. Furthermore, the Id2 and Id3 promoters
contain octamer-like sites, to which OBF1 can bind. These results provide
evidence that tight regulation of OBF1 expression in early B cells is essential
to allow efficient B lymphocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2603323
PMID: 19104664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Nov;47(11):901-5.

[The effects of mycophenolate mofetil on renal interstitial fibrosis and
epithelial-myofibroblast translation in adenine-induced renal failure rats].

[Article in Chinese]

He CM(1), Zheng FL, Liu YP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union
Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to examine the effect of mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) on epithelial-myofibroblast translation (EMT) in adenine-induced
chronic renal failure (CRF) rat model and the role of vascular endothelial growth
factor(VEGF) and inhibitor of differentiation (Id2 and Id3) in EMT in the rat
kidney.
METHODS: Sixty-four male Wistar rats were randomly assigned to the following
groups: normal control (n = 16), CRF (n = 24) and MMF(n = 24). CRF was induced by
gastric gavage of adenine (125 mg kg(-1) d(-1)) to rats for eight weeks. CRF rats
were treated with MMF (15 mg kg(-1) d(-1)) as "MMF" group. The rats were
sacrificed at week 2, 4, 6 and 8, respectively. Urinary protein and serum
creatinine levels were measured, and the histopathologic degrees of interstitial 
fibrosis were evaluated in Masson-stained sections. Expressions of alpha-smooth
muscle actin (alpha-SMA), transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1), VEGF and
Id (Id2 and Id3) in the kidney tissue were assessed by immunohistochemistry,
RT-PCR and/or Western blot methods.
RESULTS: The urinary protein level in MMF group was evidently lower than that in 
CRF group (P < 0.01), whereas no statistically significant difference was
observed in serum creatinine level between the two groups. Renal interstitial
fibrosis was reduced significantly with MMF treatment (P < 0.01). Expression of
alpha-SMA in MMF group was lower than that in CRF rats at week 6, 8 (P < 0.01),
while expression of TGFbeta1 was decreased markedly at week 2, 4, 6 (P < 0.01).
The expressions of VEGF in MMF rats were increased significantly at week 6, 8 (P 
< 0.01), and Id2, Id3 in MMF rats were increased significantly at week 4, 6 (P < 
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: MMF may ameliorate chronic renal fibrosis and EMT in adenine-induced
CRF rats. This effect of MMF on EMT is probably related to upregulation of VEGF, 
Id2 and Id3 expressions and suppressing overexpression of TGFbeta1 in renal
tissue. The exact mechanism needs to be studied further.

PMID: 19080229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2009 Sep 1;163(1-2):12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2008.11.012. 
Epub 2008 Nov 27.

Dynamics of avian ovarian follicle development: cellular mechanisms of granulosa 
cell differentiation.

Johnson AL(1), Woods DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Notre Dame, P.O. Box 369,
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. johnson.128@nd.edu

In vertebrate species that ovulate one or a limited number of ovarian follicles
per reproductive cycle, the cellular processes by which follicle selection
(cyclic recruitment) is mediated and final differentiation is initiated remain
largely unknown. In the hen ovary, the selection of a single follicle into the
preovulatory hierarchy on an approximate daily basis occurs from a small cohort
of prehierarchal follicles measuring approximately 6- to 8-mm in diameter. Given 
that the granulosa layer undergoes a dramatic alteration in phenotype subsequent 
to follicle selection, of particular interest are the cell signaling and
associated transcriptional mechanisms that regulate this transition. Recent
studies suggest that granulosa cells from prehierarchal follicles are normally
maintained in an undifferentiated state by inhibitory MAP kinase (MAPK) signaling
mediated by epidermal growth factor receptor ligands (EGFRLs). One of the
earliest markers for differentiating granulosa cells is elevated expression of
FSH receptor (fshr) mRNA and enhanced FSH-induced cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) production. EGFRL/MAPK signaling is proposed to inhibit fshr transcription
via its ability to induce Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding (Id) protein
isoforms, Id1, Id3 and Id4. Subsequent to follicle selection, cAMP-induced Id2
expression is considered both sufficient and necessary for fshr transcription.
Two working models are proposed which predict that enhanced FSHR expression and
the progression of granulosa cell differentiation occurs as a result of a decline
in MAPK signaling from within granulosa cells (internal model for
differentiation) and/or elevated cAMP signaling promoted by an endocrine,
neuroendocrine or neuronal factor (external model).

PMID: 19059411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Exp Dermatol. 2009 Apr;18(4):387-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2008.00801.x. Epub 
2008 Oct 23.

UVB upregulates the bax promoter in immortalized human keratinocytes via ROS
induction of Id3.

Trabosh VA(1), Daher A, Divito KA, Amin K, Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Id3 belongs to the inhibitor of differentiation family of helix-loop-helix
transcription factors, important in proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis.
We showed that Id3, but not Id2 or Id1, mediates the UVB-sensitization of
immortalized keratinocytes by inducing caspase 9-dependent apoptosis. In this
study, quantitative PCR analysis revealed a time-dependent increase in Id3 mRNA
induced by UVB, dependent on reactive oxygen species. UVB upregulated promoter
activity of Id3, but not Id2, at early time points, as shown by reporter assays
and also stabilized Id3 mRNA, increasing its half-life from 10 to approximately
60 min. We next examined downstream events related to UVB-induced Id3
upregulation and investigated the effects of UVB or ectopic expression of Id3 on 
bax promoter activity. Regulatory elements in the bax promoter that mediate
transcriptional activation by UVB and Id3, in the absence of p53, were
identified. Bax promoter deletion analysis revealed that transcriptional
activation by UVB involves a 738-bp region upstream from the transcription start 
site of bax. Mimicking the effects of UVB, ectopic expression of Id3 also
upregulated bax mRNA and activated this 738-bp fragment. Mutational analysis of
the transcription binding sites further showed that point mutations of the E-box 
region found in the 738-bp fragment, but not in a 174-bp fragment, completely
abolished Id3- and UVB-inducible bax promoter activity, thus confirming the
importance of Id3 and UVB-mediated Id3 upregulation in activating the bax
promoter. These results suggest a mechanism whereby reactive oxygen species
upregulation of Id3 relieves repression of bax via E-box-binding factors.

PMCID: PMC2759318
PMID: 19054058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Periodontol. 2008 Dec;79(12):2361-70. doi: 10.1902/jop.2008.070577 .

Humoral factors released from human periodontal ligament cells influence
calcification and proliferation in human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

Mizuno N(1), Ozeki Y, Shiba H, Kajiya M, Nagahara T, Takeda K, Kawaguchi H, Abiko
Y, Kurihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontal Medicine, Division of Frontier Medical Science,
Hiroshima University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Kasumi, Hiroshima,
Japan. mizuno@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Transplantation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is
believed to be a new modality for periodontal tissue regeneration. However,
little is known about the factors that influence the functions of the
transplanted MSCs. Periodontal ligament cells may be implicated in regulating MSC
functions.
METHODS: To examine the effect of humoral factors (HFs) produced by human
periodontal ligament (HPL) cells on human MSC (hMSC) gene expression, hMSCs were 
cocultured separately with HPL cells. The gene expression of the hMSCs was
analyzed by microarray. Moreover, the effect of conditioned medium (CM) from
cultures of HPL cells (CM-HPL cells) on the proliferation and mineralizing
capacity of hMSCs was examined.
RESULTS: Thirty-five genes whose expressions were upregulated more than two-fold 
and 32 genes whose expressions were downregulated more than two-fold were
identified in hMSCs cocultured separately with HPL cells. CM-HPL cells prevented 
calcification in hMSCs cultured with bone morphogenetic protein-2 but not
dexamethasone. CM-HPL cells stimulated cell proliferation in hMSCs, whereas CM
from culture of human osteoblasts did not influence the proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on the global 
gene expression of MSCs cocultured with periodontal ligament cells. A particular 
humoral factor released from periodontal ligament cells is suggested to affect
differentiation and proliferation in MSCs.

PMID: 19053928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1435-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808080200. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

TGF-beta induces growth arrest in Burkitt lymphoma cells via transcriptional
repression of E2F-1.

Spender LC(1), Inman GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Growth Factor Signalling Laboratory, The Beatson Institute for Cancer
Research, Garscube Estate, Switchback Road, Bearsden, Glasgow, G61 1BD, United
Kingdom.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a potent regulator of tissue
homeostasis and can act as both a tumor suppressor and a tumor promoter. The
ability to induce cell cycle arrest is a major component of the tumor suppressor 
function of TGF-beta. Lung, mammary, and skin epithelial cells exhibit a common
minimal cytostatic program in response to TGF-beta signaling involving the
repression of the growth-promoting factors c-MYC, Id1, Id2, and Id3. Loss of
c-MYC expression is a pivotal event in this process, resulting in derepression of
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors CDKN1A (p21) and CDKN2B (p15) and
ultimately leading to growth arrest. It is not clear, however, which responses
are necessary for TGF-beta-mediated growth arrest in other cell types. Here, in
human Burkitt lymphoma cells transformed by deregulated c-MYC expression, we
demonstrate that efficient TGF-beta-induced cytostasis can occur despite both
maintenance of c-MYC levels and a lack of p21 and p15 induction. TGF-beta
treatment also results in induction, rather than repression, of Id1 and Id2
expression. In this context, growth arrest correlates with transcriptional
repression of E2F-1, and overexpression of E2F-1 in Burkitt lymphoma cells
largely overcomes the TGF-beta-mediated G(1) arrest phenotype. These data
indicate that deregulation of c-MYC in lymphoma cells does not overcome the tumor
suppressor function of TGF-beta and that repression of E2F-1 transcription is
sufficient for the efficient induction of cytostasis.

PMID: 19022773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Br J Cancer. 2008 Dec 2;99(11):1832-41. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604763. Epub 2008
Nov 11.

Gamma-tocotrienol suppresses prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasion
through multiple-signalling pathways.

Yap WN(1), Chang PN, Han HY, Lee DT, Ling MT, Wong YC, Yap YL.

Author information: 
(1)Davos Life Science Pte. Ltd., Cancer Research Laboratory, 11 Biopolis way,
#07-03, The Helios 138667, Singapore.

Tocotrienol-rich fraction (TRF) has demonstrated antiproliferative effect on
prostate cancer (PCa) cells. To elucidate this anticancer property in PCa cells, 
this study aimed, first, to identify the most potent isomer for eliminating PCa
cells; and second, to decipher the molecular pathway responsible for its
activity. Results showed that the inhibitory effect of gamma-tocotrienol was most
potent, which resulted in induction of apoptosis as evidenced by activation of
pro-caspases and the presence of sub-G(1) cell population. Examination of the
pro-survival genes revealed that the gamma-tocotrienol-induced cell death was
associated with suppression of NF-kappaB, EGF-R and Id family proteins (Id1 and
Id3). Meanwhile, gamma-tocotrienol treatment also resulted in the induction of
JNK-signalling pathway and inhibition of JNK activity by a specific inhibitor
(SP600125) was able to partially block the effect of gamma-tocotrienol.
Interestingly, gamma-tocotrienol treatment led to suppression of mesenchymal
markers and the restoration of E-cadherin and gamma-catenin expression, which was
associated with suppression of cell invasion capability. Furthermore, a
synergistic effect was observed when cells were co-treated with gamma-tocotrienol
and Docetaxel. Our results suggested that the antiproliferative effect of
gamma-tocotrienol act through multiple-signalling pathways, and demonstrated for 
the first time the anti-invasion and chemosensitisation effect of
gamma-tocotrienol against PCa cells.

PMCID: PMC2600692
PMID: 19002171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 5;377(1):29-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.09.071. Epub 2008 Sep 25.

RFamide neuropeptides inhibit murine and human adipose differentiation.

Herrera-Herrera ML(1), Salazar-Olivo LA.

Author information: 
(1)División de Biología Molecular, Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica
y Tecnológica, San Luis Potosí, México.

RFamide neuropeptides NPFF and NPAF affect gene expression in mature 3T3-L1
adipocytes but their role on adipogenesis is unknown. Here, we show that NPFF,
NPAF, and NPSF inhibited the differentiation of 3T3-F442A preadipocytes in a
concentration-dependent manner, but had no effect on 3T3-L1 adipogenesis. All
three neuropeptides also blocked the adipose differentiation of normal and
lipoma-derived human preadipocytes. The antiadipogenic effect of RFamide
neuropeptides was linked with the overexpression of Id3 gene and the inhibition
by NPAF remained after neuropeptide removal and further incubation of 3T3 cells
with adipogenic medium. Our results show that NPFF, NPAF and NPSF negatively
affect adipogenesis and suggest that these compounds participate in the
regulation of the adipose tissue development by the central nervous system.

PMID: 18823948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Circ Res. 2008 Sep 12;103(6):565-7. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.184366.

Id3, E47, and SREBP-1c: fat factors controlling adiponectin expression.

Rahmouni K, Sigmund CD.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2008 Sep 12;103(6):624-34.

PMCID: PMC2728444
PMID: 18796641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2389-400. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838470.

Development of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells depends on the combined action 
of the basic helix-loop-helix factor E2-2 and the Ets factor Spi-B.

Nagasawa M(1), Schmidlin H, Hazekamp MG, Schotte R, Blom B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Sep;38(9):2386-8.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are central players in the innate and adaptive
immune response against viral infections. The molecular mechanism that underlies 
pDC development from progenitor cells is only beginning to be elucidated.
Previously, we reported that the Ets factor Spi-B and the inhibitors of DNA
binding protein 2 (Id2) or Id3, which antagonize E-protein activity, are
crucially involved in promoting or impairing pDC development, respectively. Here 
we show that the basic helix-loop-helix protein E2-2 is predominantly expressed
in pDC, but not in their progenitor cells or conventional DC. Forced expression
of E2-2 in progenitor cells stimulated pDC development. Conversely, inhibition of
E2-2 expression by RNA interference impaired the generation of pDC suggesting a
key role of E2-2 in development of these cells. Notably, Spi-B was unable to
overcome the Id2 enforced block in pDC development and moreover Spi-B transduced 
pDC expressed reduced Id2 levels. This might indicate that Spi-B contributes to
pDC development by promoting E2-2 activity. Consistent with notion, simultaneous 
overexpression of E2-2 and Spi-B in progenitor cells further stimulated pDC
development. Together our results provide additional insight into the
transcriptional network controlling pDC development as evidenced by the joint
venture of E2-2 and Spi-B.

PMID: 18792017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Dec;151(4):361-72. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2008.08.009. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Selenoproteins and maternal nutrition.

Pappas AC(1), Zoidis E, Surai PF, Zervas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Physiology and Feeding, Faculty of Animal Science
and Aquaculture, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
apappas@aua.gr

Selenium (Se) is an essential trace element of fundamental importance to health
due to its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and chemopreventive properties
attributed to its presence within at least 25 selenoproteins (Sel). Sel include
but not limited to glutathione peroxidases (GPx1-GPx6), thioredoxin reductases
(TrxR1-TrxR3), iodothyronine deiodinases (ID1-ID3), selenophosphate synthetase 2 
(SPS2), 15-kDa Sel (Sel15), SelH, SelI, SelK, SelM, SelN, SelO, SelP, SelR, SelS,
SelT, SelV, SelW, as well as the 15-kDa Sel (Fep15), SelJ and SelU found in fish.
In this review, we describe some of the recent progress in our understanding of
the mechanisms of Sel synthesis. The impact of maternal Se intake on offspring is
also discussed. The key regulatory point of Sel synthesis is Se itself, which
acts predominantly at post-transcriptional levels, although recent findings
indicate transcriptional and redox regulation. Maternal nutrition affects the
performance and health of the progeny. Both maternal and offspring Se
supplementations are essential for the antioxidant protection of the offspring.
Prenatal Se supplementation provides an effective antioxidant system that is
already in place at the time of birth while, postnatal Se supplementation becomes
the main determinant of progeny Se status after the first few days of progeny
life.

PMID: 18790070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2008 Apr 10;1(6):510-7.

Differential expression of multiple genes in association with MADH4/DPC4/SMAD4
inactivation in pancreatic cancer.

Cao D(1), Ashfaq R, Goggins MG, Hruban RH, Kern SE, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
The Johns Hopkins Hospital Baltimore, MD, USA.

The Gene Logic Inc. Gene Express(R) tools and Affymetrix GeneChip(R) arrays were 
utilized to discover genes differentially expressed in pancreatic cancers with
MADH4/DPC4/SMAD4 gene inactivation. cDNA was prepared from thirteen pancreas
cancer cell lines with known MADH4 status (5 with wild-type MADH4 and 8 with
inactivated MADH4) and hybridized to the complete Affymetrix Human Genome U133
GeneChip(R) set (arrays U133 A,B) for simultaneous analysis of 45,000 gene
fragments corresponding to 33,000 known genes. 25 known genes were identified as 
down-regulated at least three fold in the MADH4 mutant cancer cell lines. 9 were 
decreased in expression at least 5 fold, and 1 in particular (ID3) was decreased 
23 fold. Only 2 of the 25 down-regulated genes (ID1 and ID3) have been previously
reported as MADH4-dependent targets, and the remaining 23 genes represent
potential novel direct or indirect MADH4 downstream targets. Immunolabeling for
Id1 and Id3 did not show a relationship with known MADH4 status in pancreatic
cancer tissues, suggesting additional regulation of these two genes than
activation by MadH4. Further investigations to validate and to determine the
significance of these candidate target genes in pancreatic carcinogenesis and
progression are warranted.

PMCID: PMC2480582
PMID: 18787631  [PubMed]


308. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):355-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.08.003. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

Hairy2-Id3 interactions play an essential role in Xenopus neural crest progenitor
specification.

Nichane M(1), de Crozé N, Ren X, Souopgui J, Monsoro-Burq AH, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut
de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), Gosselies, Belgium.

Loss of function studies have shown that the Xenopus helix-loop-helix
transcription factor Hairy2 is essential for neural crest formation and maintains
cells in a mitotic undifferentiated state. However, its position in the genetic
cascade regulating neural crest formation and its relationship with other neural 
crest regulators remain largely unknown. Here we find that Hairy2 is regulated by
BMP, FGF and Wnt and that it is only required downstream of BMP and FGF for
neural crest formation. We show that Hairy2 overexpression represses neural crest
and upregulates neural border genes at early stages while it expands a subset of 
them in later embryos. We show that Hairy2 downregulates Id3, another essential
HLH neural crest regulator, through attenuation of BMP signaling. Knockdown and
rescue experiments indicate that Id3 protein, which physically interacts with
Hairy2, negatively regulates Hairy2 activity. However, Id3 is required to allow
Hairy2 to promote neural crest formation. Together, our results provide evidence 
that Hairy2 acts downstream of FGF and BMP signals at the neural border to
maintain cells in an undifferentiated state, and that Hairy2-Id3 interactions
play an essential role in neural crest progenitor specification.

PMID: 18721802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):368-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.026. Epub 2008 
Jul 30.

Hairy2 functions through both DNA-binding and non DNA-binding mechanisms at the
neural plate border in Xenopus.

Nichane M(1), Ren X, Souopgui J, Bellefroid EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Institut
de Biologie et de Médecine Moléculaires (IBMM), Gosselies, Belgium.

The Xenopus helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hairy2 is essential for neural 
crest progenitor survival and maintains cells in a mitotic undifferentiated
pre-neural crest state. However, its mode of action remains largely unknown. Here
we show that a Hairy2 DNA-binding mutant is unable to promote cell survival and
to upregulate the expression of early neural border genes but is capable to
increase cell proliferation and to expand NC in late embryos. We found that
Hairy2 transiently activates in a DNA-binding independent manner the expression
of the Notch ligand Delta1 and that Delta1 is required for Hairy2 to promote cell
proliferation and to expand NC. Finally, we provide evidence that Hairy2 induces 
Delta1 through the transcription factor Stat3. Together, these results suggest
that Hairy2 has a dual mode of action and may function at the neural plate border
through both a DNA-binding and a non-DNA-binding Stat3-Delta1 mediated mechanism.

PMID: 18710660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Circ Res. 2008 Sep 12;103(6):624-34. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.175893. Epub
2008 Jul 31.

The helix-loop-helix factors Id3 and E47 are novel regulators of adiponectin.

Doran AC(1), Meller N, Cutchins A, Deliri H, Slayton RP, Oldham SN, Kim JB,
Keller SR, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center/Cardiovascular Division, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Sep 12;103(6):565-7.

Adiponectin is an adipocyte-derived cytokine with beneficial effects on insulin
sensitivity and the development of atherosclerosis. Id3 is a helix-loop-helix
factor that binds to E-proteins such as E47 and inhibits their binding to DNA.
Although the helix-loop-helix factor sterol regulatory element binding protein
(SREBP)-1c is a known activator of adiponectin transcription, this study provides
the first evidence of a role for Id3 and E47 in adiponectin expression. Decreased
Id3 in differentiating adipocytes correlates with increased adiponectin
expression and forced expression of Id3 inhibits adiponectin expression.
Moreover, Id3-null mice have increased adiponectin expression in visceral fat
tissue and in serum. We demonstrate that E47 potentiates SREBP-1c-mediated
adiponectin promoter activation and that Id3 can dose-dependently inhibit this
action via interaction with E47. Mutation of a consensus E47 binding site results
in nearly complete loss of promoter activation. Furthermore, we demonstrate E47
binding to the endogenous adiponectin promoter both in vitro and in vivo by
chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis. Binding is not detected in
undifferentiated cells which express Id3 but peaks during differentiation in
parallel with Id3 decline. This promoter binding can be completely abolished by
the overexpression of Id3 and is enhanced in adipose tissue null for Id3. These
data establish Id3 and E47 as novel regulators of SREBP-1c-mediated adiponectin
expression in differentiating adipocytes and provide evidence that Id3 regulates 
adiponectin expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2746666
PMID: 18669923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 1;105(2):487-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21844.

Intricate gene regulatory networks of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins support
regulation of bone-tissue related genes during osteoblast differentiation.

Zhang Y(1), Hassan MQ, Li ZY, Stein JL, Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are key regulators of neurogenesis, 
myogenesis and osteogenesis. Here the relative contributions of multiple classes 
of HLH factors to the expression of bone related genes during osteoblast
maturation were compared. We examined the expression of a panel of HLH proteins
(e.g., Twist1/2, USF1/2, c-Myc, Id1 approximately 4, E12/47, Stra13) and one Zn
finger protein (Snail which recognizes a subset of E-boxes), during osteoblast
differentiation and their functional contributions to bone phenotypic gene
regulation. While expression of Twist1, Stra13, E12/47 and Snail transcripts
remains relatively constant, expression of Twist2 as well as the inhibitory
factors Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 decreases and USF1 is up-regulated during
osteoblastic differentiation of MC3T3 cells. Forced expression of selected HLH
transcription factors shows that Myc, Snail and USF factors increase expression
of the bone markers osteocalcin (OC) and/or alkaline phosphatase (AP), while
E12/47, Twist and Id factors decrease their expression. None of these factors
affect Runx2 gene expression. Interestingly, Snail enhances expression of
osteoblast markers, while Twist1 and Twist2 factors are cross-regulated and
inhibit bone specific gene expression and other HLH proteins (e.g., Id)
indirectly. Thus, our data suggest that the integrated activities of negative and
positive E-box related regulatory factors control osteoblast differentiation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2612593
PMID: 18655182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Blood. 2008 Aug 15;112(4):1068-77. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-133504. Epub 2008
Jun 3.

Id2 intrinsically regulates lymphoid and erythroid development via interaction
with different target proteins.

Ji M(1), Li H, Suh HC, Klarmann KD, Yokota Y, Keller JR.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Inhibitors of DNA binding (Id) family members are key regulators of cellular
differentiation and proliferation. These activities are related to the ability of
Id proteins to antagonize E proteins and other transcription factors. As negative
regulators of E proteins, Id proteins have been implicated in lymphocyte
development. Overexpression of Id1, Id2, or Id3 has similar effects on lymphocyte
development. However, which Id protein plays a physiologic role during lymphocyte
development is not clear. By analyzing Id2 knock-out mice and retroviral
transduced hematopoietic progenitors, we demonstrated that Id2 is an intrinsic
negative regulator of B-cell development. Hematopoietic progenitor cells
overexpressing Id2 did not reconstitute B-cell development in vivo, which
resembled the phenotype of E2A null mice. The B-cell population in bone marrow
was significantly expanded in Id2 knock-out mice compared with their wild-type
littermates. Knock-down of Id2 by shRNA in hematopoietic progenitor cells
promoted B-cell differentiation and induced the expression of B-cell
lineage-specific genes. These data identified Id2 as a physiologically relevant
regulator of E2A during B lymphopoiesis. Furthermore, we identified a novel Id2
function in erythroid development. Overexpression of Id2 enhanced erythroid
development, and decreased level of Id2 impaired normal erythroid development.
Id2 regulation of erythroid development is mediated via interacting with
transcription factor PU.1 and modulating PU.1 and GATA-1 activities. We conclude 
that Id2 regulates lymphoid and erythroid development via interaction with
different target proteins.

PMCID: PMC2515127
PMID: 18523151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Diabetes. 2008 Sep;57(9):2402-12. doi: 10.2337/db08-0244. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Switching-on survival and repair response programs in islet transplants by bone
marrow-derived vasculogenic cells.

Miller R(1), Cirulli V, Diaferia GR, Ninniri S, Hardiman G, Torbett BE, Benezra
R, Crisa L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Vascular progenitors of bone marrow origin participate to
neovascularization at sites of wound healing and transplantation. We hypothesized
that the biological purpose of this bone marrow-derived vascular component is to 
contribute angiogenic and survival functions distinct from those provided by the 
local tissue-derived vasculature.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS AND RESULTS: To address this hypothesis, we
investigated the functional impact of bone marrow-derived vascular cells on
pancreatic islets engraftment using bone marrow-reconstituted Id1(+/-)Id3(-/-)
mice, a model of bone marrow-derived vasculogenesis. We show that, in this model,
bone marrow-derived vasculogenic cells primarily contribute to the formation of
new blood vessels within islet transplants. In contrast, graft revascularization 
in a wild-type background occurs by tissue-derived blood vessels only. Using
these distinct transplant models in which bone marrow-and tissue-derived
vasculature are virtually mutually exclusive, we demonstrate that bone
marrow-derived vasculogenic cells exhibit enhanced angiogenic functions and
support prompt activation of islets survival pathways, which significantly impact
on islets engraftment and function. Moreover, gene profiling of vascular and
inflammatory cells of the grafts demonstrate that neovascularization by bone
marrow-derived cells is accompanied by the activation of a genetic program
uniquely tuned to downregulate harmful inflammatory responses and to promote
tissue repair.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies uncover the biological significance of bone
marrow-derived vasculogenic cells in the response to injury during
transplantation. Enhancing the contribution of bone marrow-derived vasculogenic
cells to transplantation sites may help to overcome both limited angiogenic
responses of the adult tissue-derived vasculature and untoward effects of
inflammation on transplant engraftment.

PMCID: PMC2518491
PMID: 18519801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. BMC Cancer. 2008 May 30;8:154. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-154.

Promoter methylation-associated loss of ID4 expression is a marker of tumour
recurrence in human breast cancer.

Noetzel E(1), Veeck J, Niederacher D, Galm O, Horn F, Hartmann A, Knüchel R, Dahl
E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of the
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. enoetzel@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of DNA binding/Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) is a
critical factor for cell proliferation and differentiation in normal vertebrate
development. ID4 has regulative functions for differentiation and growth of the
developing brain. The role of ID1, ID2 and ID3 are expected to be oncogenic due
to their overexpression in pancreatic cancer and colorectal adenocarcinomas,
respectively. Aside from these findings, loss of ID3 expression was demonstrated 
in ovarian cancer. The aim of the present study was to reveal the factual role of
ID4 in carcinogenesis in more detail, since its role for the pathogenesis of
human breast cancer has been discussed controversially, assigning both oncogenic 
and tumour suppressive functions.
METHODS: ID4 promoter methylation, ID4 mRNA expression and ID4 protein expression
were analysed in primary human breast cancer specimens using methylation-specific
PCR (MSP) (n=170), semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR (n=46) and
immunhistochemistry (n=3), respectively. In order to demonstrate a functional
association of ID4 promoter methylation with its gene silencing, we performed DNA
demethylation analysis with four human breast cell lines using MSP and
semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR. In addition, we performed correlations of ID4
promoter methylation with ID4 mRNA and ID4 protein expression in matched samples 
of breast tumour and corresponding normal tissue. We carried out statistical
analyses in order to find correlations between ID4 promoter methylation and
clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: Frequent ID4 promoter methylation was observed in primary breast cancer 
samples (69%, 117/170). We found a tight correlation (P<0.0001) between ID4
promoter methylation and loss of ID4 expression in primary breast cancer 3
specimens. Demethylating treatment with breast cancer cell lines was associated
with clear ID4 mRNA re-expression. Tumours with ID4 promoter methylation showed
distinct loss of ID4 expression on both transcription and protein level.
Interestingly, ID4 promoter methylation was a factor for unfavourable
recurrence-free survival (P=0.036) and increased risk for lymph node metastasis
(P=0.030).
CONCLUSION: ID4 is indeed a novel tumour suppressor gene in normal human breast
tissue and is epigenetically silenced during cancer development, indicating
increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a 
prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2435120
PMID: 18513385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008 Jun;85(6):2090-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.02.027.

Endothelial expression of bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 1a is required
for atrioventricular valve formation.

Kaneko K(1), Li X, Zhang X, Lamberti JJ, Jamieson SW, Thistlethwaite PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of California San Diego, San
Diego, California 92103-8892, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2008 Jun;85(6):2099.

BACKGROUND: Atrioventricular canal defects account for 4% of all congenital heart
anomalies. They arise from failure of endocardial cushion formation, a process
dependent on transition of endothelial cells into clustered mesenchymal cells in 
the mid-atrioventricular septum. To date, the genetic signals necessary for
atrioventricular canal defects are poorly understood. We hypothesized that bone
morphogenetic protein signaling in cardiac endothelial cells may be crucial to
this process.
METHODS: To study the role of bone morphogenetic protein receptors (Bmpr) in the 
developing heart, we created knockout mice with inactivation of Bmpr1a
selectively in endocardium. Two strains of null mice were created: one with
constitutive endothelial-specific knockout of Bmpr1a and one with time-inducible,
endothelial-specific knockout of Bmpr1a. Embryos and animals were analyzed by
microscopy, RNA in situ hybridization, and microangiography.
RESULTS: Animals with null mutation of Bmpr1a in endothelium were embryonic
lethal at E11.5 to 12.0 and demonstrated absence of endocardial cushion
formation. Embryos failed to form atrioventricular valves and adjacent septa.
Endocardial knockout of Bmpr1a did not affect development of the outflow tract or
aortic arches. Using time-inducible, cell-specific knockout mice, we show that
Bmpr1a has two functions in the developing atrioventricular canal: to induce
endocardial endothelial-mesenchymal transition, and to pattern the septal
mesenchyme into endocardial cushions. We demonstrate that these processes are
temporally linked to expression of the transcription factors Id1 and Id3.
CONCLUSIONS: Endocardial cushion formation is dependent on cell-specific
expression of Bmpr1a. Our results suggest that Bmpr1a-mediated signaling is a
crucial pathway involved in pathogenesis of atrioventricular septal and valve
malformations, which are among the most common congenital heart defects in
humans.

PMID: 18498827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1653-61. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21574.

Id2, Id3, and Id4 proteins show dynamic changes in expression during vibrissae
follicle development.

Hammond NL(1), Jahoda CA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Durham, South
Road, Durham, United Kingdom.

Id proteins are involved in the transcriptional control of many fundamental
biological processes, including differentiation and lineage commitment. We
studied Id2, Id3, and Id4 protein expression during different stages of rat
vibrissa follicle development using immunohistochemistry. Id2 was highly
expressed in the cytoplasm of specialized cells in the basal epidermis and outer 
root sheath during early stages of follicle development. These cells were
identified as Merkel cells (MCs) by means of double-immunolabeling with
synaptophysin and cytokeratin-20, and persisted in neonatal follicles. Id3
immunofluorescence was characterized by membrane-associated expression in basal
epithelial cells of follicles early in development. Subsequently follicle
epithelial cells switched to have strong nuclear labeling, also a feature of
newly forming dermal papilla cells. Id4 expression was primarily associated with 
innervation of the developing follicle musculature. These observations illustrate
dynamic expression patterns of Id2 and Id3 proteins in developing follicles and
specifically link Id2 expression to Merkel cell specification.

PMID: 18498089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 25;283(30):21230-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710525200. Epub 2008
May 12.

Rho/Rho-associated kinase signal regulates myogenic differentiation via
myocardin-related transcription factor-A/Smad-dependent transcription of the Id3 
gene.

Iwasaki K(1), Hayashi K, Fujioka T, Sobue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience (D13), Research Center for Child Mental
Development, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Yamadaoka 2-2, Suita, 
Osaka, Japan.

RhoA is known to be involved in myogenic differentiation, but whether it acts as 
a positive or negative regulator is controversial. To resolve this issue, we
investigated the differentiation stage-specific roles of RhoA and its effector,
Rho-associated kinase, using C2C12 myoblasts. We found that proliferating
myoblasts show high levels of RhoA and serum-response factor activities and
strong expression of the downstream target of RhoA, myocardin-related
transcription factor-A (MRTF-A or MAL); these activities and expression are
markedly lower in differentiating myocytes. We further demonstrated that, in
proliferating myoblasts, an increase in MRTF-A, which forms a complex with
Smad1/4, strikingly activates the expression level of the Id3 gene; the Id3 gene 
product is a potent inhibitor of myogenic differentiation. Finally, we found that
during differentiation, one of the forkhead transcription factors translocates
into the nucleus and suppresses Id3 expression by preventing the association of
the MRTF-A-Smad complex with the Id3 promoter, which leads to the enhancement of 
myogenic differentiation. We conclude that RhoA/Rho-associated kinase signaling
plays positive and negative roles in myogenic differentiation, mediated by
MRTF-A/Smad-dependent transcription of the Id3 gene in a differentiation
stage-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC3258938
PMID: 18477564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jul;198(1):243-52. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0151. Epub 2008 May 8.

PD98059 enhances C2 myoblast differentiation through p38 MAPK activation: a novel
role for PD98059.

Al-Shanti N(1), Stewart CE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research into Human Movement and Health, Manchester
Metropolitan University, Hassall Road, Alsager, Cheshire ST7 2HL, England, UK.
n.al-shanti@mmu.ac.uk

Cell differentiation is usually accompanied by irreversible cell cycle exit,
which is a critical step for skeletal muscle differentiation. We therefore
hypothesise that PD98059 that blocks the MAP kinase kinase (MEK) pathway
(proliferation pathway) when administrated to murine C2 skeletal myoblasts will
arrest cell cycle and, consequently, enhances differentiation relative to
untreated controls. In this study, we aimed to examine this hypothesis using
phenotypic differentiation, biochemical assays, flow cytometry and real-time PCR 
in C2 cells cultured for 48 h in differentiation media only (untreated) or
supplemented with either a single dose of 10 ng/ml IGF-I or 20 muM PD98059 for 48
h. Creatine kinase (CK) activity was increased by 7.5-fold (P<0.05) in the
presence of PD98059, whereas untreated and IGF-I-treated cells induced 4.5- and
4-fold increase respectively when compared with baseline controls. Increased CK
values in the presence of PD98059 were not only associated with myotube formation
but also associated with cell cycle arrest in G1 phase (86+/-3.2%; P<0.05).
Moreover, the expression of myogenic-specific transcriptional factor mRNAs (MyoD 
and myogenin) was significantly higher in PD-treated cells (4.7+/-0.15 and
314+/-10.2 ng/reaction respectively; P<0.05) than untreated (2.0+/-0.2 and
233+/-11 ng/reaction respectively) or IGF-treated cells (3.2+/-0.24 and
296+/-16.2 ng/reaction respectively). Unexpectedly, Id3 mRNA, the potent negative
regulator of muscle differentiation, was also expressed at significantly higher
levels in PD-treated cells (77+/-0.346 ng/reaction; P<0.05) than untreated
(49+/-7.7 ng/reaction) or IGF-I-treated cells (47+/-0.7 ng/reaction).
Furthermore, expression of the muscle differentiation-specific genes (IGF-binding
protein-5, IGF-II receptor and IGF-II) was also increased significantly in
PD-treated cells when compared with untreated cells. Phosflow analysis showed a
significant increase in the levels of phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (49.0+/-6.7%, P<0.05) in PD-treated cells when compared with
DM-treated cells (31.7+/-5.7%). These findings uncover a previously unconsidered 
positive effect of PD98059 on C2 myoblast differentiation and identify the
pathway(s) underlying PD-induced C2 myoblast differentiation.

PMID: 18467380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Virology. 2008 Jul 5;376(2):258-69. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2007.12.003. Epub 2008
May 5.

The ID proteins contribute to the growth of rodent fibroblasts during
LMP1-mediated transformation.

Everly DN Jr(1), Mainou BA, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, CB#7295, University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill, 450 West Drive, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.
david.everly@rosalindfranklin.edu

LMP1 induces the expression of two members of the family of Id proteins, Id1 and 
Id3, and affects cell cycle regulation by decreasing the expression of the cyclin
dependent kinase inhibitor, p27, and increasing levels and phosphorylation of
cdk2 and Rb. In the present study, the contribution of the Id proteins to
LMP1-mediated transformation was determined. Although LMP1 effectively inhibited 
p27 expression, the Id proteins alone did not affect expression of p27, cdk2, and
Rb. Neither Id1 nor Id3 was sufficient to transform Rat-1 cells and inhibition of
Id1 expression did not affect LMP1-induced morphologic transformation of Rat-1
cells or reduction of p27. However, reduced Id expression resulted in smaller
foci and impaired the growth rate of Rat-1 cells. These data indicate that
overexpression of the Id proteins is not sufficient for the effects of LMP1 on
the cell cycle but that inhibition of Id expression does affect the growth of
LMP1-transformed and parental Rat1 cells.

PMCID: PMC2901101
PMID: 18456300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Immunol. 2008 May 15;180(10):6553-65.

Activation of a TGF-beta-specific multistep gene expression program in mature
macrophages requires glucocorticoid-mediated surface expression of TGF-beta
receptor II.

Gratchev A(1), Kzhyshkowska J, Kannookadan S, Ochsenreiter M, Popova A, Yu X,
Mamidi S, Stonehouse-Usselmann E, Muller-Molinet I, Gooi L, Goerdt S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karls University
of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. alexei.gratchev@gmail.com

Alternatively activated (M2) macrophages regulate steady state-, cancer-, and
inflammation-related tissue remodeling. They are induced by Th2-cytokines and
glucocorticoids (GC). The responsiveness of mature macrophages to TGF-beta, a
cytokine involved in inflammation, cancer, and atherosclerosis, is currently
controversial. Recently, we demonstrated that IL-17 receptor B is up-regulated in
human monocyte-derived macrophages differentiated in the presence of Th2
cytokines IL-4 and TGF-beta1. In this study, we show that mature human
macrophages differentiated in the presence of IL-4, and dexamethasone
(M2(IL-4/GC)) but not M2(IL-4) responds to TGF-beta1 which induced a gene
expression program comprising 111 genes including transcriptional/signaling
regulators (ID3 and RGS1), immune modulators (ALOX5AP and IL-17 receptor B) and
atherosclerosis-related genes (ALOX5AP, ORL1, APOC1, APOC2, and APOE). Analysis
of molecular mechanism underlying GC/TGF-beta cooperation revealed that surface
expression of TGF-betaRII was high in M2(GC) and M2(IL-4/GC), but absent from
M2(IL-4), whereas the expression of TGF-betaRI/II mRNA, TGF-betaRII total
protein, and surface expression of TGF-betaRIII were unchanged. GC dexamethasone 
was essential for increased surface expression of functional TGF-betaRII because 
its effect was observed also in combination with IL-13, M-CSF, and GM-CSF.
Prolonged Smad2-mediated signaling observed in TGF-beta1-treated M2(IL-4/GC) was 
due to insufficient activity of negative feedback mechanism what can be explained
by up-regulation of SIRT1, a negative regulator of Smad7, and the retention of
TGF-betaRII complex on the cell surface. In summary, mature human M2 macrophages 
made permissive to TGF-beta by GC-induced surface expression of TGF-betaRII
activate in response to TGF-beta1, a multistep gene expression program featuring 
traits of macrophages found within an atherosclerotic lesion.

PMID: 18453574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Sep;216(3):771-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21455.

BMP signaling dynamics in embryonic orofacial tissue.

Mukhopadhyay P(1), Webb CL, Warner DR, Greene RM, Pisano MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, University of
Louisville Birth Defects Center, ULSD, University of Louisville, Louisville,
Kentucky 40292, USA. p0mukh01@louisville.edu

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family represents a class of signaling
molecules, that plays key roles in morphogenesis, cell proliferation, survival
and differentiation during normal development. Members of this family are
essential for the development of the mammalian orofacial region where they
regulate cell proliferation, extracellular matrix synthesis, and cellular
differentiation. Perturbation of any of these processes results in orofacial
clefting. Embryonic orofacial tissue expresses BMP mRNAs, their cognate proteins,
and BMP-specific receptors in unique temporo-spatial patterns, suggesting
functional roles in orofacial development. However, specific genes that function 
as downstream mediators of BMP action during orofacial ontogenesis have not been 
well defined. In the current study, elements of the Smad component of the BMP
intracellular signaling system were identified and characterized in embryonic
orofacial tissue and functional activation of the Smad pathway by BMP2 and BMP4
was demonstrated. BMP2 and BMP4-initiated Smad signaling in cells derived from
embryonic orofacial tissue was found to result in: (1) phosphorylation of Smads 1
and 5; (2) nuclear translocation of Smads 1, 4, and 5; (3) binding of Smads 1, 4,
and 5 to a consensus Smad binding element (SBE)-containing oligonucleotide; (4)
transactivation of transfected reporter constructs, containing BMP-inducible Smad
response elements; and (5) increased expression at transcriptional as well as
translational levels of Id3 (endogenous gene containing BMP receptor-specific
Smad response elements). Collectively, these data document the existence of a
functional Smad-mediated BMP signaling system in cells of the developing murine
orofacial region.

PMCID: PMC2746655
PMID: 18446813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Virus Res. 2008 Jul;135(1):144-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2008.03.001. Epub 2008 
Apr 16.

Molecular epidemiology of rabies in Indonesia.

Susetya H(1), Sugiyama M, Inagaki A, Ito N, Mudiarto G, Minamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Applied Biological Sciences, The
United School of Veterinary Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu
501-1193, Japan.

In order to clarify the genetic relationships and dynamics of rabies viruses that
are epidemic in Indonesia, we determined and analyzed 1307 nucleotides of
nucleoprotein genes of 34 rabies field isolates collected from Sumatra, Java,
Kalimantan, Sulawesi and Flores islands. Results of phylogenetic analysis
indicated that rabies isolates in Indonesia formed one cluster, were of Asian
lineage, and were closely related to a rabies isolate in China rather than to
rabies isolates in Thailand, India or Sri Lanka. Rabies isolates in Indonesia
were divided into three phylogroups (ID1, ID2 and ID3) that included seven
lineages. There was a correlation between phylogroup and geographical
distribution of the isolates. Isolates in four lineages (SC1, SC2, SC3 and ST) of
the ID1 phylogroup were mainly present in Sumatra. Isolates in the ST lineage
were distributed widely in Sumatra, while isolates in the SC1, SC2 and SC3
lineages were limited to central Sumatra. ID2 and ID3 phylogroups included one
lineage (JA) and two lineages (KS and SF), respectively. Results of phylogenetic 
analysis and historical background suggest that rabies viruses in China might
have been transferred to Indonesia and spread to each island due to human
activities.

PMID: 18420300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;14(8):2318-25. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4716.

Increased expression of Id family proteins in small cell lung cancer and its
prognostic significance.

Kamalian L(1), Gosney JR, Forootan SS, Foster CS, Bao ZZ, Beesley C, Ke Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, School of Cancer Studies, Faculty of Medicine,
the University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To study the molecular pathology of human small cell lung cancer (SCLC),
molecular biology approaches were used to identify genes involved in malignant
progression of the cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microquantity differential display was used initially to
identify genes expressed differentially between normal and malignant cell lines. 
The differences were verified by Western blot. Immunohistochemical analysis was
done on paired normal and malignant lung tissues and on tissues taken by biopsy
to assess the expression status of candidate genes and their prognostic
significance.
RESULTS: Inhibitor of DNA/differentiation (Id)1 gene was up-regulated in SCLC
cells. Levels of Id1 in 8 of 10 cell lines were increased by 1.7- to 21.4-fold
when compared with the benign cells. A similar increase was also found in levels 
of Id2 and Id3. On 26 pairs of lung tissues, all four Id proteins were
significantly (Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, P < 0.001-0.005) overexpressed in
cytoplasm of the malignant cells. In nuclei of SCLC cells, Id1 expression was
significantly reduced, whereas the levels of Id2, Id3, and Id4 were significantly
(Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, P < 0.001) increased. Immunohistochemical staining on
biopsy specimens showed that the increased expression of Id2 in cytoplasm of
cancer cells, not the other three proteins, was significantly associated with the
increased survival of SCLC patients.
CONCLUSION: Changed expression profiles of Id proteins may play important roles
in malignant progression of SCLC, and the increased Id2 in cytoplasm is a novel
prognostic factor to predict the patient outcomes.

PMID: 18413820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jun;45(11):3302-11. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.02.012. Epub
2008 Apr 1.

A role for E2-2 at the DN3 stage of early thymopoiesis.

Wikström I(1), Forssell J, Penha-Goncalves MN, Bergqvist I, Holmberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical Genetics, Umeå
University, 901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

Roles for the E-proteins E2A and HEB during T lymphocyte development have been
well established. Based on our previous observations of counter selection against
T cells lacking E2-2, it seemed reasonable to assume that there would be a
function also for E2-2 in thymocyte development. Aiming at assigning such a role 
for E2-2, we analyzed the expression of E2-2, E2A, HEB as well as Id mRNA during 
T cell development. Interestingly, whereas all three E-proteins were expressed
during early thymocyte development, significant expression beyond the DP stage
was detected only for E2A. Among the Id proteins, Id2 displayed a prominent
expression exclusively in DN1, whereas Id3 showed some expression in DN1,
followed by a down regulation and then a prominent induction, peaking in the DP
stage. E2-2 was expressed during the DN stages, as well as in the DP stage,
suggesting that E2-2 operates in concert with the other E-proteins during early
thymocyte development. We found that E2-2 null thymocytes displayed a partial
block at the DN3 stage of development, as well as a reduced expression of pre-T
alpha, known to be regulated also by E2A and HEB. The fact that E2-2 deficient
thymocytes develop without gross abnormalities is likely to stem from redundancy 
due to the co-expression of E2A and HEB.

PMID: 18384878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008 Nov 1;72(3):808-13. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2008.01.029. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Influence of multiple genetic polymorphisms on genitourinary morbidity after
carbon ion radiotherapy for prostate cancer.

Suga T(1), Iwakawa M, Tsuji H, Ishikawa H, Oda E, Noda S, Otsuka Y, Ishikawa A,
Ishikawa K, Shimazaki J, Mizoe JE, Tsujii H, Imai T.

Author information: 
(1)RadGenomics Research Group, National Institute of Radiological Sciences,
Chiba, Japan.

PURPOSE: To investigate the genetic risk of late urinary morbidity after carbon
ion radiotherapy in prostate cancer patients.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: A total of 197 prostate cancer patients who had undergone 
carbon ion radiotherapy were evaluated for urinary morbidity. The distribution of
patients with dysuria was as follows: Grade 0, 165; Grade 1, 28; and Grade 2, 4
patients. The patients were divided (2:1) consecutively into the training and
test sets and then categorized into control (Grade 0) and case (Grade 1 or
greater) groups. First, 450 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 118
candidate genes were genotyped in the training set. The associations between the 
SNP genotypes and urinary morbidity were assessed using Fisher's exact test.
Then, various combinations of the markers were tested for their ability to
maximize the area under the receiver operating characteristics (AUC-ROC) curve
analysis results. Finally, the test set was validated for the selected markers.
RESULTS: When the SNP markers in the SART1, ID3, EPDR1, PAH, and XRCC6 genes in
the training set were subjected to AUC-ROC curve analysis, the AUC-ROC curve
reached a maximum of 0.86. The AUC-ROC curve of these markers in the test set was
0.77. The SNPs in these five genes were defined as "risk genotypes."
Approximately 90% of patients in the case group (Grade 1 or greater) had three or
more risk genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results have shown that patients with late urinary morbidity
after carbon ion radiotherapy can be stratified according to the total number of 
risk genotypes they harbor.

PMID: 18374504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Gene. 2008 May 15;414(1-2):95-105. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.02.015. Epub 2008 Mar
4.

Autocrine BMP4 signalling regulates ID3 proto-oncogene expression in human
ovarian cancer cells.

Shepherd TG(1), Thériault BL, Nachtigal MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
tshephe6@uwo.ca

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-4 signalling leads to the direct upregulation of
ID3 proto-oncogene expression in human ovarian cancer cells. An upstream
BMP4-responsive enhancer element consisting of a palindromic BMP response element
(BRE) site and CAGA box was identified ~3.0 kb upstream of the human ID3 gene,
and a nearly-identical element exists in the second intron of the ID3 gene. BMP4 
stimulation leads to the direct binding of Smads 1/5 and Smad4 to the upstream
and intronic enhancers, and together both enhancers cooperate to yield heightened
BMP4-mediated ID3 promoter activity. We further demonstrate that ID3 is
overexpressed in human ovarian cancer cells when compared to normal ovarian
surface epithelial cells, and treatment of ovarian cancer cells with the BMP4
antagonist Noggin abrogates endogenous ID3 gene expression. Our findings define
the mechanism of BMP4-mediated ID3 gene expression, and support the notion that
ovarian cancer cells possess autocrine BMP4 signalling required to sustain ID3
overexpression which may contribute to human ovarian cancer pathogenesis.

PMID: 18372118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Endocrinology. 2008 Jun;149(6):3187-95. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1659. Epub 2008 Mar 
6.

Role for inhibitor of differentiation/deoxyribonucleic acid-binding (Id) proteins
in granulosa cell differentiation.

Johnson AL(1), Haugen MJ, Woods DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556, USA. johnson.128@nd.edu

Recent studies in the hen ovary have linked the initiation of granulosa cell
differentiation at follicle selection to the alleviation of inhibitory MAPK
signaling. The present studies assessed a role for individual inhibitor of
differentiation (Id) protein isoforms as modulators of key transcriptional events
occurring within granulosa cells at or immediately subsequent to differentiation.
Findings from freshly collected granulosa cells collected at different stages of 
follicle development demonstrated a negative association between expression
levels for Id2 mRNA compared with levels of Id1, Id3, and Id4. Elevated levels of
Id2 are related to a differentiating/differentiated phenotype, whereas elevated
Id1, Id3, and Id4 are associated with an undifferentiated phenotype. This
negative relationship extends to cell signal transduction, because factors that
promote inhibitory MAPK signaling (TGF-alpha and betacellulin) block expression
of Id2 mRNA but increase levels of Id1, Id3, and Id4. Furthermore, overexpression
of Gallus Id2 in cultured granulosa was found to significantly decrease levels of
Id1, Id3, and Id4 mRNA but facilitate FSHR mRNA expression and, importantly,
initiate LHR mRNA expression plus LH-induced progesterone production. Finally,
knockdown studies using small interfering RNA specific for Id2 revealed reduced
expression of FSHR and LHR mRNA and attenuated FSH- and LH-induced levels of StAR
and p450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme mRNA plus progesterone
production. Collectively, these data demonstrate that Id2 expression is both
sufficient and necessary for increasing LHR expression and, as a result,
promoting gonadotropin-induced differentiation in hen granulosa cells subsequent 
to follicle selection.

PMID: 18325989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Apr;47(4):437-41. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken013.
Epub 2008 Feb 23.

Is Inhibitor of differentiation 3 involved in human primary Sjögren's syndrome?

Sellam J(1), Miceli-Richard C, Gottenberg JE, Proust A, Ittah M, Lavie F, Loiseau
P, Mariette X.

Author information: 
(1)Rhumatologie, INSERM U802, Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux
de Paris, Université Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

OBJECTIVES: Inhibitor of differentiation 3 (Id3)-deficient mice show sicca
symptoms, lymphocyte infiltration of exocrine glands and positive anti-Ro/SSA and
anti-La/SSB antibodies, all hallmarks of primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS). The
impairment of Id3 in T cells and, possibly, in salivary glandular epithelial
cells (SGECs) seems to be involved. This animal model prompted us to investigate 
the role of Id3 in human pSS.
METHODS: Quantitative Id3 expression in peripheral T cells, cultured SGECs and in
total minor salivary glands was assessed by RT-PCR in pSS patients and controls. 
After Id3 sequencing, we investigated two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
(c.313G>A and g.-156A>G) in a case-control study of 212 Caucasian pSS patients
and 168 controls.
RESULTS: Quantitative Id3 expression was not decreased in pSS patients nor in
SGECs, in T cells or in minor salivary glands. As well, patients and controls did
not differ in allele and genotype frequencies of Id3 SNPs (P = 0.67 and P = 0.71 
for the c.313G>A and the g.-156A>G, respectively). Neither SNP was associated
with a pattern of autoantibody secretion.
CONCLUSION: Although the Id3-deficient mouse model represents an attractive model
for human pSS, Id3 expression is not impaired in SGECs, peripheral T cells and in
labial salivary glands in pSS patients and Id3-relevant SNPs do not give evidence
of genetic predisposition in Caucasian pSS patients.

PMID: 18296721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 May;22(5):1078-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0547. Epub 2008 Feb 
21.

A natural polymorphism in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha hinge 
region attenuates transcription due to defective release of nuclear receptor
corepressor from chromatin.

Liu MH(1), Li J, Shen P, Husna B, Tai ES, Yong EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National University Hospital, Yong
Loo Lin School of Medicine, Republic of Singapore.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPARalpha) is a central
regulator of lipid metabolism. Fibrate drugs act on PPARalpha to modulate
dyslipidemias. A natural variant (V227A) affecting the PPARalpha hinge region was
associated with perturbations in blood lipid levels in Asian populations. In this
study, we investigated the functional significance of the V227A substitution. The
variant significantly attenuated PPARalpha-mediated transactivation of the
cytochrome P450 4A6 and mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase
(HMGCS2) genes in the presence of fibrate ligands. Screening of a panel of
PPARalpha coregulators revealed that V227A enhanced recruitment of the nuclear
corepressor NCoR. Transactivation activity of V227A could be restored by
silencing NCoR or by inhibition of its histone deacetylase activity. Deletion
studies indicated that PPARalpha interacted with NCoR receptor-interacting domain
1 (ID1) but not ID2 or ID3. These interactions were dependent on the intact
consensus nonapeptide nuclear receptor interaction motif in NCoR ID1 and were
enhanced by the adjacent 24 N-terminal residues. Novel corepressor interaction
determinants involving PPARalpha helices 1 and 2 were identified. In hepatic
cells, the V227A substitution stabilized PPARalpha/NCoR interactions and caused
defective release of NCoR in the presence of agonists on the HMGCS2 promoter.
These results provide the first indication that defective function of a natural
PPARalpha variant was due, at least partially, to increased corepressor binding. 
Our data suggest that the PPARalpha/NCoR interaction is physiologically relevant 
and can produce a discernable phenotype when the magnitude of the interaction is 
altered by a naturally occurring variation.

PMID: 18292238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 May;19(5):2113-26. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E07-10-1057. Epub 2008
Feb 20.

p204 protein overcomes the inhibition of core binding factor alpha-1-mediated
osteogenic differentiation by Id helix-loop-helix proteins.

Luan Y(1), Yu XP, Yang N, Frenkel S, Chen L, Liu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10003, USA.

Id proteins play important roles in osteogenic differentiation; however, the
molecular mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we established that inhibitor
of differentiation (Id) proteins, including Id1, Id2, and Id3, associate with
core binding factor alpha-1 (Cbfa1) to cause diminished transcription of the
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OCL) gene, leading to less ALP
activity and osteocalcin (OCL) production. Id acts by inhibiting the
sequence-specific binding of Cbfa1 to DNA and by decreasing the expression of
Cbfa1 in cells undergoing osteogenic differentiation. p204, an
interferon-inducible protein that interacts with both Cbfa1 and Id2, overcame the
Id2-mediated inhibition of Cbfa1-induced ALP activity and OCL production. We show
that 1) p204 disturbed the binding of Id2 to Cbfa1 and enabled Cbfa1 to bind to
the promoters of its target genes and 2) that p204 promoted the translocation
from nucleus to the cytoplasm and accelerated the degradation of Id2 by
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway during osteogenesis. Nucleus export signal (NES) of 
p204 is required for the p204-enhanced cytoplasmic translocation and degradation 
of Id2, because a p204 mutant lacking NES lost these activities. Together, Cbfa1,
p204, and Id proteins form a regulatory circuit and act in concert to regulate
osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2366862
PMID: 18287524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Atherosclerosis. 2008 May;198(1):12-21. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2007.12.048. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Estrogen-induced redox sensitive Id3 signaling controls the growth of vascular
cells.

Felty Q(1), Porther N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health, Florida International
University, Miami, FL 33190, USA. Feltyq@fiu.edu

In this study, we investigated a mechanism by which estrogen-induced oxidants
control endothelial cell differentiation into tubelike structures via redox
sensitive signaling molecule Id3. Using a matrigel cell culture, we determined
whether superoxide or hydrogen peroxide signaled estrogen-induced tube formation.
Overexpression of the superoxide scavenger MnSOD and the hydrogen peroxide
scavenger catalase inhibited tube formation in estrogen treated endothelial
cells. Since tube formation on matrigel is not specific for endothelial cells, we
verified our results in a co-culture model that better represents tube formation 
in vivo. Antioxidants ebselen and N-acetylcysteine as well as overexpression of
MnSOD and catalase inhibited tube formation in estrogen exposed endothelial cells
co-cultured with fibroblasts. We previously showed that estrogen-induced
mitochondrial oxidants depended on the cytoskeleton so we tested tube formation
dependence on the cytoskeleton. Estrogen-induced tube formation was inhibited by 
the actin cytoskeleton disruptor cytochalasin D and the microtubule destabilizer 
colchicine. Estrogen increased Id3 phosphorylation which was reduced by catalase 
and N-acetylcysteine treatments. We determined the functional role of Id3 in tube
formation by RNA intereference and showed Id3 siRNA to inhibit tube formation in 
estrogen exposed cells. The major novel findings presented here are that: (i)
estrogen-induced tube formation requires the presence of Id3, a member of the
helix-loop-helix family of transcriptional factors and (ii) estrogen increases
Id3 phosphorylation via a redox-dependent process. Furthermore, these studies
demonstrate Id3 to be an important signaling molecule in estrogen stimulated
vascularization and may serve as a therapeutic target in the prevention and
treatment of vasculoproliferative disorders.

PMID: 18281048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2001;31(5):745-54. doi: 10.1109/3477.956036.

Fuzzy rule extraction from ID3-type decision trees for real data.

Pal NR(1), Chakraborty S.

Author information: 
(1)Electron. & Commun. Sci. Unit, Indian Stat. Inst., Calcutta.

This paper proposes a method to construct a fuzzy rule-based classifier system
from an ID3-type decision tree (DT) for real data. The three major steps are rule
extraction, gradient descent tuning of the rule-base, and performance-based
pruning of the rule-base. Pruning removes all rules which cannot meet a certain
level of performance. To test our scheme, we have used the DT generated by RIB3, 
an ID3-type classifier for real data. In this process, we made some improvements 
of RID3 to get a tree with less redundancy and hence a smaller rule-base. The
rule-base is tested on several data sets and is found to demonstrate an excellent
performance. Results obtained by the proposed scheme are consistently better than
C4.5 across several data sets.

PMID: 18244839  [PubMed]


333. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 2001;31(4):650-7. doi: 10.1109/3477.938268.

SAFARI: a structured approach for automatic rule.

Wani MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sch. of Comput. & Math., Teesside Univ., Middlesbrough.

This paper describes a new algorithm for obtaining rules automatically from
training examples. The algorithm is applicable to examples involving both
objects: with discrete and continuous-valued attributes. The paper explains a new
quantization procedure fur continuous-valued attributes and shows how appropriate
ranges of values of various attributes are obtained. The algorithm uses a
decision-tree-based approach for obtaining rules, but unlike other tree-based
algorithms such as ID3, it allows more than one attribute at a node which greatly
improves its performance. The ability of the algorithm to obtain a measure of
partial match further enhances its generalization characteristic. The algorithm
produces the same rules irrespective of the order of presentation of training
examples. The algorithm has been demonstrated on classification problems. The
results have compared favorably with those obtained by existing inductive
learning algorithms.

PMID: 18244829  [PubMed]


334. Nat Biotechnol. 2008 Jan;26(1):91-100. doi: 10.1038/nbt1366. Epub 2008 Jan 6.

Peptide-conjugated antisense oligonucleotides for targeted inhibition of a
transcriptional regulator in vivo.

Henke E(1), Perk J, Vider J, de Candia P, Chin Y, Solit DB, Ponomarev V, Cartegni
L, Manova K, Rosen N, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, 1270 York Ave., New York, New York 10021, USA.

Transcription factors are important targets for the treatment of a variety of
malignancies but are extremely difficult to inhibit, as they are located in the
cell's nucleus and act mainly by protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions.
The transcriptional regulators Id1 and Id3 are attractive targets for cancer
therapy as they are required for tumor invasiveness, metastasis and angiogenesis.
We report here the development of an antitumor agent that downregulates Id1
effectively in tumor endothelial cells in vivo. Efficient delivery and
substantial reduction of Id1 protein levels in the tumor endothelium were
effected by fusing an antisense molecule to a peptide known to home specifically 
to tumor neovessels. In two different tumor models, systemic delivery of this
drug led to enhanced hemorrhage, hypoxia and inhibition of primary tumor growth
and metastasis, similar to what is observed in Id1 knockout mice. Combination
with the Hsp90 inhibitor 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin yielded
virtually complete growth suppression of aggressive breast tumors.

PMID: 18176556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Open Med Inform J. 2008;2:149-59. doi: 10.2174/1874431100802010149. Epub 2008 Nov
19.

Syndrome diagnosis: human intuition or machine intelligence?

Braaten O(1), Friestad J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, and
Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Norway.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether artificial intelligence methods 
can represent objective methods that are essential in syndrome diagnosis. Most
syndromes have no external criterion standard of diagnosis. The predictive value 
of a clinical sign used in diagnosis is dependent on the prior probability of the
syndrome diagnosis. Clinicians often misjudge the probabilities involved.
Syndromology needs objective methods to ensure diagnostic consistency, and take
prior probabilities into account. We applied two basic artificial intelligence
methods to a database of machine-generated patients - a 'vector method' and a set
method. As reference methods we ran an ID3 algorithm, a cluster analysis and a
naive Bayes' calculation on the same patient series. The overall diagnostic error
rate for the the vector algorithm was 0.93%, and for the ID3 0.97%. For the
clinical signs found by the set method, the predictive values varied between 0.71
and 1.0. The artificial intelligence methods that we used, proved simple, robust 
and powerful, and represent objective diagnostic methods.

PMCID: PMC2669648
PMID: 19415142  [PubMed]


336. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1783(3):503-17. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Lyl1 interacts with CREB1 and alters expression of CREB1 target genes.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Suarez Saiz F, Trus MR, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, 610 University Avenue
9-111, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family contains key
regulators of cellular proliferation and differentiation as well as the suspected
oncoproteins Tal1 and Lyl1. Tal1 and Lyl1 are aberrantly over-expressed in
leukemia as a result of chromosomal translocations, or other genetic or
epigenetic events. Protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions described so far 
are mediated by their highly homologous bHLH domains, while little is known about
the function of other protein domains. Hetero-dimers of Tal1 and Lyl1 with E2A or
HEB, decrease the rate of E2A or HEB homo-dimer formation and are poor activators
of transcription. In vitro, these hetero-dimers also recognize different binding 
sites from homo-dimer complexes, which may also lead to inappropriate activation 
or repression of promoters in vivo. Both mechanisms are thought to contribute to 
the oncogenic potential of Tal1 and Lyl1. Despite their bHLH structural
similarity, accumulating evidence suggests that Tal1 and Lyl1 target different
genes. This raises the possibility that domains flanking the bHLH region, which
are distinct in the two proteins, may participate in target recognition. Here we 
report that CREB1, a widely-expressed transcription factor and a suspected
oncogene in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) was identified as a binding partner 
for Lyl1 but not for Tal1. The interaction between Lyl1 and CREB1 involves the N 
terminal domain of Lyl1 and the Q2 and KID domains of CREB1. The histone
acetyl-transferases p300 and CBP are recruited to these complexes in the absence 
of CREB1 Ser 133 phosphorylation. In the Id1 promoter, Lyl1 complexes direct
transcriptional activation. We also found that in addition to Id1, over-expressed
Lyl1 can activate other CREB1 target promoters such as Id3, cyclin D3, Brca1,
Btg2 and Egr1. Moreover, approximately 50% of all gene promoters identified by
ChIP-chip experiments were jointly occupied by CREB1 and Lyl1, further
strengthening the association of Lyl1 with Cre binding sites. Given the newly
recognized importance of CREB1 in AML, the ability of Lyl1 to modulate promoter
responses to CREB1 suggests that it plays a role in the malignant phenotype by
occupying different promoters than Tal1.

PMID: 18160048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS Genet. 2007 Dec;3(12):e219.

A mechanism misregulating p27 in tumors discovered in a functional genomic
screen.

Garrett-Engele CM(1), Tasch MA, Hwang HC, Fero ML, Perlmutter RM, Clurman BE,
Roberts JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, USA.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(KIP1) is a tumor suppressor gene in
mice, and loss of p27 protein is a negative prognostic indicator in human
cancers. Unlike other tumor suppressors, the p27 gene is rarely mutated in
tumors. Therefore misregulation of p27, rather than loss of the gene, is
responsible for tumor-associated decreases in p27 protein levels. We performed a 
functional genomic screen in p27(+/-) mice to identify genes that regulate p27
during lymphomagenesis. This study demonstrated that decreased p27 expression in 
tumors resulted from altered transcription of the p27 gene, and the retroviral
tagging strategy enabled us to pinpoint relevant transcription factors. inhibitor
of DNA binding 3 (Id3) was isolated and validated as a transcriptional repressor 
of p27. We further demonstrated that p27 was a downstream target of Id3 in
src-family kinase Lck-driven thymic lymphomagenesis and that p27 was an essential
regulator of Lck-dependent thymic maturation during normal T-cell development.
Thus, we have identified and characterized transcriptional repression of p27 by
Id3 as a new mechanism decreasing p27 protein in tumors.

PMCID: PMC2134944
PMID: 18069898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 4;104(49):19506-11. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

ID genes mediate tumor reinitiation during breast cancer lung metastasis.

Gupta GP(1), Perk J, Acharyya S, de Candia P, Mittal V, Todorova-Manova K, Gerald
WL, Brogi E, Benezra R, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Molecular Cytology Core Facility, Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Department of Pathology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The establishment of distant metastases depends on the capacity of small numbers 
of cancer cells to regenerate a tumor after entering a target tissue. The
mechanisms that confer this capacity remain to be defined. Here we identify a
role for the transcriptional inhibitors of differentiation Id1 and Id3 as
selective mediators of lung metastatic colonization in the triple negative [TN,
i.e., lacking expression of estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, and
lacking Her2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2) amplification] subgroup
of human breast cancer. Although broad expression of Id1 has recently been
documented in tumors of the rare metaplastic subtype, here we report that rare
Id1-expressing cells are also present in the more common TN subset of human
breast tumors but not in other subtypes. We also provide evidence that Id1
expression is enriched in clinically obtained hormone receptor negative lung
metastases. Functional studies demonstrate that Id1 and its closely related
family member Id3 are required for tumor initiating functions, both in the
context of primary tumor formation and during metastatic colonization of the lung
microenvironment. In vivo characterization of lung metastatic progression reveals
that Id1 and Id3 facilitate sustained proliferation during the early stages of
metastatic colonization, subsequent to extravasation into the lung parenchyma.
These results shed light on the proliferative mechanisms that initiate metastatic
colonization, and they implicate Id1 and Id3 as mediators of this malignant
function in the TN subgroup of breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC2148319
PMID: 18048329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 7;7:125.

Differential regulation of abundance and deadenylation of maternal transcripts
during bovine oocyte maturation in vitro and in vivo.

Thélie A(1), Papillier P, Pennetier S, Perreau C, Traverso JM, Uzbekova S,
Mermillod P, Joly C, Humblot P, Dalbiès-Tran R.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR85 Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements, F-37380
Nouzilly, France. Aurore.Thelie@tours.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: In bovine maturing oocytes and cleavage stage embryos, gene
expression is mostly controlled at the post-transcriptional level, through
degradation and deadenylation/polyadenylation. We have investigated how post
transcriptional control of maternal transcripts was affected during in vitro and 
in vivo maturation, as a model of differential developmental competence.
RESULTS: Using real time PCR, we have analyzed variation of maternal transcripts,
in terms of abundance and polyadenylation, during in vitro or in vivo oocyte
maturation and in vitro embryo development. Four genes are characterized here for
the first time in bovine: ring finger protein 18 (RNF18) and breast cancer
anti-estrogen resistance 4 (BCAR4), whose oocyte preferential expression was not 
previously reported in any species, as well as Maternal embryonic leucine zipper 
kinase (MELK) and STELLA. We included three known oocyte marker genes (Maternal
antigen that embryos require (MATER), Zygote arrest 1 (ZAR1), NACHT, leucine rich
repeat and PYD containing 9 (NALP9)). In addition, we selected transcripts
previously identified as differentially regulated during maturation,
peroxiredoxin 1 and 2 (PRDX1, PRDX2), inhibitor of DNA binding 2 and 3 (ID2,
ID3), cyclin B1 (CCNB1), cell division cycle 2 (CDC2), as well as Aurora A
(AURKA). Most transcripts underwent a moderate degradation during maturation. But
they displayed sharply contrasted deadenylation patterns that account for
variations observed previously by DNA array and correlated with the presence of a
putative cytoplasmic polyadenylation element in their 3' untranslated region.
Similar variations in abundance and polyadenylation status were observed during
in vitro maturation or in vivo maturation, except for PRDX1, that appears as a
marker of in vivo maturation. Throughout in vitro development, oocyte restricted 
transcripts were progressively degraded until the morula stage, except for MELK ;
and the corresponding genes remained silent after major embryonic genome
activation.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, our data emphasize the extent of post-transcriptional
regulation during oocyte maturation. They do not evidence a general alteration of
this phenomenon after in vitro maturation as compared to in vivo maturation, but 
indicate that some individual messenger RNA can be affected.

PMCID: PMC2211488
PMID: 17988387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2007 Sep;72(9):954-61.

Transcription factors NFAT2 and Egr1 cooperatively regulate the maturation of
T-lymphoma in vitro.

Koltsova EK(1), Wiest DL, Vavilova TP.

Author information: 
(1)Moscow State Medical Stomatological University, Moscow 127473, Russia.
ekoltsova@gmail.com

We have demonstrated that transcription factors Egr1 and NFAT2 cooperate in
regulation of the early stages of T-lymphocyte development, whereas the related
factors Egr2 and Egr3 do not cooperate with NFAT2. Egr1 and NFAT2 are shown to
cooperatively control gene expression of the regulatory factor Id3 and
recombinase Rag2, whose functions are critical for T-lymphocyte differentiation. 
Thus, the concerted action of the transcription factors Egr1 and NFAT2 can play a
crucial role in regulation of the T cell differentiation in vitro due to the
cooperative regulation of Id3 and Rag2 gene expression.

PMID: 17922653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Oct;37(10):2937-48.

Inhibitory effects and target genes of bone morphogenetic protein 6 in Jurkat TAg
cells.

Sivertsen EA(1), Huse K, Hystad ME, Kersten C, Smeland EB, Myklebust JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) are multifunctional cytokines that belong to
the TGF-beta superfamily. BMP have been shown to regulate haematopoietic stem
cells, B lymphopoiesis and early thymocyte differentiation. In the present study 
we explored the role of BMP-6 in Jurkat TAg cells. BMP-6 rapidly induced
phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, p38 and ERK1/2, followed by a potent up-regulation 
of ID1, ID2 and ID3. ID1 and ID3 were also induced at the protein level.
Genome-wide expression profiling of cells treated with BMP-6 compared to medium
confirmed that ID1-ID3 were target genes of BMP-6 together with Noggin and Smad6.
Furthermore, several genes involved in transcriptional regulation were also
identified, including NFKBIA, HEY1, DLX2, KLF10 and early growth response 1.
Stimulation with BMP-6 exerted an antiproliferative effect that was counteracted 
by inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)1 siRNA, indicating that Id1 is an important
downstream mediator in Jurkat TAg cells. A subset of CD4(+) T cells were found to
express the BMP receptors Alk-2 and Alk-3 (type I), in addition to BMPRII (type
II). BMP-6 also induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, followed by transcriptional
increase in ID1-ID3 mRNA expression. However, we did not observe significant
changes in Id protein expression in CD4(+) T cells. Altogether, the data indicate
a role for BMP-6 in human T lineage cells.

PMID: 17899540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Immunol. 2007 Oct 1;179(7):4694-703.

Early growth response 1 and NF-ATc1 act in concert to promote thymocyte
development beyond the beta-selection checkpoint.

Koltsova EK(1), Ciofani M, Benezra R, Miyazaki T, Clipstone N, Zúñiga-Pflücker
JC, Wiest DL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Immunobiology Working Group, Fox Chase Cancer
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Development of immature T cell precursors beyond the beta-selection checkpoint is
regulated by signals transduced by the pre-TCR complex. The pre-TCR-induced
differentiation program is orchestrated by a network of transcription factors
that serve to integrate this signaling information. Among these transcription
factors are those of the early growth response (Egr) and NF-AT families. In this 
study, we demonstrate that Egr1 and NF-ATc1 act together to promote development
of T cell precursors beyond the beta-selection checkpoint to the CD8 immature
single-positive and CD4+ CD8+ double-positive stages. Moreover, we find that Egr1
and NF-AT cooperatively induce the expression of inhibitor of DNA binding 3
(Id3), a regulatory factor known to play an important role in positive selection 
of thymocytes, but not previously demonstrated to be required for beta-selection.
Importantly, we show in this study that Id3 deficiency abrogates the ability of
ectopically expressed Egr1 to promote traversal of the beta-selection checkpoint.
Id3 is presumably essential for traversal of the beta-selection checkpoint in
this context because of the inability of other inhibitor of DNA binding family
members to compensate, since transgenic Egr1 does not induce expression of
inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) or 2 (Id2). Taken together, these data
demonstrate that Id3 is a cooperatively induced target that is important for
Egr-mediated promotion of development beyond the beta-selection checkpoint.
Moreover, these data indicate that the ERK and calcium signaling pathways may
converge during beta-selection through the concerted action of Egr1 and NF-ATc1, 
respectively.

PMID: 17878368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Comput Biol Med. 2008 Jan;38(1):42-52. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Induction of multiple criteria optimal classification rules for biological and
medical data.

Li HL(1), Chen MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Information Management, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta
Hsueh Road, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan, Republic of China. hlli@cc.nctu.edu.tw

To induce critical classification rules from observed data is a major task in
biological and medical research. A classification rule is considered to be useful
if it is optimal and simultaneously satisfies three criteria: is highly accurate,
has a high rate of support, and is highly compact. However, current
classification methods, such as rough set theory, neural networks, ID3, etc., may
only induce feasible rules instead of optimal rules. In addition, the rules found
by current methods may only satisfy one of the three criteria. This study
proposes a multi-criteria model to induce optimal classification rules with
better rates of accuracy, support and compactness. A linear multi-objective
programming model for inducing classification rules is formulated. Two practical 
data sets, one of HSV patients results and another of European barn swallows, are
tested. The results illustrate that the proposed method can induce better rules
than current methods.

PMID: 17869236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Dev Dyn. 2007 Oct;236(10):2825-35.

Temporal and spatial regulation of bone morphogenetic protein signaling in late
lung development.

Alejandre-Alcázar MA(1), Shalamanov PD, Amarie OV, Sevilla-Pérez J, Seeger W,
Eickelberg O, Morty RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Giessen Lung Center, Justus
Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) play important roles in early lung
development. No study to date has addressed a role for BMP signaling in late lung
development. We describe changes in the expression and localization of BMP
receptors (Bmpr1a, Bmpr1b, and Bmpr2) and Smad (Smad1, Smad4, Smad5, and Smad8)
intracellular signaling proteins during the saccular and alveolarization stages
of late lung development. BMP signaling, assessed by Smad1/5 phosphorylation,
nuclear translocation, and induction of id1, id2, and id3 gene expression, was
evident throughout late lung development. Our data indicate that BMP signaling is
active during late lung development, and points to roles for the BMP system in
septal and vascular development, and in the homeostasis of the epithelial layer
of large conducting airways in the mature lung.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17823941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Dev Cell. 2007 Aug;13(2):283-97.

Id sustains Hes1 expression to inhibit precocious neurogenesis by releasing
negative autoregulation of Hes1.

Bai G(1), Sheng N, Xie Z, Bian W, Yokota Y, Benezra R, Kageyama R, Guillemot F,
Jing N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Negative bHLH transcription factor Hes1 can inhibit neural stem cells (NSCs) from
precocious neurogenesis through repressing proneural gene expression; therefore, 
sustenance of Hes1 expression is crucial for NSC pool maintenance. Here we find
that Ids, the dominant-negative regulators of proneural proteins, are expressed
prior to proneural genes and share an overlapping expression pattern with Hes1 in
the early neural tube of chick embryos. Overexpression of Id2 in the chick
hindbrain upregulates Hes1 expression and inhibits proneural gene expression and 
neuronal differentiation. By contrast, Hes1 expression decreases, proneural gene 
expression expands, and neurogenesis occurs precociously in Id1;Id3 double
knockout mice and in Id1-3 RNAi-electroporated chick embryos. Mechanistic studies
show that Id proteins interact directly with Hes1 and release the negative
feedback autoregulation of Hes1 without interfering with its ability to affect
other target genes. These results indicate that Id proteins participate in NSC
maintenance through sustaining Hes1 expression in early embryos.

PMID: 17681138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Prostate. 2007 Sep 15;67(13):1411-20.

ID1-, ID2-, and ID3-regulated gene expression in E2A positive or negative
prostate cancer cells.

Asirvatham AJ(1), Carey JP, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia 30314, USA.

BACKGROUND: The inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins are expressed in
prostate cancer (PCA). However, there is a general lack of Id isoform-specific
downstream effectors.
METHODS: Id1, Id2, or Id3 were silenced in PCA cell lines LNCaP, DU145, and PC3
using gene-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA). The effect of Id gene
silencing on representative genes involved in apoptosis (p53, SNAIL2),
proliferation (p21, p16), and tumor invasion (E-cadherin and MMP9) was
investigated by real-time PCR. Expression of E-proteins, the primary Id
interaction partners was also evaluated to understand the molecular mechanism of 
action.
RESULTS: The Id proteins regulated the expression of CDKNIs p16 and p21 even in
the absence of E-proteins. Loss of Id1 and Id3 up- or downregulated E-cadherin
expression in E-protein negative or positive PCA cell lines, respectively. The
effect of Id genes on cell proliferation was also independent of CDKNIs in p16
and p21 null PC3 cells. The p53-independent anti-apoptotic effect of Id2 was
mediated in part by transcriptional repressor SNAI2. MMP9 seems to be the common 
target of all three Id genes (Id1, Id2, and Id3).
CONCLUSIONS: The overall effect of Id proteins on proliferation and apoptosis is 
independent of E-proteins. E-proteins can however determine the magnitude of
response or in some cases even reverse the Id-mediated target gene expression.
Evaluating E-protein expression in conjunction with Id proteins will allow better
understanding of the molecular mechanism of action of Id proteins and increase
their prognostic significance in PCA.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 17639499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Methods Mol Biol. 2007;377:203-22.

Progression-associated genes in astrocytoma identified by novel microarray gene
expression data reanalysis.

MacDonald TJ(1), Pollack IF, Okada H, Bhattacharya S, Lyons-Weiler J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's Research Institute,
Department of Hematology-Oncology, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, USA.

Astrocytoma is graded as pilocytic (WHO grade I), diffuse (WHO grade II),
anaplastic (WHO grade III), and glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV). The
progression from low- to high-grade astrocytoma is associated with distinct
molecular changes that vary with patient age, yet the prognosis of high-grade
tumors in children and adults is equally dismal. Whether specific gene expression
changes are consistently associated with all high-grade astrocytomas, independent
of patient age, is not known. To address this question, we reanalyzed the
microarray datasets comprising astrocytomas from children and adults,
respectively. We identified nine genes consistently dysregulated in high-grade
tumors, using four novel tests for identifying differentially expressed genes.
Four genes encoding ribosomal proteins (RPS2, RPS8, RPS18, RPL37A) were
upregulated, and five genes (APOD, SORL1, SPOCK2, PRSS11, ID3) were downregulated
in high-grade by all tests. Expression results were validated using a third
astrocytoma dataset. APOD, the most differentially expressed gene, has been shown
to inhibit tumor cell and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. This
suggests that dysregulation of APOD may be critical for malignant astrocytoma
formation, and thus a possible novel universal target for therapeutic
intervention. Further investigation is needed to evaluate the role of APOD, as
well as the other genes identified, in malignant astrocytoma development.

PMID: 17634619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2351-60. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Id1, but not Id3, directs long-term repopulating hematopoietic stem-cell
maintenance.

Perry SS(1), Zhao Y, Nie L, Cochrane SW, Huang Z, Sun XH.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology and Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

E-proteins are widely expressed basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription
factors that regulate differentiation in many cell lineages, including lymphoid, 
muscle, and neuronal cells. E-protein function is controlled by HLH inhibitors
such as Id and SCL/TAL1 proteins, which recently have been suggested to play a
role in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) differentiation. However, the precise
stages when these proteins are expressed and their specific functions are not
entirely clear. Using a knock-in mouse model where the sequence for the enhanced 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) was inserted downstream of the Id1 promoter, we
were able to track Id1 expression on an individual cell basis and detected Id1
expression in long-term repopulating HSCs (LT-HSCs). Functional assays showed
that the Id1/GFP(+)Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(Hi) population was highly enriched for
LT-HSCs. Consistent with this expression pattern, Id1 deficiency led to a 2-fold 
reduction in the number of LT-HSCs defined as
Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(Hi)CD48(-)CD150(+). Primary bone marrow transplantation
studies revealed that Id1 is dispensable for short-term engraftment. In contrast,
both Id1(-/-) whole bone marrow and Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(Hi)Thy1.1(Lo)-enriched
HSCs, but not Id3(-/-) marrow, displayed impaired engraftment relative to
wild-type controls in secondary transplantation assays. These findings suggest a 
unique role for Id1 in LT-HSC maintenance and hematopoietic development.

PMCID: PMC1988946
PMID: 17622570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Bioinformation. 2005 Aug 31;1(2):40-1.

Rapid identification of female Culexmosquito species using Expert System in the
South East Asian region.

Murty US(1), Kumar DV, Rao MS, Reuben R, Tewari SC, Hiriyan J, Akiyama J,
Akavaram D.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Biology Division, Indian Institute of Chemical
Technology (CSIR), Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India. murty_usn@yahoo.com

Rapid identification of mosquito (vector) species is critical for vector control 
and disease management. Pictorial keys of mosquito species are currently used for
the identification of new mosquito species. However, this approach is not very
effective. Here, we describe the use of an ID3 algorithm (part of artificial
intelligence) for the rapid identification of the South East Asian female Culex
mosquito species.AVAILABILITY: http://www.envisiict.org/

PMCID: PMC1891630
PMID: 17597850  [PubMed]


350. Bioinformation. 2005 Apr 21;1(1):14-5.

A rapid identification system for metallothionein proteins using expert system.

Praveen B(1), Vincent S, Murty US, Krishna AR, Jamil K.

Author information: 
(1)Biology division, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad-500 007, 
India. bhoopathip@gmail.com

Metallothioneins (MT) are low molecular weight proteins mostly rich in cysteine
residues with high metal content. Generally, MT proteins are responsible for
regulating the intracellular supply of biologically essential metal ions and they
protect cells from the deleterious effects of non-essential polarizable
transition and post-transition metal ions. Due to their biological importance,
proper characterization of MT is necessary. Here we describe a computer program
(ID3 algorithm, a part of Artificial Intelligence) developed using available data
for the rapid identification of MT. Tissue samples contains several low molecular
weight proteins with different physical, chemical and biological characteristics.
The described software solution proposes to categorize MT proteins without
aromatic amino acids and high metal content. The proposed solution can be
expanded to other types of proteins with specific known characteristics.

PMCID: PMC1891620
PMID: 17597844  [PubMed]


351. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jul 27;359(2):317-22. Epub 2007 May 24.

Identification of apoptosis-related PLZF target genes.

Bernardo MV(1), Yelo E, Gimeno L, Campillo JA, Parrado A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, El
Palmar, Murcia, Spain.

The PLZF gene encodes a BTB/POZ-zinc finger-type transcription factor, involved
in physiological development, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. In
this paper, we investigate proliferation, survival, and gene expression
regulation in stable clones from the human haematopoietic K562, DG75, and Jurkat 
cell lines with inducible expression of PLZF. In Jurkat cells, but not in K562
and DG75 cells, PLZF induced growth suppression and apoptosis in a cell
density-dependent manner. Deletion of the BTB/POZ domain of PLZF abrogated growth
suppression and apoptosis. PLZF was expressed with a nuclear speckled pattern
distinctively in the full-length PLZF-expressing Jurkat clones, suggesting that
the nuclear speckled localization is required for PLZF-induced apoptosis. By
microarray analysis, we identified that the apoptosis-inducer TP53INP1, ID1, and 
ID3 genes were upregulated, and the apoptosis-inhibitor TERT gene was
downregulated. The identification of apoptosis-related PLZF target genes may have
biological and clinical relevance in cancer typified by altered PLZF expression.

PMID: 17537403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Immunology. 2007 Sep;122(1):73-9. Epub 2007 Apr 30.

B-lymphocyte depletion ameliorates Sjögren's syndrome in Id3 knockout mice.

Hayakawa I(1), Tedder TF, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Sjögren's syndrome is an autoimmune disease in which immune cells chronically
attack the lachrymal and salivary glands. The Id3 knockout mouse is a newly
established animal model for primary Sjögren's syndrome. To address the role of B
cells in Sjögren's syndrome and autoimmune disease, we studied the effect of CD20
monoclonal antibody treatment on the disease in Id3 knockout mice. Antibody
treatment at 2-month intervals led to efficient and sustained B-cell depletion in
Id3 knockout mice. A significant improvement of histopathology was observed
accompanied by the recovery of saliva secretory function after CD20 antibody
treatment. We further show that serum immunoglobulin G3, which is abnormally high
in untreated Id3 knockout mice, was reduced after CD20 antibody treatment. This
study establishes a new animal model for immunotherapy of Sjögren's symptoms and 
suggests a possible link between immunoglobulin G3 and disease pathology in Id3
knockout mice.

PMCID: PMC2265983
PMID: 17472721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 23;26(39):5772-83. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Id3 is a novel regulator of p27kip1 mRNA in early G1 phase and is required for
cell-cycle progression.

Chassot AA(1), Turchi L, Virolle T, Fitsialos G, Batoz M, Deckert M, Dulic V,
Meneguzzi G, Buscà R, Ponzio G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U634; Faculté de Médecine, Université Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice
cedex, France.

P27kip is a key inhibitory protein of the cell-cycle progression, which is
rapidly downregulated in early G1 phase by a post-translational mechanism
involving the proteosomal degradation. In this study, using a wounding model that
induces cell-cycle entry of human dermal fibroblasts, we demonstrate that p27mRNA
is downregulated when cells progress into the G1 phase, and then it returns to
its basal level when cells approach the S phase. By using a quantitative
polymerase chain reaction screening we identified inhibitors of differentiation
(Id3), a bHLH transcriptional repressor, as a candidate mediator accounting for
p27 mRNA decrease. Id3 silencing, using an small interfering RNA approach,
reversed the injury mediated p27 downregulation demonstrating that Id3 is
involved in the transcriptional repression of p27. Reporter gene experiments and 
a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that Id3 likely exerts its
repressive action through ELK1 inhibition. By inhibiting early p27
downregulation, Id3 depletion blocked (i) the G1-phase progression as assessed by
the inhibition of pRb phosphorylation and p130 degradation and (ii) the G1/S
transition as observed by the inhibition of cyclin A induction, demonstrating
that p27 mRNA decrease is required for cell proliferation. Apart from its effect 
on the early p27 diminution, Id3 appears also involved in the control of the
steady-state level of p27 at the G1/S boundary. In conclusion, this study
identifies a novel mechanism of p27 regulation which besides p27 protein
degradation also implicates a transcriptional mechanism mediated by Id3.

PMID: 17404577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 May;27(5):1072-8. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Dysregulated bone morphogenetic protein signaling in monocrotaline-induced
pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Morty RE(1), Nejman B, Kwapiszewska G, Hecker M, Zakrzewicz A, Kouri FM, Peters
DM, Dumitrascu R, Seeger W, Knaus P, Schermuly RT, Eickelberg O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Giessen Lung Center, Justus
Liebig University, Aulweg 123 (Raum 6-11), D-35392 Giessen, Germany.
rory.morty@innere.med.uni-giessen.de

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the bmpr2 gene, encoding the type II bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP) receptor, have been identified in patients with pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH), implicating BMP signaling in PAH. The aim of this study was
to assess BMP signaling and its physiological effects in a monocrotaline (MCT)
model of PAH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of BMP receptors Ib and II, and Smads 4, 5, 6,
and 8, was downregulated in lungs but not kidneys of MCT-treated rats. Smad1
phosphorylation and expression of BMP/Smad target genes id1 and id3 was also
reduced, although ERK1/2 and p38(MAPK) phosphorylation remained unaffected. BMP
receptor and Smad expression, Smad1 phosphorylation, and induction of the
BMP/Smad-responsive element of the id1 promoter were reduced in pulmonary artery 
smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) from MCT-treated rats. As a consequence of impaired 
BMP/Smad signaling, PASMCs from MCT-treated rats were resistant to apoptosis
induced by BMP-4 and BMP-7, and were also resistant to BMP-4 antagonism of
proliferation induced by platelet-derived growth factor.
CONCLUSION: BMP signaling and BMP-regulated physiological phenomena are perturbed
in MCT-treated rats, lending solid support to the proposed roles for BMP
signaling in the pathogenesis of human PAH.

PMID: 17347486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 Apr 1;220(1):9-17. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) exposure of normal human dermal
fibroblasts results in AhR-dependent and -independent changes in gene expression.

Akintobi AM(1), Villano CM, White LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, 76 Lipman Dr., Rutgers, The State
University of NJ, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) results in a variety of
lesions in mammals including severe skin lesions. The majority of TCDD's
biological effects are mediated through activation of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR). We have chosen to examine the effect of TCDD and the AhR pathway 
on dermal fibroblasts because this cell type plays an integral role in skin
homeostasis through the production of cytokines and other factors that regulate
epidermal proliferation and differentiation. Our data show that normal human
dermal fibroblasts (NHDFs) are responsive to TCDD, as demonstrated by induction
of cytochrome p450 1B1 (CYP1B1) expression. Further, our data demonstrate that
TCDD treatment of NHDFs results in significant (75-90%) decrease in expression of
Id-1 and Id-3, proteins that are involved in regulation of cell proliferation and
differentiation. The Id (Inhibitor of DNA binding) proteins are transcriptional
inhibitors that function by forming inactive heterodimers with other HLH
proteins. TCDD-repression of Id-1 and -3 is independent of de novo protein
synthesis; co-treatment with cycloheximide has no effect on TCDD inhibition of
Id-1 and Id-3. Co-treatment with the AhR antagonist alpha-naphthoflavone also
does not block inhibition of Id-1 and Id-3 by TCDD, suggesting that TCDD
inhibition of Id-1 and Id-3 is, at least in part, mediated independently of the
AhR pathway. Our data also show that TCDD inhibits expression of the cell cycle
regulatory gene p16(ink4a), which is often linked to Id expression. TCDD-induced 
reduction of p16(ink4a) expression is also independent of protein synthesis and
the AhR pathway.

PMID: 17257637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 9;354(2):567-73. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

CCN3/NOV inhibits BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation by interacting with
BMP and Notch signaling pathways.

Minamizato T(1), Sakamoto K, Liu T, Kokubo H, Katsube K, Perbal B, Nakamura S,
Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Graduate School of Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan.

We elucidate the role of CCN3/NOV, a member of the CCN family proteins, in
osteoblast differentiation using MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells. Transduction with
CCN3 adenovirus (AdCCN3) alone induced no apparent changes in the expression of
osteoblast-related markers, whereas cotransduction with BMP-2 adenovirus
(AdBMP-2) and AdCCN3 significantly inhibited the AdBMP-2-induced mRNA expression 
of Runx2, osterix, ALP, and osteocalcin. Immunoprecipitation-western analysis
revealed that CCN3 associated with BMP-2. Compared to transduction with AdBMP-2
alone, cotransduction with AdBMP-2 and AdCCN3 attenuated the expression of
phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 and the mRNA for Id1, Id2, and Id3. Transduction with
AdCCN3 stimulated the expression of cleaved Notch1, the mRNA expression of Hes1
and Hey1/Hesr1, and the promoter activities of Hes1 and Hey1. The inhibitory
effects of CCN3 on the expression of BMP-2-induced osteoblast-related markers
were nullified in Hey1-deficient osteoblastic cells. These results indicate that 
CCN3 exerts inhibitory effects on BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation by its
involvement of the BMP and Notch signaling pathways.

PMID: 17250806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Regul Pept. 2006 Nov 15;137(1-2):89-94. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Possible implication of the transcriptional regulator Id3 in PACAP-induced
pro-survival signaling during PC12 cell differentiation.

Ghzili H(1), Grumolato L, Thouënnon E, Vaudry H, Anouar Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U413, European Institute for Peptide Research IFRMP 23, Laboratory of
Cellular and Molecular Neuroendocrinology, UA CNRS, University of Rouen, 76821
Mont-Saint-Aignan, France.

PACAP inhibits cell proliferation and promotes cell survival and neurite
outgrowth of pheochromocytoma PC12 cells. Transcriptome analysis of PACAP-treated
PC12 cells allowed to identify potential genes implicated in this differentiation
process. Among the genes whose expression is up-regulated by PACAP, we identified
the Inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (Id3). Id3 is a member of the helix-loop-helix
(HLH) family of transcription factors which acts as a negative dominant inhibitor
of basic HLH factors. Time-course studies revealed that Id3 is an early PACAP
response gene (8-fold after 1 h of stimulation), and that the up-regulation of
its expression persists over 12 h after the onset of PACAP treatment. The
stimulatory effect of PACAP on Id3 mRNA levels was mimicked by adenylate
cyclase/PKA activators like forskolin and dibutyryl cyclic AMP. Moreover,
PACAP-induced Id3 gene expression was inhibited by phosphatidylinositol
3'-OH-kinase and p38 MAP kinase blockers. Northern blot analysis of Id3
distribution in rat tissues showed a strong expression of this gene in the
adrenal medulla. Overexpression of Id3 increased the number of living PC12 cells,
in basal condition and after exposure to oxidative stress. These results indicate
that Id3 is a cAMP-responsive gene whose up-regulation could be involved in
PACAP-induced pro-survival signaling during sympathoadrenal cell differentiation.

PMID: 16928405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;91(11):4603-11. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG) stimulates thyroid cell proliferation
via a vascular endothelial growth factor/kinase insert domain receptor/inhibitor 
of DNA binding-3 autocrine pathway.

Kim DS(1), Franklyn JA, Boelaert K, Eggo MC, Watkinson JC, McCabe CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) exerts its biological effects 
by binding to the tyrosine kinase receptors VEGF receptor type 1 (VEGFR1/Flt-1)
and VEGFR2 (Flk-1/KDR). Kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) is the critical
receptor controlling proliferation and migration of endothelial cells and has
been shown to be expressed in some nonendothelial cells. We recently reported
that the proangiogenic pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG) stimulates VEGF
and up-regulates inhibitor of DNA binding-3 (ID3), an important gene in
VEGF-dependent angiogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to test whether VEGF, ID3, and KDR confer a
PTTG-mediated effect on thyroid cell growth.
DESIGN: Gene expression, MAPK stimulation, and cell proliferation were assessed
in follicular thyroid cancer FTC133 cells. Gene expression and clinical
associations were determined in 21 normal and 38 tumorous thyroid specimens (nine
follicular and 29 papillary).
RESULTS: ID3 correlated with VEGF mRNA expression in our series of thyroid
cancers, which also showed up-regulated KDR mRNA. Stimulation of FTC133 cells
with exogenous VEGF enhanced ID3 expression, which could be abrogated by the
KDR-specific inhibitor ZM323881, suggesting that VEGF regulation of ID3 is KDR
dependent. PTTG significantly correlated with KDR mRNA expression in our thyroid 
cancer cohort and up-regulated KDR and VEGF expression in FTC133 cells. Finally, 
cells transfected with PTTG demonstrated increased cell proliferation and
phosphorylation of MAPK, which was abrogated by ZM323881.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the presence of a VEGF/KDR/ID3-dependent autocrine pathway
in FTC133 thyroid cells. By up-regulating both VEGF and KDR expression, we
propose a novel PTTG-mediated proliferative pathway that may be critical to
thyroid cancer growth and progression.

PMID: 16926250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Neurochem. 2006 Jul;98(2):459-70.

Overexpression of SOCS3 inhibits astrogliogenesis and promotes maintenance of
neural stem cells.

Cao F(1), Hata R, Zhu P, Ma YJ, Tanaka J, Hanakawa Y, Hashimoto K, Niinobe M,
Yoshikawa K, Sakanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Histology, Ehime Graduate University School of
Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan.

To investigate the effects of suppressors of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) on
neural stem cell fate, stem cells were infected with an adenoviral vector
expressing SOCS3. Three days later, western blot analysis and immunocytochemical 
analysis revealed that the protein level of MAP2 and the number of MAP2-positive 
cells were significantly increased in SOCS3-transfected cells, whereas the
protein level of GFAP and the number of GFAP-positive cells were significantly
decreased. Furthermore, promoter assay revealed a significant reduction in the
transcriptional level of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(Stat3) in the transfected cells. In addition, the mRNA levels of Notch family
member (notch1) and inhibitory basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors (hes5 and
id3) were significantly up-regulated 1 day after overexpression of SOCS3. Three
days after transfection, the mRNA level of hes5 was significantly decreased,
whereas that of notch1 was still up-regulated. Moreover, all of SOCS3-positive
cells expressed Nestin protein but did not express MAP2 or GFAP proteins. These
data indicate that overexpression of SOCS3 induced neurogenesis and inhibited
astrogliogenesis in neural stem cells. Our data also show that SOCS3 promoted
maintenance of neural stem cells.

PMID: 16805839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Chembiochem. 2006 Aug;7(8):1164-8.

Stepwise solid-phase synthesis and spontaneous homodimerization of the
helix-loop-helix protein Id3.

Svobodová J(1), Cabrele C.

Author information: 
(1)Fakultät für Chemie und Pharmazie, Universität Regensburg, Universitätsstrasse
31, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

PMID: 16800014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mech Dev. 2006 Jul;123(7):580-90. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Id3 is important for proliferation and differentiation of the hepatoblasts during
the chick liver development.

Nakayama M(1), Matsumoto K, Tatsumi N, Yanai M, Yokouchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pattern Formation, Department of Organogenesis, Institute of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Japan.

The specified hepatic endoderm (hepatoblasts), the bipotential progenitor for
hepatocytes and bile duct epithelial cells, proliferates during the primordial
stages of liver development. Despite extensive studies, the mechanism that
regulates proliferation of bipotential hepatoblasts is not fully understood. Here
we show that Id3, a negative regulator of helix-loop-helix transcription factors,
is an important regulator of hepatoblast proliferation in the developing chick
liver. Id3 was expressed in hepatoblasts at early developmental stages (stages
12-29) but not in hepatocytes at later developmental stages (stage 34 onwards).
Depletion of Id3 in hepatoblasts by siRNA results in failure of cell
proliferation, but is not associated with either cell death or failure of
expression of Hhex and Fibrinogen, the earliest hepatoblast markers. These
observations suggest that at early developmental stages, Id3 functions as a
positive regulator of hepatoblast proliferation, independent of cell death or
maintenance of the non-terminally differentiated state. Interestingly at later
developmental stages, the expression pattern of Id3 is complementary to that of
Albumin, a marker of mature hepatocytes. Overexpression of Id3 in liver explants 
delayed the initiation of Albumin expression. Taken together, our observations
show that Id3 is not only a positive regulator of hepatoblast proliferation, but 
also an inhibitor of their differentiation into hepatocytes in the developing
chick liver.

PMID: 16793241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Toxicol Sci. 2006 Nov;94(1):139-52. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Novel retinoid targets in the mouse limb during organogenesis.

Ali-Khan SE(1), Hales BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Comment in
    Toxicol Sci. 2006 Nov;94(1):1-2.

Bioactive retinoids are potent limb teratogens, upregulating apoptosis,
decreasing chondrogenesis, and producing limb-reduction defects. To target the
origins of these effects, we examined gene expression changes in the developing
murine limb after 3 h of culture with teratogenic concentrations of vitamin A.
Embryonic day 12 CD-1 limbs were cultured in the absence or presence of vitamin A
(retinol acetate) at 1.25 and 62.5muM (n = 5). Total RNA was used to probe Atlas 
1.2 cDNA arrays. Eighty-one genes were significantly upregulated by retinol
exposure; among these were key limb development signaling molecules,
extracellular matrix and adhesion proteins, oncogenes, and a large number of
transcriptional regulators, including Eya2, Id3, Snail, and Hes1. To relate these
expression changes to teratogenic outcome, the response of these four genes was
assessed after culture with vitamin A and retinoid receptor antagonists that are 
able to rescue retinoid-induced malformations; expression levels were correlated 
with limb malformations. Lastly, pathways analysis revealed that a large number
of the genes significantly affected by retinoid treatment are functionally linked
through direct interactions. Several regulatory gene cascades emerged relevant to
morphogenesis, cell-fate, and chondrogenesis; moreover, members of these cascades
crosstalk with one other. These results indicate that retinoids act in a
coordinated fashion to disrupt development at multiple levels. In sum, this work 
proposes several unifying mechanisms for retinoid-induced limb malformations,
identifies novel retinoid targets, and highlights Eya2, Id3, Snail, and Hes1 as
potential key teratogenic effectors.

PMID: 16772331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 Jun;21(6):902-9.

Dysregulation of the BMP-p38 MAPK signaling pathway in cells from patients with
fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP).

Fiori JL(1), Billings PC, de la Peña LS, Kaplan FS, Shore EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6081, USA.

FOP is a disabling disorder in which skeletal muscle is progressively replaced
with bone. Lymphocytes, our model system for examining BMP signaling, cannot
signal through the canonical Smad pathway unless exogenous Smad1 is supplied,
providing a unique cell type in which the BMP-p38 MAPK pathway can be examined.
FOP lymphocytes exhibit defects in the BMP-p38 MAPK pathway, suggesting that
altered BMP signaling underlies ectopic bone formation in this
disease.INTRODUCTION: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare
genetic disorder characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification of
connective tissues. Whereas the primary genetic defect in this condition is
unknown, BMP4 mRNA and protein and BMP receptor type IA (BMPRIA) protein are
overexpressed in cultured lymphocytes from FOP patients, supporting that altered 
BMP signaling is involved in this disease. In this study, we examined downstream 
signaling targets to study the BMP-Smad and BMP-p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathways in FOP.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Protein phosphorylation was assayed by immunoblots, and
p38 MAPK activity was measured by kinase assays. To examine BMP target genes, the
mRNA expression of ID1, ID3, and MSX2 was determined by quantitative real-time
PCR. Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t-test or ANOVA.
RESULTS: FOP lymphocytes exhibited increased levels of p38 phosphorylation and
p38 MAPK activity in response to BMP4 stimulation. Furthermore, in response to
BMP4, FOP cells overexpressed the downstream signaling targets ID1 by 5-fold and 
ID3 by 3-fold compared with controls. ID1 and ID3 mRNA induction was specifically
blocked with a p38 MAPK inhibitor, but not extracellular signal-related kinase
(ERK) or c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitors. MSX2, a known Smad pathway
target gene, is not upregulated in control or FOP cells in response to BMP,
suggesting that lymphocytes do not use this limb of the BMP pathway. However,
introduction of Smad1 into lymphocytes made the cells competent to regulate MSX2 
mRNA after BMP4 treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Lymphocytes are a cell system that signals primarily through the
BMP-p38 MAPK pathway rather than the BMP-Smad pathway in response to BMP4. The
p38 MAPK pathway is dysregulated in FOP lymphocytes, which may play a role in the
pathogenesis of FOP.

PMID: 16753021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Jul;41(1):26-33. Epub 2006 May 22.

Upregulation of ID protein by growth and differentiation factor 5 (GDF5) through 
a smad-dependent and MAPK-independent pathway in HUVSMC.

Chen X(1), Zankl A, Niroomand F, Liu Z, Katus HA, Jahn L, Tiefenbacher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Bergheimerstrasse 58,
69115 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Jul;41(1):4-7.

GDF5 (growth and differentiation factor five), a member of the TGF-beta
superfamily, binds specifically to BMPR1b, BMPR2 and ACTR2a receptors forming a
heterodimeric complex, thereby inducing phosphorylation of smad1, 5, 8 and
translocation to the nucleus. ID1 (inhibitor of differentiation or DNA binding)
is essential for G1 to S phase transition inhibiting DNA binding thereby playing 
an important role in the control of differentiation, proliferation and
angiogenesis. The objective of this study was, therefore, to characterize the
signal transduction pathway of GDF5, especially the involvement of ID1, in human 
umbilical vein smooth muscle cells (HUVSMC). We observed the expression of
BMPR1a, BMPR1b, BMPR2, ACTR2a, smad1, smad 5, ID1, ID2 and ID3 in HUVSMC.
Application of GDF5 upregulated ID1 and ID3 expression by involvement of the smad
signaling pathway. GDF5 caused phorsphorylation of smad1 followed by upregulation
of ID1 and ID3. Co-incubation with anti-GDF5 prevented these effects. GDF5
significantly inhibited phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and induced phosphorylation
of ERK. The specific inhibitor of p38 MAPK or ERK, SB203580 or U0126 did not
induce ID protein expression. Smad1 siRNA transfection inhibited the upregulation
of ID protein. GDF5 had chemotactic activity in HUVSMC; this effect was partly
blocked by transfection of smad1 or ID1 siRNA. Our results indicate that GDF5
induces ID1 and ID3 in HUVSMC by a smad-dependent, MAPK-independent pathway. GDF5
binds to specific receptors, thereby inducing phosphorylation and translocation
of smad1 to the nucleus where it is involved in the regulation of transcription. 
Since ID1 has been shown to be crucial for cell cycle control, we propose that
GDF5 could be involved in the process of angiogenesis.

PMID: 16716349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 May;23(9):2277-88.

Requirement for Id1 in opioid-induced oligodendrogenesis in cultured adult rat
hippocampal progenitors.

Persson AI(1), Bull C, Eriksson PS.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory for Molecular Neurobiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Göteborg University, Guldhedsgatan 19, Floor 1, S-413 45 Göteborg, Sweden.
Anders.Persson@neuro.gu.se

Growth factors and peptides playing important roles during early development of
the central nervous system have also been shown to maintain their regulation of
cell genesis in the adult brain. We have previously described that endogenous
opioids, expressed in the developing hippocampus, regulate proliferation and
differentiation in the adult rat hippocampus. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of the opioid beta-endorphin on gene expression and glial
differentiation in cultures of adult rat hippocampal progenitors (AHPs). Changes 
in gene expression after stimulation of AHPs with beta-endorphin for 48 h were
investigated using cDNA arrays. Confirmation experiments verified that
stimulation with beta-endorphin increased the mRNA levels of myelin basic
protein, glutathione S-transferase pi, c-junD and rab16 (P < 0.05), genes that
are associated with oligodendrogenesis. Furthermore, beta-endorphin increased the
levels of Id1, but not Id3, mRNA on the arrays. Incubation of AHPs with
beta-endorphin resulted in a threefold increase in oligodendrogenesis (P < 0.01) 
but no significant change in astrogliogenesis. No effect on oligodendrogenesis
was observed in the presence of the opioid antagonist naloxone. Coincubation of
beta-endorphin with Id1 antisense oligonucleotides for 10 days also entirely
blocked the induced oligodendrogenesis in our AHP cultures. Moreover, a
subpopulation of AHPs (25%) showed nuclear expression of the proneural
transcriptional activator Mash1 that was reduced to approximately 5% of the cells
when exposed to beta-endorphin. We suggest a requirement for Id1 in
opioid-induced oligodendrogenesis in cultured AHPs possibly acting on
opioid-responsive AHPs expressing the proneural transcriptional activator Mash1.

PMID: 16706836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jun 15;15(12):2003-14. Epub 2006 May 8.

Inhibitors of differentiation (ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4) genes are neuronal targets 
of MeCP2 that are elevated in Rett syndrome.

Peddada S(1), Yasui DH, LaSalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Rowe Program in Human Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of California, CA 95616, USA.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder caused by
mutations in MECP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2. MeCP2 is a
transcriptional repressor elevated in mature neurons and is predicted to be
required for neuronal maturation by regulating multiple target genes. Identifying
primary gene targets in either Mecp2-deficient mice or human RTT brain has proven
to be difficult, perhaps because of the transient requirement for MeCP2 during
neuronal maturation. In order to experimentally control the timing of MeCP2
expression and deficiency during neuronal maturation, human SH-SY5Y cells
undergoing mature neuronal differentiation were transfected with methylated MeCP2
oligonucleotide decoy to disrupt the binding of MeCP2 to endogenous targets.
Genome-wide expression microarray analysis identified all four known members of
the inhibitors of differentiation or inhibitors of DNA-binding (ID1, ID2, ID3 and
ID4) subfamily of helix-loop-helix genes as novel neuronal targets of MeCP2.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed binding of MeCP2 near or within 
the promoters of ID1, ID2 and ID3, and quantitative RT-PCR confirmed increased
expression of all four Id genes in Mecp2-deficient mouse brain. All four ID
proteins were significantly increased in Mecp2-deficient mouse and human RTT
brain using immunofluorescence and laser scanning cytometric analyses. Because of
their involvement in cell differentiation and neural development, ID genes are
ideal primary targets for MeCP2 regulation of neuronal maturation that may
explain the molecular pathogenesis of RTT.

PMCID: PMC1931415
PMID: 16682435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Circ Res. 2006 May 26;98(10):1254-63. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Thrombin and NAD(P)H oxidase-mediated regulation of CD44 and BMP4-Id pathway in
VSMC, restenosis, and atherosclerosis.

Vendrov AE(1), Madamanchi NR, Hakim ZS, Rojas M, Runge MS.

Author information: 
(1)Carolina Cardiovascular Biology Center, Department of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7055, USA.

To characterize novel signaling pathways that underlie NAD(P)H oxidase-mediated
signaling in atherosclerosis, we first examined differences in thrombin-induced
gene expression between wild-type and p47phox(-/-) (NAD[P]H oxidase-deficient)
VSMC. Of the 9000 genes analyzed by cDNA microarray method at the G1/S transition
point, 76 genes were similarly and significantly modulated in both the cell
types, whereas another 22 genes that encompass various functional groups were
regulated in NAD(P)H oxidase-dependent manner. Among these 22 genes,
thrombin-induced NAD(P)H oxidase-mediated regulation of Klf15, Igbp1, Ak4,
Adamts5, Ech1, Serp1, Sec61a2, Aox1, Aoh1, Fxyd5, Rai14, and Serpinh1 was shown
for the first time in VSMC. The role of NAD(P)H oxidase in the regulation of a
subset of these genes (CD44, BMP4, Id1, and Id3) was confirmed using modulators
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, a ROS scavenger and in
gain-of-function experiments. We then characterized regulation of these genes in 
restenosis and atherosclerosis. In both apoE(-/-) mice and in a mouse vascular
injury model, these genes are regulated in NAD(P)H oxidase-dependent manner
during vascular lesion formation. Based on these findings, we propose that
NAD(P)H oxidase-dependent gene expression in general, and the CD44 and BMP4-Id
signaling pathway in particular, is important in restenosis and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 16601225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jul;19(7):931-41. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Id proteins expression in prostate cancer: high-level expression of Id-4 in
primary prostate cancer is associated with development of metastases.

Yuen HF(1), Chua CW, Chan YP, Wong YC, Wang X, Chan KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

A major cause of treatment failure for prostate cancer is the development of
androgen-independent metastatic disease. Id protein family, a group of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, has been shown to be involved in
carcinogenesis and a prognostic marker in several types of human cancers. In this
study, we examined the expressions of four Id proteins, Id-1, -2, -3 and -4, in
125 clinical prostate cancer specimens as well as 40 nodular hyperplasia
specimens by immunohistochemistry. The expressions of Id proteins were correlated
with Gleason grading and metastatic progress of the tumors. We found that Id
proteins were dysregulated in prostate cancer. Id-1 and -2 expressions were
elevated while Id-3 and -4 expressions were reduced in prostate cancers compared 
to nodular hyperplasia. Cytoplasmic staining of Id-1 (P=0.013) and nuclear
staining of Id-2 (P=0.001) and Id-4 (P<0.001) were positively correlated with
Gleason score. The results indicate that these Id proteins may play a positive
role in the development of prostate cancer. In contrast, Id-3 might have an
inverse relationship with prostate neoplastic transformation (P=0.002) and cancer
progression (P=0.022). We found that Id-4 nuclear overexpression in the primary
prostate cancers significantly increased the risks to the development of
metastasis in the patients (odds ratio=3.215, 95% confidence
interval=1.150-8.987, P=0.026). Our results suggest that in prostate cancer
patients, differential Id proteins expressions may be a useful marker for poor
prognosis, and Id-4 may be a potential prognostic marker for distant metastasis.

PMID: 16575399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14893-906. Epub 2006 Mar 22.

p204 protein overcomes the inhibition of the differentiation of P19 murine
embryonal carcinoma cells to beating cardiac myocytes by Id proteins.

Ding B(1), Liu CJ, Huang Y, Yu J, Kong W, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8024, USA.

We reported in the accompanying article (Ding, B., Liu, C., Huang, Y., Hickey, R.
P., Yu, J., Kong, W., and Lengyel, P. (2006) J. Biol. Chem. 281, 14882-14892)
that (i) the p204 protein is required for the differentiation of murine P19
embryonal carcinoma stem cells to beating cardiac myocytes, and (ii) the
expression of p204 in the differentiating P19 cells is synergistically
transactivated by the cardiac transcription factors Gata4, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. Here
we report that endogenous or ectopic inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins
inhibited the differentiation of P19 cells to myocytes. This was in consequence
of the binding of Id1, Id2, or Id3 protein to the Gata4 and Nkx2.5 proteins and
the resulting inhibitions (i) of the binding of these transcription factors to
each other and to DNA and (ii) of their synergistic transactivation of the
expression of various genes, including atrial natriuretic factor and Ifi204
(encoding p204). p204 overcame this inhibition by Id proteins in consequence of
(i) binding and sequestering Id proteins, (ii) accelerating their ubiquitination 
and degradation by proteasomes, and (iii) decreasing the level of Id proteins in 
the nucleus by increasing their translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. 
Points (ii) and (iii) depended on the presence of the nuclear export signal in
p204. In the course of the differentiation, Gata4, Nkx2.5, and p204 were
components of a positive feedback loop. This loop arose in consequence of it that
p204 overcame the inhibition of the synergistic activity of Gata4 and Nkx2.5 by
the Id proteins.

PMID: 16556596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Prostate. 2006 Jun 15;66(9):921-35.

Non-redundant inhibitor of differentiation (Id) gene expression and function in
human prostate epithelial cells.

Asirvatham AJ(1), Schmidt MA, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center For Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: The four Id (inhibitor of differentiation) proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3,
and Id4) dimerize and neutralize the transcriptional activity of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins. The Id proteins negatively regulate
differentiation and promote proliferation hence the expression of specific
subsets of Id proteins is high in many different types of cancers. However, the
expression of all the Id isoforms and their potential function in specific cancer
cell types is not known. In this study, the expression and function of all four
Id isoforms in prostate cancer cell lines was investigated to gain a better
understanding of the role of each Id isoform in normal prostate epithelial and
prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: Id gene and protein expression was evaluated in the context of androgen 
response. The cellular function of Id isoforms was evaluated by targeted loss of 
function of Id genes.
RESULTS: The four Id isoforms are differentially expressed and regulated in
normal human prostate epithelial cells versus prostate cancer cell lines DU145
and LNCaP. Id4 is present only in AR positive cells (normal and LNCaP) and its
expression regulated by androgens. Loss of Id1 and Id3 expression by siRNA
results in loss of proliferation. Loss of Id2 had no effect on proliferation but 
increased apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: A complex equilibrium between Id isoforms determines the cell fate. 
Id1 and Id3 target cellular proliferation, Id2 targets apoptosis, and Id4 may act
as a potential tumor suppressor in prostate epithelial cells.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16541417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Int J Neural Syst. 2006 Feb;16(1):63-78.

Neuro-fuzzy decision trees.

Bhatt RB(1), Gopal M.

Author information: 
(1)Control Laboratories, II/214, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology - Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhim - 110016, India.
rajen.bhatt@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Int J Neural Syst. 2006 Aug;16(4):319.

Fuzzy decision trees are powerful, top-down, hierarchical search methodology to
extract human interpretable classification rules. However, they are often
criticized to result in poor learning accuracy. In this paper, we propose
Neuro-Fuzzy Decision Trees (N-FDTs); a fuzzy decision tree structure with neural 
like parameter adaptation strategy. In the forward cycle, we construct fuzzy
decision trees using any of the standard induction algorithms like fuzzy ID3. In 
the feedback cycle, parameters of fuzzy decision trees have been adapted using
stochastic gradient descent algorithm by traversing back from leaf to root nodes.
With this strategy, during the parameter adaptation stage, we keep the
hierarchical structure of fuzzy decision trees intact. The proposed approach of
applying backpropagation algorithm directly on the structure of fuzzy decision
trees improves its learning accuracy without compromising the comprehensibility
(interpretability). The proposed methodology has been validated using
computational experiments on real-world datasets.

PMID: 16496439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Vascul Pharmacol. 2006 Apr;44(4):206-14. Epub 2006 Feb 14.

Angiogenic transcriptome of human microvascular endothelial cells: Effect of
hypoxia, modulation by atorvastatin.

Loboda A(1), Jazwa A, Jozkowicz A, Molema G, Dulak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian
University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.

Hypoxia changes expression of angiogenic genes. Statins were also reported to
affect blood vessel formation. However, data on the effects of statins on
endothelial cells in hypoxia are limited. Here, effect of hypoxia and
atorvastatin was assessed in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1).
Hypoxia (1% O2) up-regulated vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) but,
unexpectedly, it decreased interleukin-8 (IL-8) and placenta growth factor (PlGF)
expression. Atorvastatin (0.1-1 microM) attenuated PlGF in HMEC-1 in normoxia
while it decreased VEGF-A and IL-8 production both in normoxia and hypoxia.
Notably, the expression of VEGF-D, macrophage scavenger receptor-1 (MSR1),
transforming growth factor beta receptor III (TGFbetaR3) and inhibitor of DNA
binding 3 (ID3) was augmented by atorvastatin in cells cultured in normoxia,
while in hypoxia the statin attenuated their expression. These data showed that
hypoxia influenced in the opposite way the expression of major endothelial genes,
augmenting VEGF-A and decreasing IL-8 and PlGF. The influence of atorvastatin on 
angiogenic gene expression is complex, and final pro- or anti-angiogenic outcome 
of statin therapy remains to be established for numerous angiogenesis-related
diseases.

PMCID: PMC1626524
PMID: 16481221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Microbes Infect. 2006 Apr;8(4):1064-74. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

Helicobacter pylori regulates the expression of inhibitors of DNA binding (Id)
proteins by gastric epithelial cells.

Manzo BA(1), Crabtree JE, Fiona Campbell M, Tweedle D, Potten CS, Bajaj-Elliott
M, Sanderson IR, Wilson JW.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Gastroenterology, Institute of Cell and Molecular
Sciences, Barts and The London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of London, 4 Newark Street, London E1 2AT,UK.

Id transcription factors control proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis by 
inhibiting the DNA binding of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.
Increased expression of Id proteins promotes proliferation, inhibits
differentiation, and is associated with intestinal tumorigenesis. We aimed to
determine how Helicobacter pylori may alter the expression of Id proteins by
gastric epithelial cells: it was hypothesised that H. pylori, a known carcinogen,
would result in increased expression of one or more Id family members. In vitro
and in vivo models of infection were employed, including treatment of AGS gastric
epithelial cells with wild-type H. pylori strains, 60190 and SS1, and Mongolian
gerbils infected with H. pylori SS1. A small cohort of human gastric mucosal
biopsies was also examined. Treatment of AGS cells with H. pylori resulted in
down-regulation of Id1 and Id3. Unexpectedly, expression of the main target of Id
proteins, the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E2A, was also
suppressed, with an associated decrease in E-box binding activity. In contrast,
H. pylori induced the expression of the CDK inhibitor p21(WAF-1/cip1), and the
homeobox transcription factor, Cdx2, an early marker of intestinal metaplasia of 
the stomach epithelium. Gastric epithelium from H. pylori-infected gerbils
demonstrated similar changes, with decreased Id2, Id3 and E2A, and elevated
p21(WAF-1/cip1) expression. In human gastric epithelium also, H. pylori infection
was associated with reduced Id and E2A expression. In conclusion, H. pylori
alters the expression of Id proteins, in vitro and in vivo; it is hypothesised
that these changes contribute to H. pylori-associated pathologies.

PMID: 16473539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 22;25(26):3649-60. Epub 2006 Jan 30.

Id3 induces a caspase-3- and -9-dependent apoptosis and mediates UVB
sensitization of HPV16 E6/7 immortalized human keratinocytes.

Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Daher A, Trabosh V, Chen WC, Gerstel D, Soeda E,
Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding (Id) proteins comprise a class of
helix-loop-helix transcription factors involved in proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. We have shown that while Id2 is
induced by UVB in primary keratinocytes, Id3 is upregulated only in immortalized 
cells. We have now determined that the consequences of ectopic expression of Id3 
protein are strikingly different between immortalized and primary keratinocytes. 
Overexpression of Id3 induces a significant increase in apoptotic cells as
revealed by Annexin V positivity as well as proteolytic processing of caspase-3
in immortalized, but not in primary keratinocytes. Id3-green fluorescent protein 
(GFP)-positive cells exhibited a fivefold increase in apoptotic nuclear
fragmentation compared to Id3-GFP-negative cells. These apoptotic responses were 
accompanied by activation of caspase-3, as shown by immunocytochemical staining
with antibodies to active caspase-3. Immunostaining with antibodies to the active
form of caspase-9 as well as to the active form of Bax further revealed that
induction of apoptosis in Id3-overexpressing keratinocytes occurred via a
mitochondrial-caspase-9-mediated pathway. Coexpression of dominant-negative
caspase-9 with Id3 significantly suppressed apoptotic nuclear fragmentation,
indicating that caspase-9 activation is essential for Id3-induced cell death.
This response was also markedly attenuated by coexpression with the Bax
antagonist antiapoptotic protein Bcl2, confirming a role for Bax activation in
this apoptotic response. Id3-induced Bax activation may result from increased
expression of Bax protein. Furthermore, reduction of Id3 expression by small
interfering RNAs abrogated the UVB-induced proteolytic activation of caspase-3 in
these cells. These data together suggest that UVB-induced apoptosis of
immortalized keratinocytes is at least in part due to Id3 upregulation in these
cells.

PMID: 16449966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Brain Res. 2006 Feb 16;1073-1074:93-102. Epub 2006 Jan 27.

Localization of Id2 mRNA in the adult mouse brain.

Kitajima K(1), Takahashi R, Yokota Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Fukui,
23-3 Shimoaizuki, Matsuoka, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

Id proteins are negative regulators of basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors and are involved in cellular differentiation and proliferation. Four
members of the Id gene family exhibit closely related but distinct expression
patterns in various mammalian organs of not only embryos but also adults. Among
them, Id2 is known to be expressed in Purkinje cells and neurons in the cortical 
layers of the adult mouse brain, suggesting that Id2 is involved in some neural
functions in the adult. To get insight into the role of Id2 in the nervous
system, we investigated the localization of Id2 mRNA-expressing cells in the
adult mouse brain in detail by in situ hybridization with the radiolabeled
antisense probe and compared it with the localization of other Id gene family
members. The results indicated that Id2 mRNA is detected in more varied brain
regions than previously reported. These regions include the amygdaloid complex,
caudate putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra pars reticulata,
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and the anterior part of the subventricular zone. These 
results suggest the possibility that Id2 plays a role in the neural activity and 
cognitive functions. On the other hand, Id1 was barely detectable. Although
moderate or low expression of Id3 was observed diffusely, high expression was
observed in some specific regions including the molecular layer of the dentate
gyrus and the external capsule. Id4 mRNA was detected in the regions such as the 
caudate putamen and the lateral amygdaloid nucleus. Thus, the expression pattern 
of Id2 is distinct from those of other Id gene family members.

PMID: 16443197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Exp Hematol. 2006 Jan;34(1):72-81.

BMP-6 inhibits human bone marrow B lymphopoiesis--upregulation of Id1 and Id3.

Kersten C(1), Dosen G, Myklebust JH, Sivertsen EA, Hystad ME, Smeland EB, Rian E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway. christian.kersten@sshf.no

OBJECTIVE: In mammals, factors produced by bone marrow (BM) stromal cells are
instrumental in orchestrating the developmental process of B lymphocytes. Bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are multifunctional cytokines previously found to
regulate hematopoietic stem cells. In the present study, we have explored the
role of BMP-6 in human B progenitor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In vitro B lymphopoiesis of CD10(+) B progenitor cells
from human BM was evaluated in the presence or absence of BMP-6 in short- or
long-term coculture on MS-5 stromal cells, by tracking CFSE-labeled CD10(+) B
progenitor cells or by quantification of CD19(+) cells. DNA synthesis in the
pre-B cell line Nalm-6 was measured by (3)H-thymidine incorporation.
BMP-6-induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 was determined by Western blot
analysis, whereas elevation of Id1-Id4 mRNA levels and basal BMP-6 mRNA levels
were measured by real-time and conventional RT-PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: By in vitro coculture of CD10(+) B progenitor cells or monoculture of
Nalm-6 cells, we found that BMP-6 inhibited B lymphopoiesis by impeding cell
proliferation. Furthermore, in CD10(+) B progenitors as well as in Nalm-6 cells, 
BMP-6 rapidly induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, followed by an upregulation
of Id1 and Id3 mRNA levels. Finally, we demonstrated that human bone marrow
stromal cells express BMP-6 mRNA whereas B progenitor cells did not.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that BMP-6, produced by the BM, may participate to
fine-tune the balance between proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation in
human B progenitor cells during BM B lymphopoiesis.

PMID: 16413393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Neurosci. 2006 Jan 11;26(2):550-8.

Inhibitors of differentiation and DNA binding (Ids) regulate Math1 and hair cell 
formation during the development of the organ of Corti.

Jones JM(1), Montcouquiol M, Dabdoub A, Woods C, Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Developmental Neuroscience, Porter Neuroscience Center, National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Math1 (also called Atoh1) 
is both necessary and sufficient for hair cell development in the mammalian
cochlea (Bermingham et al., 1999; Zheng and Gao, 2000). Previous studies have
demonstrated that a dynamic pattern of Math1 expression plays a key role in
regulating the number and position of mechanosensory hair cells. However, the
factors that regulate the temporal and spatial expression of Math1 within the
cochlea are unknown. The bHLH-related inhibitors of differentiation and DNA
binding (Id) proteins are known to negatively regulate many bHLH transcription
factors, including Math1, in a number of different systems. Therefore, Id
proteins are good candidates for regulating Math1 in the cochlea. Results from
PCR and in situ hybridization indicate that Id1, Id2, and Id3 are expressed
within the cochlear duct in a pattern that is consistent with a role in
regulation of hair cell development. In particular, expression of Ids and Math1
overlapped in cochlear progenitor cells before cellular differentiation, but a
specific downregulation of Id expression was observed in individual cells that
differentiated as hair cells. In addition, progenitor cells in which the
expression of Ids was maintained during the time period for hair cell
differentiation were inhibited from developing as hair cells. These results
indicate a key role for Ids in the regulation of expression of Math1 and hair
cell differentiation in the developing cochlea.

PMID: 16407553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Mar;91(3):1119-28. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Pituitary tumor-transforming gene regulates multiple downstream angiogenic genes 
in thyroid cancer.

Kim DS(1), Franklyn JA, Stratford AL, Boelaert K, Watkinson JC, Eggo MC, McCabe
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research, University of 
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TH, United Kingdom. daekim72@yahoo.co.uk

CONTEXT: Pituitary tumor-transforming gene (PTTG) is a multifunctional protein
involved in several tumorigenic mechanisms, including angiogenesis. PTTG has been
shown to promote angiogenesis, a key rate-limiting step in tumor progression, by 
up-regulation of fibroblast growth factor-2 and vascular endothelial growth
factor.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether PTTG regulates other angiogenic genes in
thyroid cells, we performed angiogenesis-specific cDNA arrays after PTTG
transfection. Two of the genes [inhibitor of DNA binding-3 (ID3) and
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1)] which showed differential expression in primary thyroid
cells were validated in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: TSP-1 showed a 2.5-fold reduction and ID3 showed a 3.5-fold induction in
expression in response to PTTG overexpression in vitro. Conversely, suppression
of PTTG with small interfering RNA was associated with a 2-fold induction of
TSP-1 and a 2.2-fold reduction in ID3 expression. When we examined TSP-1 and ID3 
expression in 34 differentiated thyroid cancers, ID3 was significantly increased 
in tumors compared with normal thyroid tissue. Furthermore, ID3 expression was
significantly higher in follicular thyroid tumors than in papillary tumors.
Although mean TSP-1 expression was not altered in cancers compared with normal
thyroids, we observed a significant independent association between TSP-1
expression and early tumor recurrence, with recurrent tumors demonstrating
4.2-fold lower TSP-1 expression than normal thyroid tissues.
CONCLUSION: We have identified ID3 and TSP-1 as two new downstream targets of
PTTG in thyroid cancer. We propose that PTTG may promote angiogenesis by
regulating the expression of multiple genes with both pro- and antiangiogenic
properties and may thus be a key gene in triggering the angiogenic switch in
thyroid tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16394085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Eur J Immunol. 2006 Jan;36(1):139-48.

The chicken Ig light chain 3'-enhancer is essential for gene expression and
regulates gene conversion via the transcription factor E2A.

Conlon TM(1), Meyer KB.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Department of Pathology,
Cambridge University, Cambridge, UK.

Erratum in
    Eur J Immunol. 2006 Sep;36(9):2556.

Expression of the rearranged chicken immunoglobulin light chain (IgL) gene is
regulated by a V gene promoter, a matrix attachment region (MAR) in the J-C
intron and an enhancer downstream of the Ig constant region. Using knockout
analysis, we demonstrate that the 3'-enhancer is not only required for gene
activation but is also essential for the maintenance of gene expression. Deletion
of the MAR on the other hand increases IgL transcription, indicating that the MAR
acts as negative regulator. We demonstrate that Id1 and Id3, dominant-negative
regulators of basic-region helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, are
able to reduce chicken IgL 3'-enhancer activity in transient assays and strongly 
reduce the rate of gene conversion (GC) in DT40 clone 18 cells. Conversely,
overexpression of avian E47, a bHLH transcription factor, leads to a dramatic
increase in GC rates independent of IgL or activation-induced cytidine deaminase 
RNA levels. Thus, E47 is the first transcription factor to activate GC without an
apparent increase in transcription.

PMID: 16342328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Nature. 2005 Dec 8;438(7069):820-7.

VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow progenitors initiate the
pre-metastatic niche.

Kaplan RN(1), Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH, Vincent L, Costa C, MacDonald
DD, Jin DK, Shido K, Kerns SA, Zhu Z, Hicklin D, Wu Y, Port JL, Altorki N, Port
ER, Ruggero D, Shmelkov SV, Jensen KK, Rafii S, Lyden D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and the Children's Blood Foundation Laboratories,
Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2005 Dec 8;438(7069):750-1.
    Nature. 2009 Sep 17;461(7262):E4; discussion E5.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms by which a tumour cell undergoes metastasis
to a predetermined location are largely unknown. Here we demonstrate that bone
marrow-derived haematopoietic progenitor cells that express vascular endothelial 
growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1; also known as Flt1) home to tumour-specific
pre-metastatic sites and form cellular clusters before the arrival of tumour
cells. Preventing VEGFR1 function using antibodies or by the removal of VEGFR1(+)
cells from the bone marrow of wild-type mice abrogates the formation of these
pre-metastatic clusters and prevents tumour metastasis, whereas reconstitution
with selected Id3 (inhibitor of differentiation 3)-competent VEGFR1+ cells
establishes cluster formation and tumour metastasis in Id3 knockout mice. We also
show that VEGFR1+ cells express VLA-4 (also known as integrin alpha4beta1), and
that tumour-specific growth factors upregulate fibronectin--a VLA-4 ligand--in
resident fibroblasts, providing a permissive niche for incoming tumour cells.
Conditioned media obtained from distinct tumour types with unique patterns of
metastatic spread redirected fibronectin expression and cluster formation,
thereby transforming the metastatic profile. These findings demonstrate a
requirement for VEGFR1+ haematopoietic progenitors in the regulation of
metastasis, and suggest that expression patterns of fibronectin and VEGFR1+VLA-4+
clusters dictate organ-specific tumour spread.

PMCID: PMC2945882
PMID: 16341007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Vasc Res. 2006;43(2):123-30. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Hyperlipemia and oxidation of LDL induce vascular smooth muscle cell growth: an
effect mediated by the HLH factor Id3.

Taylor AM(1), Li F, Thimmalapura P, Gerrity RG, Sarembock IJ, Forrest S,
Rutherford S, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, and the
Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Hyperlipemia and oxidized LDL (ox-LDL) are important independent cardiovascular
risk factors. Ox-LDL has been shown to stimulate vascular smooth muscle cell
(VSMC) proliferation. However, the effects of hyperlipemia and the molecular
mechanisms mediating hyperlipemia and ox-LDL effects on VSMC growth are poorly
understood. The helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor, Id3, is a
redox-sensitive gene expressed in VSMC in response to mitogen stimulation and
vascular injury. Accordingly, we hypothesize that Id3 is an important mediator of
ox-LDL and hyperlipemia-induced VSMC growth. Aortas harvested from hyperlipemic
pigs demonstrated significantly more Id3 than normolipemic controls. Primary VSMC
were stimulated with ox-LDL, native LDL, sera from hyperlipemic pigs, or
normolipemic pigs. VSMC exposed to hyperlipemic sera demonstrated increased Id3
expression, VSMC growth and S-phase entry and decreased p21cip1 expression and
transcription. Cells stimulated with ox-LDL demonstrated similar findings of
increased growth and Id3 expression and decreased p21cip1 expression. Moreover,
the effects of ox-LDL on growth were abolished in cells devoid of the Id3 gene.
Results provide evidence that the HLH factor Id3 mediates the mitogenic effect of
hyperlipemic sera and ox-LDL in VSMC via inhibition of p21cip1 expression,
subsequently increasing DNA synthesis and proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2929384
PMID: 16340216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Blood. 2006 Apr 1;107(7):2686-93. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Id helix-loop-helix proteins negatively regulate TRANCE-mediated osteoclast
differentiation.

Lee J(1), Kim K, Kim JH, Jin HM, Choi HK, Lee SH, Kook H, Kim KK, Yokota Y, Lee
SY, Choi Y, Kim N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Hak-Dong 5, Dong-Ku, Gwangju 501-746, Korea.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related activation-induced cytokine (TRANCE) induces 
osteoclast formation from monocyte/macrophage lineage cells via various
transcription factors, including the Mi transcription factor (Mitf). Here, we
show that inhibitors of differentiation/DNA binding (Ids), helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors, negatively regulate TRANCE-induced osteoclast
differentiation. Expression levels of Id1, Id2, and Id3 genes are significantly
reduced by TRANCE during osteoclastogenesis. Interestingly, overexpression of the
3 Id genes in bone marrow-derived monocyte/macrophage lineage cells (BMMs)
inhibits the formation of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP)-positive
multinuclear osteoclasts, but it does not alter the ability of BMMs to either
phagocytose or differentiate into dendritic cells (DCs). Overexpression of Id2 in
BMMs attenuates the gene induction of nuclear factor of activated T cells c1
(NFATc1) and osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR) during TRANCE-mediated
osteoclastogenesis. Furthermore, Id proteins interact with Mitf, a basic HLH
(bHLH) transcription factor, and inhibit its transactivation of OSCAR, which is a
costimulatory receptor expressed by osteoclast precursors, by attenuating the DNA
binding ability of Mitf to the E-box site of the OSCAR promoter. Taken together, 
our results reveal both a new facet of negative regulation, mediated by Id
proteins, as well as the mechanism whereby TRANCE signaling overcomes it,
allowing osteoclastogenesis to proceed.

PMCID: PMC1895380
PMID: 16322470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Androl. 2006 Mar-Apr;27(2):212-24. Epub 2005 Nov 22.

Expression, localization, and regulation of inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)
proteins in the rat epididymis.

Carroll M(1), Hamzeh M, Robaire B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

The epididymis is the site in which spermatozoa are matured and stored. Regional 
differences along the epididymis are essential for the establishment of the
microenvironment required for germ cell maturation. Inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)
proteins are transcription factors that modulate the functions of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors and act by binding to and
sequestering bHLH proteins; the latter act to regulate cellular proliferation and
differentiation. The objectives of this study were to determine the mRNA
expression and the immunocytolocalization of Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 in the
epididymis of adult rats and to determine the Id3 protein expression profile in
orchidectomized and in aged animals. We found that, at the mRNA level, Id
proteins are expressed in a unique, region-specific manner along the epididymis. 
Id1 immunoreactivity is specific to myoid cells; the presence of Id2 is observed 
in clear cells, myoid cells, and in the apical region of principal cells. Id3
immunoreactivity is essentially confined to the nuclei of principal cells and
myoid cells, whereas Id4 is observed mainly in myoid and narrow cells. Thus, Ids 
are localized to different cell types and are differentially expressed, at both
the mRNA and protein levels, along the epididymis. Expression of Id3 is
differentially regulated in response to orchidectomy along the epididymis. The
fact that these regulators of gene expression are expressed in this manner may
provide some insight into the differential expression of other genes that lead to
region-specific differences along the epididymis, a hallmark of this tissue.

PMID: 16304207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005 Dec;26(12):1409-20.

Molecular mechanisms regulating expression and function of transcription
regulator inhibitor of differentiation 3.

Lim RW(1), Wu JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri 65212, USA. limr@health.missouri.edu

The transcription factor antagonist inhibitor of differentiation 3 (Id3) has been
implicated in many diverse developmental, physiological and pathophysiological
processes. Its expression and function is subjected to many levels of complex
regulation. This review summarizes the current understanding of these mechanisms 
and describes how they might be related to the diverse functions that have been
attributed to the Id3 protein. Detailed understanding of these mechanisms should 
provide insights towards the development of therapeutic approaches to various
diseases, including cancer and atherogenesis.

PMID: 16297338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 30;25(14):2070-81.

Id proteins: novel targets of activin action, which regulate epidermal
homeostasis.

Rotzer D(1), Krampert M, Sulyok S, Braun S, Stark HJ, Boukamp P, Werner S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, Hönggerberg,
Zürich, Switzerland.

Activin is a member of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) family,
which plays a crucial role in skin morphogenesis and wound healing. To gain
insight into the underlying mechanisms of action, we searched for
activin-regulated genes in cultured keratinocytes. One of the identified target
genes encodes Id1, a negative regulator of helix-loop-helix transcription
factors. We show that Id1, Id2, and Id3 are strongly downregulated by activin in 
keratinocytes in vitro and in vivo. To determine the role of Id1 in keratinocyte 
biology, we generated stable HaCaT keratinocyte cell lines overexpressing this
protein. Our results revealed that enhanced levels of Id1 do not affect
proliferation of keratinocytes in monoculture under exponential culture
conditions or in response to activin or TGF-beta1. However, in three-dimensional 
organotypic cultures, Id1-overexpressing HaCaT cells formed a hyperthickened and 
disorganized epithelium that was characterized by enhanced keratinocyte
proliferation, abnormal differentiation, and an increased rate of apoptosis.
These results identify an important function of Id1 in the regulation of
epidermal homeostasis.

PMID: 16288215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cancer Sci. 2005 Nov;96(11):784-90.

Targeting Id1 and Id3 inhibits peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer.

Tsuchiya T(1), Okaji Y, Tsuno NH, Sakurai D, Tsuchiya N, Kawai K, Yazawa K,
Asakage M, Yamada J, Yoneyama S, Kitayama J, Osada T, Watanabe T, Tokunaga K,
Takahashi K, Nagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, the University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Japan. tk-tsuchiya@muh.biglobe.ne.jp

Inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) proteins are essential for cell differentiation,
proliferation, migration, invasion and angiogenesis. Recently, they have been
shown to correlate with less differentiated phenotypes, high malignant potential 
and poor clinical outcome in various kinds of tumors. In an attempt to develop
new strategies for the treatment of peritoneal metastasis of gastric cancer, we
prepared an Id1, 3 double-knockdown gastric cancer cell line, MKN45, by RNA
interference and investigated its effects on the development of metastatic
nodules in the peritoneal cavity. Both cell proliferation and migration
capabilities were decreased in Id1, 3 double-knockdown cells, as was their
ability to bind to laminin, which could be explained by the decreased expression 
of integrin alpha6. These are important steps in the metastatic process. In a
mouse model, the number of peritoneal metastatic nodules formed by Id1, 3
double-knockdown cells was reduced compared to mock-transfected control cells, as
was the size of individual tumors. In this study, we clearly demonstrated that
Id1, 3 double-knockdown significantly impaired the ability of gastric cancer
cells to form peritoneal metastasis. Id should be considered an ideal target for 
the treatment and prevention of gastric cancer, and RNA interference is an
attractive and promising strategy to achieve it.

PMID: 16271072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Nov;35(11):3307-19.

Identification of genes involved in the initiation of human Th1 or Th2 cell
commitment.

Lund R(1), Ahlfors H, Kainonen E, Lahesmaa AM, Dixon C, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku/Abo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.

The differentiation of naïve T helper (Th) cells is induced by TCR activation and
IL-12/STAT4 or IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathways, forming Th1 and Th2 cells,
respectively. In this study, oligonucleotide arrays were used to identify genes
regulated during the initiation of human Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation at 2
and 6 h in presence or absence of immunosuppressive TGF-beta. As a result the
immediate targets of IL-12, IL-4 and TGF-beta were identified. The effects of
IL-12 at this early stage were minimal and consistent with the known kinetics of 
IL-12Rbeta2 expression. IL-4, however, was observed to rapidly regulate 63 genes,
26 of which were differentially expressed at both the 2- and 6-h time points. Of 
these IL-4 regulated genes, one-third have previously been observed to display
expression changes in the later phases of the polarization process. Similarly to 
the key regulators, TBX21 and GATA3, the transcription factors SATB1, TCF7 and
BCL6 were differentially regulated at the protein level during early Th1 and Th2 
cell polarization. Moreover, the developing Th1 and Th2 cells were demonstrated
to be responsive to the immunosuppressive TGF-beta and IL-10. In this study, a
panel of novel factors that may be important regulators of the differentiation
process was identified.

PMID: 16220538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Oct 15;1731(1):13-22. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Regulation of inhibitor of differentiation gene 3 (Id3) expression by Sp2-motif
binding factor in myogenic C2C12 cells: downregulation of DNA binding activity
following skeletal muscle differentiation.

Wu J(1), Lim RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology and Physiology and Molecular Biology
Program, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO 65201, USA.

Id3 is a member of the Id family of transcriptional regulators that have been
implicated in the development of multiple tissues. Altered expression of the Id
genes and proteins contribute to carcinogenesis and atherosclerosis. Id3 is
highly expressed in proliferating skeletal muscle cells but becomes downregulated
upon terminal differentiation. We have identified several DNase I protected
footprints within a proximal region of the mouse Id3 promoter that has been shown
previously to support high levels of transcriptional activity in proliferating
skeletal muscle cells. Two of these sites interacted, respectively, in vitro with
Sp2 and Egr-1 proteins present in muscle cell nuclear extracts. Mutation analysis
revealed that the Sp2 site accounted for a major part of the Id3 promoter
activity in proliferating muscle cells whereas the Egr-1 site was dispensable.
Consistent with the previously observed downregulation of the endogenous Id3
gene, protein binding to the Sp2 site was substantially reduced with extracts
from differentiated muscle cells. Our results reveal Id3 as a potential target
for Sp2 and raise the possibility that acute activation and the chronic and
maintained expression of Id3 gene might be regulated by different mechanisms.

PMID: 16216350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Endocrinology. 2006 Jan;147(1):257-71. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Androgens regulate the immune/inflammatory response and cell survival pathways in
rat ventral prostate epithelial cells.

Asirvatham AJ(1), Schmidt M, Gao B, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164, USA.

A major hurdle in understanding the role of androgens is the heterogeneity of
androgen receptor (AR) expression in the prostate. Because the majority of
prostate cancer arises from the AR-positive secretory luminal epithelial cells,
identifying the androgen-mediated pathways in the prostate epithelium is of great
significance to understanding their role in prostate pathogenesis. To meet this
objective, the current study was designed to identify immediate-early genes
expressed in response to the synthetic androgen R1881 in cultured rat ventral
prostate epithelial cells. Rat ventral prostate epithelial cells, purified from
20-d-old rats, were cultured, and the presence of AR and the response to androgen
were established. The cells were then treated with R1881 for 2 and 12 h to
capture immediate-early genes in an Affymetrix-based gene chip platform. A total 
of 66 nonredundant genes were identified that were responsive to R1881. The
functional androgen response elements were identified in the proximal promoter to
determine possible molecular mechanism. Cluster analysis identified five distinct
signatures of R1881-induced genes. Pathway analysis suggested that R1881
primarily influences cell proliferation/differentiation and inflammatory/immune
response pathways. Androgens appear to regulate cell renewal by regulating
differentiation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Two mutually exclusive
inflammatory response pathways were observed. The interferon pathway was
up-regulated, and the ILs were down-regulated. The data identified novel
androgen-regulated genes (e.g. Id1, Id3, IL-6, IGF-binding protein-2 and -3, and 
JunB). The loss of androgen regulation of these genes can have important
consequences for cellular transformation and transition to androgen-independent
growth and survival.

PMID: 16195407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 1;175(7):4518-27.

Id3 induces growth arrest and caspase-2-dependent apoptosis in B lymphocyte
progenitors.

Kee BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
bkee@bsd.uchicago.edu

The E-protein transcription factors E2A, HEB, and E2-2 play an essential role in 
the differentiation, proliferation, and survival of B lymphocyte progenitors
(BLPs). In this study, we show that the E-protein antagonist Id3 induces
apoptosis of both primary and transformed BLPs through a caspase-2-dependent
mechanism that does not require p53 and is not inhibited by bcl-2. Id3 expressing
B lineage cells show reduced expression of known E-protein target genes as well
as multiple genes involved in cell proliferation. We hypothesize that Id3 induces
activation of caspase-2 as a consequence of severe or "catastrophic" growth
arrest. In support of this hypothesis, we show that chemical-induced growth
arrest is sufficient to activate caspase-2 and induce apoptosis in BLPs. Our data
suggest that E-proteins function in the control of differentiation and
proliferation and that diminished E-protein activity results in apoptosis as a
consequence of growth arrest.

PMID: 16177095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 20;102(38):13574-9. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

A requirement for sustained ERK signaling during thymocyte positive selection in 
vivo.

McNeil LK(1), Starr TK, Hogquist KA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

It is unknown how the contrasting events of positive and negative selection can
lead to the distinct biological outcomes of life or death. An increasing body of 
evidence suggests that the duration of extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) signaling plays a role in thymocyte selection. However, it remains unclear 
what the kinetics of ERK activation are during positive selection in vivo. In
this study, we examined the magnitude and duration of ERK signaling in intact
murine thymic tissues cultured under conditions of negative or positive
selection. We found that negative selection induced a rapid and robust ERK
activation that is associated with death, whereas positive selection stimulated a
lower intensity and brief ERK activation that quickly declined and then gradually
increased and was sustained over several days. The expression pattern of Egr-1
(early growth response-1), a downstream ERK effector, correlates with the
biphasic kinetics of ERK during positive selection. Id3 (inhibitor of
differentiation/DNA binding 3) also exhibits biphasic kinetics but appeared to be
independent of ERK signaling. Furthermore, inhibitors of T cell receptor ligation
and ERK activation block maturation of CD8 single-positive thymocytes even when
added after 24 h. These results demonstrate that the in vivo duration of ERK
signaling must be sustained to support positive selection.

PMCID: PMC1224638
PMID: 16174747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Thyroid. 2005 Aug;15(8):799-813.

Thyroid hormone deiodination in fish.

Orozco A(1), Valverde-R C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Fisiología Evolutiva, Instituto de Neurobiología, Campus
UNAM-UAQ, Juriquilla, Querétaro, México. aureao@servidor.unam.mx

We review the experimental evidence accumulated within the past decade regarding 
the physiologic, biochemical, and molecular characterization of iodothyronine
deiodinases (IDs) in piscine species. Agnathans, chondrichthyes, and teleosts
express the three isotypes of IDs: ID1, ID2, and ID3, which are responsible for
the peripheral fine-tuning of thyroid hormone (TH) bioactivity. At the molecular 
and operational level, fish IDs share properties with their corresponding
vertebrate counterparts. However, fish IDs also exhibit discrete features that
seem to be distinctive for piscine species. Indeed, teleostean ID1 is
conspicuously resistant to propylthiouracil (PTU) inhibition, and its response to
thyroidal status differs from that exhibited by other ID1s. Moreover, both the
high level of ID2 activity and its expression in the liver of teleosts are unique
among vertebrates. The physiologic role of iodothyronine deiodination in
functions regulated by TH in fish is not entirely clear. Nevertheless, current
experimental evidence suggests that IDs may coordinate and facilitate, in a
tissue-specific fashion, the action of iodothyronines and other hormones involved
in such processes.

PMID: 16131323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Jan;290(1):L120-6. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

BMP-7 opposes TGF-beta1-mediated collagen induction in mouse pulmonary
myofibroblasts through Id2.

Izumi N(1), Mizuguchi S, Inagaki Y, Saika S, Kawada N, Nakajima Y, Inoue K,
Suehiro S, Friedman SL, Ikeda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University,
Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Mesenchymal cells, primarily fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, are the principal
matrix-producing cells during pulmonary fibrogenesis. Transforming growth factor 
(TGF)-beta signaling plays an important role in stimulating the expression of
type I collagen of these cells. Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-7, a member of
the TGF-beta superfamily, has been reported to oppose the fibrogenic activity of 
TGF-beta1. Here, we have addressed the effects of BMP-7 on the fibrogenic
activity of pulmonary myofibroblasts. We first established cell lines from the
lungs of transgenic mice harboring the COL1A2 upstream sequence fused to
luciferase. They displayed a spindle shape and expressed vimentin and
alpha-smooth muscle actin, but not E-cadherin. COL1A2 promoter activity was dose 
dependently induced by TGF-beta1, which was further augmented by adenoviral
overexpression of Smad3, but was downregulated by Smad7. Under the identical
condition, adenoviral overexpression of BMP-7 attenuated the TGF-beta1-dependent 
COL1A2 promoter activity. By immunocytochemistry, the ectopic expression of BMP-7
led to the nuclear localization of phospho-Smad1/5/8 and suppressed that of
Smad3. BMP-7 suppressed the expression of mRNAs for COL1A2 and tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase-2 while increasing those of inhibitors of differentiation
(Id) 2 and 3. Ectopic expression of Id2 and Id3 was found to decrease the COL1A2 
promoter activity. Finally, BMP-7 and Id2 decreased TGF-beta1-dependent collagen 
protein secretion. In conclusion, these data demonstrate that BMP-7 antagonizes
the TGF-beta1-dependent fibrogenic activity of mouse pulmonary myofibroblastic
cells by inducing Id2 and Id3.

PMID: 16126788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Jan;290(1):C282-9. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Adenoviral gene transfer of BMP-7, Id2, or Id3 suppresses injury-induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of lens epithelium in mice.

Saika S(1), Ikeda K, Yamanaka O, Flanders KC, Ohnishi Y, Nakajima Y, Muragaki Y, 
Ooshima A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Ophthalmology, Wakayama Medical Univ., 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama
641-0012, Japan. shizuya@wakayama-med.ac.jp

We have examined the effect of adenovirus-mediated expression of bone morphogenic
protein-7 (BMP-7) and inhibitors of differentiation 2 and 3 (Id2 and Id3) on
injury-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of lens epithelium in
mice. Id2 and Id3 are known to be upregulated by BMP-7 and to antagonize Smad2/3 
signaling. The Cre-LoxP system adenoviral gene transfer was used. Three
microliters of adenoviral solution (2 x 10(7) PFU/mul) were injected into the
right lens of adult male C57BL/6 mice (n = 144) at the time of capsular injury
induced using a hypodermic needle under both general and topical anesthesia. A
mixture of Cre-adenovirus (Cre-Ad) and vector encoding mBMP-7, mId2, or mId3 was 
administered in a test group. Control lenses were treated with Cre-Ad alone.
After healing intervals of 5 or 10 days, the animals were killed and then we
performed histological processes or RNA extraction from the lens. RT-PCR,
real-time RT-PCR, and immunohistochemistry showed expression of each introduced
gene in the lens. Exogenous BMP-7 upregulated expression of Id2 and Id3 in
injured lenses, and gene introduction of Id2 or Id3 also upregulated BMP-7
expression. Gene transfer of BMP-7, Id2, or Id3 delayed injury-induced EMT of the
lens epithelial cells as evaluated by histology and expression patterns of
alpha-smooth muscle actin and collagens in association with reduction of Smad2
COOH-terminal phosphorylation. Gene transfer of BMP-7, Id2, or Id3 delayed
injury-induced EMT of lens epithelial cells and subsequent sealing of the
capsular break with fibrous tissue in mice.

PMID: 16120655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Histopathology. 2005 Sep;47(3):303-9.

Id helix-loop-helix proteins are differentially expressed in gestational
trophoblastic disease.

Xue WC(1), Feng HC, Chan KY, Chiu PM, Ngan HY, Khoo US, Tsao SW, Chan KW, Cheung 
AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China.

AIMS: To assess the expression of Id proteins in trophoblastic tissues and to
correlate this with clinical parameters, proliferative and apoptotic indices as
well as to related oncogene expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry for Id1, Id2, Id3 and Id4 was performed
on 83 trophoblastic tissues including 17 normal first-trimester placentas, seven 
term placentas, 47 hydatidiform moles (HM), and 12 spontaneous miscarriages. The 
four Id proteins were predominantly expressed in the villous and implantation
site intermediate trophoblast. Expression of Id1 in HM was significantly higher
than that in normal placenta (P = 0.0006) and spontaneous miscarriage (P =
0.0001) but did not correlate with subsequent development of gestational
trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). Id1 expression correlated with the proliferation
index as assessed by MCM7 (P = 0.003) and Ki67 (P = 0.017) and with the apoptotic
activity assessed by TUNEL (P = 0.001) and M30 CytoDeath antibody (P = 0.013).
Moreover, the expression of Id1 correlated with the expression of p53 (P =
0.004), p21(WAF1) (/CIP1) (P = 0.003) but not with p16 (P = 0.107).
CONCLUSIONS: Id proteins may play a role in the regulation of proliferative and
apoptotic activity in trophoblastic tissue and are potentially useful in
differentiating molar and non-molar gestation, but are not helpful in predicting 
GTN.

PMID: 16115231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Neurosci Res. 2005 Oct;53(2):176-82.

Fate redirection of hippocampal astrocytes toward neuronal lineage by aggregate
culture.

Yanagisawa M(1), Nakashima K, Ochiai W, Takizawa T, Setoguchi T, Uemura A,
Takizawa M, Nobuhisa I, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
myanagisawa@mail.mcg.edu

Mammalian cells that have been committed to a certain cell lineage cannot be
directed to other lineages. However, some astrocytes in the mammalian brains have
been reported to represent plasticity to redirect to other cell lineages. We
found that mouse hippocampal astrocytes cultured in aggregate forms of
"astrosphere", redirected to MAP2-positive immature neurons. In astrospheres,
basic HLH factors positively regulating neuronal differentiation were
up-regulated and Id3 inhibiting basic HLH factors was down-regulated. Ectopic Id3
induction repressed redirection of astrocytes to a neuronal lineage, suggesting
that astrosphere formation induced plasticity of astrocytes by changing the gene 
expression patterns.

PMID: 16112216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Oct;25(10):2069-74. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

The effects of leukocyte-type 12/15-lipoxygenase on Id3-mediated vascular smooth 
muscle cell growth.

Taylor AM(1), Hanchett R, Natarajan R, Hedrick CC, Forrest S, Nadler JL, McNamara
CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

OBJECTIVE: 12/15-lipoxygenase (12/15-LO) has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of vascular disease. Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation is a key
component of the response to injury in vascular disease. The role of 12/15-LO in 
regulating VSMC proliferation is poorly understood. Id3 has been shown to
regulate growth in various cell types and is expressed in VSMCs within
atherosclerotic and restenotic lesions. This study examines the role of Id3 in
12/15-LO-mediated VSMC proliferation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Primary aortic VSMCs from leukocyte-type 12/15-LO
transgenic, leukocyte-type 12/15-LO knockout (KO), and control mice were plated
in equal densities and assayed for growth, Id3 protein expression, and Id3
transcription. Results demonstrated that 12/15-LO transgenic VSMCs grew faster,
whereas 12/15-LO KO VSMCs grew slower relative to control VSMCs. Further,
pharmacological and molecular inhibition of 12/15-LO resulted in decreased VSMC
growth. Western blots demonstrated increased Id3 protein in 12/15-LO transgenic
VSMCs, whereas luciferase promoter reporter assays revealed increased Id3
transcription. In addition, overexpression of 12/15-LO increased growth in
control cells but not in Id3 KO cells. 12/15-LO transgenic VSMCs demonstrated
increased protein kinase C (PKC) activity. Consistent with these data, PKC
inhibition decreased Id3 promoter activation.
CONCLUSIONS: 12/15-LO is an important mediator of VSMC growth. The
growth-promoting effects of 12/15-LO are at least partially mediated through
induction of Id3 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2929383
PMID: 16037566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Thyroid. 2005 Jun;15(6):522-30.

Id1 gene expression and regulation in human thyroid tissue.

Kebebew E(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Surgery and UCSF
Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
kebebewe@surgery.ucsf.edu

The Id genes encode helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription proteins that lack a DNA
binding basic domain. Id proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) function as dominant
negative regulators of basic HLH transcription factors by forming inactive
heterodimers. Recent studies suggest that the Id proteins participate in the
regulation of cell growth, differentiation, tumorigenesis and angiogenesis in a
variety of cell types. This report summarizes studies done in our laboratory on
the expression and regulation of the Id1 gene in human thyroid tissue, the result
of activation of the major mitogen signal transduction pathways on Id1 gene
expression, and the effect of the Id1 gene on thyroid cancer cell growth and
differentiation.

PMID: 16029118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 18;24(35):5443-58.

Id2 protein is selectively upregulated by UVB in primary, but not in immortalized
human keratinocytes and inhibits differentiation.

Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Trabosh V, Velarde A, Chou FP, Daher A, Tenzin F,
Tokino T, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University,
School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Solar ultraviolet B (UVB) acts as both an initiator and promoter in models of
multistage skin carcinogenesis. We found that, whereas UVB induces apoptosis in
human papillomavirus-16 E6/7-immortalized keratinocytes, it inhibits markers of
differentiation in human foreskin keratinocytes (HFK). Potential mechanisms for
this differential response were examined by DNA microarray, which revealed that
UVB alters the expression of three of the four human inhibitor of
differentiation/DNA binding (Id) proteins that comprise a class of
helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors involved in proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. These results were verified by
RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis of control and UVB-irradiated primary and
immortalized keratinocytes. Whereas Id1 was downregulated in both cell types, Id2
expression was upregulated in primary HFK, but not immortalized cells. In
contrast, Id3 expression was significantly increased only in immortalized cells. 
The differential expression pattern of Id2 in response to UVB was recapitulated
in reporter constructs containing the 5' regulatory regions of this gene. Id2
promoter activity increased in response to UVB in HFK, but not in immortalized
cells. To identify the regulatory elements in the Id2 promoter that mediate
transcriptional activation by UVB in HFK, promoter deletion/mutation analysis was
performed. Deletion analysis revealed that transactivation involves a 166 bp
region immediately upstream to the Id2 transcriptional start site and is
independent of c-Myc. The consensus E twenty-six (ETS) binding site at -120
appears to mediate UVB transcriptional activation of Id2 because point mutations 
at this site completely abrogated this response. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays verified that the Id2 promoter
interacts with known Id2 promoter (ETS) binding factors Erg1/2 and Fli1, but not 
with c-Myc; and this interaction is enhanced after UVB exposure. Similar to the
effects of UVB exposure, ectopic expression of Id2 protein in primary HFK
resulted in inhibition of differentiation, as shown by decreased levels of the
terminal differentiation marker keratin K1 and inhibition of involucrin
crosslinking. Reduction of Id2 expression by small interfering RNAs attenuated
the UVB-induced inhibition of differentiation in these cells. These results
suggest that UVB-induced inhibition of differentiation of primary HFK is at
least, in part, due to the upregulation of Id2, and that upregulation of Id2 by
UVB might predispose keratinocytes to carcinogenesis by preventing their normal
differentiation program.

PMID: 16007217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Acta Otolaryngol. 2005 Mar;125(3):244-9.

Characterization of inhibitor of differentiation (Id3) gene expression in the
developing cochlear tissue of rats.

Ozeki M(1), Schlentz EP, Lin J.

Author information: 
(1)The Auditory Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.

CONCLUSION: The Id3 gene is expressed in the developing cochlear tissue and
participates in the development of cochlear progenitor hair cells during the
embryonic stage.
OBJECTIVES: Inhibitor of differentiation (Id3) is an important transcription
factor expressed in the cochlear tissue and progenitor hair cells. It is likely
to be involved in cell-cycle progression and the proliferation of cochlear
progenitor hair cells during the embryonic stage. The dynamic expression of Id3
in the developing cochlear tissue is, however, poorly understood. In this study
we sought to characterize the expression of Id3 in the developing cochlear tissue
and to explore its role in the growth and proliferation of progenitor hair cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Expression of the Id3 gene in the developing cochlear
tissue was examined by means of Northern blotting, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. The effects of Id3 on primary cultures of otocyst
epithelial cells and a progenitor hair cell line (OT12) were studied using
specific antisense oligonucleotides.
RESULTS: The Id3 gene was expressed in the rapidly growing otocyst on embryonic
Day 12 and specifically in the fundamental structures of the cochlea, e.g. the
organ of Corti, spiral ganglions and stria vascularis, on postnatal Day 1.
Inhibition of Id3 gene expression with antisense oligonucleotides in cultured
otocyst epithelial cells and OT12 reduced DNA synthesis and cell-cycle
progression, suggesting that Id3 participates in the proliferation of cochlear
progenitor hair cells.

PMID: 15966691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Neurosci Res. 2005 Jul 15;81(2):163-71.

Suppression of Stat3 promotes neurogenesis in cultured neural stem cells.

Gu F(1), Hata R, Ma YJ, Tanaka J, Mitsuda N, Kumon Y, Hanakawa Y, Hashimoto K,
Nakajima K, Sakanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ehime University School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon, 
Ehime, Japan.

To investigate the effects of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
(Stat3) on neural stem cell fate, stem cells were inoculated with an adenovirus
vector expressing dominant negative form of Stat3 (Stat3F). One day later, a
promoter assay revealed significant reduction of the transcriptional level in the
transfected cells. Three days later, Western blot analysis and immunocytochemical
analysis revealed that the protein level of microtubule-associated protein (MAP)2
and the number of MAP2-positive cells were increased significantly in the
transfected cells whereas the protein level of glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) and the number of GFAP-positive cells were decreased significantly. In
addition, mRNA levels of Notch family members (Notch1, 2, and 3) and of
inhibitory basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors (Hes5, Id2, and Id3) were
significantly downregulated at 3 days after viral inoculation with Stat3F;
however, mRNA levels of bHLH determination factors (Math1 and Neurogenin3) and
bHLH differentiation factors (NeuroD1 and NeuroD2) were significantly
upregulated. These data indicated that suppression of Stat3 directly induced
neurogenesis and inhibited astrogliogenesis in neural stem cells.

PMID: 15948155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Dev Biol. 2005 May 15;281(2):210-26.

Phylogenetic footprinting and genome scanning identify vertebrate BMP response
elements and new target genes.

von Bubnoff A(1), Peiffer DA, Blitz IL, Hayata T, Ogata S, Zeng Q, Trunnell M,
Cho KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, Developmental Biology Center,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The complex gene regulatory networks governed by growth factor signaling are
still poorly understood. In order to accelerate the rate of progress in
uncovering these networks, we explored the usefulness of interspecies sequence
comparison (phylogenetic footprinting) to identify conserved growth factor
response elements. The promoter regions of two direct target genes of Bone
Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling in Xenopus, Xvent2 and XId3, were compared 
with the corresponding human and/or mouse counterparts to identify conserved
sequences. A comparison between the Xenopus and human Vent2 promoter sequences
revealed a highly conserved 21 bp sequence that overlaps the previously reported 
Xvent2 BMP response element (BRE). Reporter gene assays using Xenopus animal pole
ectodermal explants (animal caps) revealed that this conserved 21 bp BRE is both 
necessary and sufficient for BMP responsiveness. We combine the same phylogenetic
footprinting approach with luciferase assays to identify a highly conserved 49 bp
BMP responsive region in the Xenopus Id3 promoter. GFP reporters containing
multimers of either the Xvent2 or XId3 BREs appear to recapitulate endogenous BMP
signaling activity in transgenic Xenopus embryos. Comparison of the Xvent2 and
the XId3 BRE revealed core sequence features that are both necessary and
sufficient for BMP responsiveness: a Smad binding element (SBE) and a GC-rich
element resembling an OAZ binding site. Based on these findings, we have
implemented genome scanning to identify over 100 additional putative target genes
containing 2 or more BRE-like sequences which are conserved between human and
mouse. RT-PCR and in situ analyses revealed that this in silico approach can
effectively be used to identify potential BMP target genes.

PMID: 15893974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. BMC Immunol. 2005 May 9;6:9.

BMP-6 inhibits growth of mature human B cells; induction of Smad phosphorylation 
and upregulation of Id1.

Kersten C(1), Sivertsen EA, Hystad ME, Forfang L, Smeland EB, Myklebust JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium 
Hospital, Montebello, 0310 Oslo, Norway. christian.kersten@sshf.no

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) belong to the TGF-beta superfamily
and are secreted proteins with pleiotropic roles in many different cell types. A 
potential role of BMP-6 in the immune system has been implied by various studies 
of malignant and rheumatoid diseases. In the present study, we explored the role 
of BMP-6 in normal human peripheral blood B cells.
RESULTS: The B cells were found to express BMP type I and type II receptors and
BMP-6 rapidly induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8. Furthermore,
Smad-phosphorylation was followed by upregulation of Id1 mRNA and Id1 protein,
whereas Id2 and Id3 expression was not affected. Furthermore, we found that BMP-6
had an antiproliferative effect both in naive (CD19+CD27-) and memory B cells
(CD19+CD27+) stimulated with anti-IgM alone or the combined action of anti-IgM
and CD40L. Additionally, BMP-6 induced cell death in activated memory B cells.
Importantly, the antiproliferative effect of BMP-6 in B-cells was completely
neutralized by the natural antagonist, noggin. Furthermore, B cells were
demonstrated to upregulate BMP-6 mRNA upon stimulation with anti-IgM.
CONCLUSION: In mature human B cells, BMP-6 inhibited cell growth, and rapidly
induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 followed by an upregulation of Id1.

PMCID: PMC1134658
PMID: 15877825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Neuroreport. 2005 May 12;16(7):673-6.

Developmental expression patterns and localization of DNA-binding protein
inhibitor (Id3) in the mouse retina.

Yeung SC(1), Yip HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.

Id3 (inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation), a member of the Id
helix-loop-helix protein family, has long been studied as a positive regulator of
proliferation and a negative regulator of differentiation. In this study, we
examined the expression pattern and cellular phenotypes of Id3 in postnatal and
adult mouse retina. Id3 was mainly expressed in the early postnatal inner retina.
From the late postnatal development towards adulthood, Id3 expression was
confined to the ganglion cell layer and the inner nuclear layer. Colocalization
analysis showed that Id3 positive cells were identified as retinal ganglion cells
and amacrine cells. The differential expression profiles of Id3 provide the
groundwork for the elucidation of its possible role in retinal development.

PMID: 15858404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005 Apr;26(4):486-91.

Engagement of membrane immunoglobulin enhances Id3 promoter activity in WEHI-231 
B lymphoma cells.

Li XJ(1), Hata K, Mizuguchi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Jinling Hospital, School of
Medicine, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210002, China. lixiaojun62@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: We have recently shown that engagement of membrane immunoglobulin (mIg)
induced upregulation of inhibitor of differentiation 3 (Id3) mRNA, resulting in
growth arrest at G1 phase in WEHI-231 cells. In the present study, we examined
whether engagement of mIg will affect promoter activity of the Id3 gene in
WEHI-231 cells.
METHODS: DNA fragments corresponding to the 5'-flanking region of mId3 gene were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using genomic DNA as the template.
Three DNA fragments upstream of the transcription start site (+1) of the mId3
gene were subcloned into the luciferase reporter vector PGV-B2. The recombinant
constructs were transiently transfected into WEHI-231 cells by an electroporation
method. After incubation for 24 h, WEHI-231 cells were stimulated with 10 mg/L
anti-IgM or irradiated CD40L-expressing NIH3T3 cells or control NIH3T3 cells for 
further 24 h, followed by assay for luciferase activity.
RESULTS: The luciferase analysis demonstrated that basal promoter activity of the
Id3 gene was found in the region between -200 and +54. The Id3 promoter activity 
was increased 2-fold following stimulation with anti-IgM, but not CD40L, compared
with medium alone.
CONCLUSION: The mIg-mediated upregulation of Id3 expression is controlled, at
least in part, through transcriptional regulation, as assessed by luciferase
assay.

PMID: 15780199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Development. 2005 Apr;132(8):1831-41. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

Xenopus Id3 is required downstream of Myc for the formation of multipotent neural
crest progenitor cells.

Light W(1), Vernon AE, Lasorella A, Iavarone A, LaBonne C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Neural crest cells, a population of proliferative, migratory, tissue-invasive
stem cells, are a defining feature of vertebrate embryos. These cells arise at
the neural plate border during a time in development when precursors of the
central nervous system and the epidermis are responding to the extracellular
signals that will ultimately dictate their fates. Neural crest progenitors, by
contrast, must be maintained in a multipotent state until after neural tube
closure. Although the molecular mechanisms governing this process have yet to be 
fully elucidated, recent work has suggested that Myc functions to prevent
premature cell fate decisions in neural crest forming regions of the early
ectoderm. Here, we show that the small HLH protein Id3 is a Myc target that plays
an essential role in the formation and maintenance of neural crest stem cells. A 
morpholino-mediated 'knockdown' of Id3 protein results in embryos that lack
neural crest. Moreover, forced expression of Id3 maintains the expression of
markers of the neural crest progenitor state beyond the time when they would
normally be downregulated and blocks the differentiation of neural crest
derivatives. These results shed new light on the mechanisms governing the
formation and maintenance of a developmentally and clinically important cell
population.

PMID: 15772131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Genes Dev. 2005 Mar 15;19(6):744-55.

To proliferate or to die: role of Id3 in cell cycle progression and survival of
neural crest progenitors.

Kee Y(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 
91125, USA.

The neural crest is a unique population of mitotically active, multipotent
progenitors that arise at the vertebrate neural plate border. Here, we show that 
the helix-loop-helix transcriptional regulator Id3 has a novel role in cell cycle
progression and survival of neural crest progenitors in Xenopus. Id3 is localized
at the neural plate border during gastrulation and neurulation, overlapping the
domain of neural crest induction. Morpholino oligonucleotide-mediated depletion
of Id3 results in the absence of neural crest precursors and a resultant loss of 
neural crest derivatives. This appears to be mediated by cell cycle inhibition
followed by cell death of the neural crest progenitor pool, rather than a cell
fate switch. Conversely, overexpression of Id3 increases cell proliferation and
results in expansion of the neural crest domain. Our data suggest that Id3
functions by a novel mechanism, independent of cell fate determination, to
mediate the decision of neural crest precursors to proliferate or die.

PMCID: PMC1065727
PMID: 15769946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):4229-37.

Human papillomavirus type 18 E6 protein binds the cellular PDZ protein
TIP-2/GIPC, which is involved in transforming growth factor beta signaling and
triggers its degradation by the proteasome.

Favre-Bonvin A(1), Reynaud C, Kretz-Remy C, Jalinot P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, CNRS UMR 5161, Ecole
Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Several viral proteins expressed by DNA or RNA transforming viruses have the
particular property of binding via their C-terminal end to various cellular
proteins with PDZ domains. This study is focused on the PDZ protein TIP-2/GIPC,
which was originally identified in two-hybrid screens performed with two
different baits: the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax oncoprotein and the
regulator of G signaling RGS-GAIP. Further studies have shown that TIP-2/GIPC is 
also able to associate with the cytoplasmic domains of various transmembrane
proteins. In this report we show that TIP-2/GIPC interacts with the E6 protein of
human papillomavirus type 18 (HPV-18). This event triggers polyubiquitination and
proteasome-mediated degradation of the cellular protein. In agreement with this
observation, silencing of E6 by RNA interference in HeLa cells causes an increase
in the intracellular TIP-2/GIPC level. This PDZ protein has been previously found
to be involved in transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling by
favoring expression of the TGF-beta type III receptor at the cell membrane. In
line with this activity of TIP-2/GIPC, we observed that depletion of this protein
in HeLa cells hampers induction of the Id3 gene by TGF-beta treatment and also
diminishes the antiproliferative effect of this cytokine. Conversely, silencing
of E6 increases the expression of Id3 and blocks proliferation of HeLa cells.
These results support the notion that HPV-18 E6 renders cells less sensitive to
the cytostatic effect of TGF-beta by lowering the intracellular amount of
TIP-2/GIPC.

PMCID: PMC1061528
PMID: 15767424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Prostate. 2005 Aug 1;64(3):253-64.

Negative acting HLH proteins Id 1, Id 2, Id 3, and Id 4 are expressed in prostate
epithelial cells.

Chaudhary J(1), Schmidt M, Sadler-Riggleman I.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4231, USA. jaideep@wsu.edu

BACKGROUND: The four known Id proteins, Id 1, Id 2, Id 3, and Id 4 are largely
considered as dominant negative helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins. They can
dimerize with basic helix loop proteins (bHLH) but the dimers fail to bind the
consensus E box response element (CANNTG). Alternatively, members of the Id
family, for example, Id 2 can also bind to non-bHLH proteins such as
retinoblastoma (Rb) and ETS-TCF to modulate their activities. Consistent with
their role as promoters of proliferation, subset of Id genes for example, Id 1
and Id 2 are expressed in many cancers including that of the prostate. However,
their expression and function in the normal prostate is unknown.
METHODS: The present study was designed to evaluate the expression profile and
functional significance of all Id isoforms in normal rat prostate epithelial
cells. The data suggests that all four Id isoforms are expressed in normal cells,
albeit at different levels.
RESULTS: Agents that promote growth, for example, serum increase the levels of Id
1, Id 2, and Id 3. The hormones and mitogens such as testosterone and hepatocyte 
growth factor (HGF) that promote prostate epithelial cell differentiation
stimulate Id 4 and Id 2, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In prostate epithelial cells, Id 1 may be specifically involved in
promoting proliferation whereas Id 4 and Id 2 may have defined roles in
regulating differentiated functions in response to androgens and local paracrine 
factors such as HGF.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15717313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Int J Neural Syst. 2004 Dec;14(6):373-80.

On the structure and initial parameter identification of Gaussian RBF networks.

Bhatt RB(1), Gopal M.

Author information: 
(1)Control laboratories, II/214, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology-Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-110016, India.
bhattrajen@ee.iitd.ernet.in

We consider the efficient initialization of structure and parameters of
generalized Gaussian radial basis function (RBF) networks using fuzzy decision
trees generated by fuzzy ID3 like induction algorithms. The initialization scheme
is based on the proposed functional equivalence property of fuzzy decision trees 
and generalized Gaussian RBF networks. The resulting RBF network is compact, easy
to induce, comprehensible, and has acceptable classification accuracy with
stochastic gradient descent learning algorithm.

PMID: 15714604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Aging Cell. 2005 Feb;4(1):21-30.

Telomere-independent cellular senescence in human fetal cardiomyocytes.

Ball AJ(1), Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)UCSD Cancer Center, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0816, USA.
ajball@ucsd.edu

Fetal cardiomyocytes have been proposed as a potential source of cell-based
therapy for heart failure. This study examined cellular senescence in cultured
human fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes (HFCs). HFCs were isolated and identified 
by immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR. Cells were found to senesce after 20-25
population doublings, as determined by growth arrest, morphological changes and
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity. Using the telomeric repeat
amplification protocol assay, telomerase activity was undetectable in primary
HFCs. Cells were transduced to express the human reverse transcriptase subunit
(hTERT) of telomerase. This resulted in greatly increased telomerase activity,
but no significant lifespan extension. Analysis of telomere length in primary
HFCs revealed that the senescent phenotype was not accompanied by telomere
shortening. Telomeres in hTERT-positive cells were elongated in comparison with
primary cells, and elongation was retained in senescent cells. Levels of the
tumor suppressor protein p16INK4A increased in all senescent cells whether
telomerase-positive or -negative. Senescence was accompanied by a decline in
transcript levels of the polycomb gene Bmi-1, Ets1 and Ets2 transcription
factors, and Id1, Id2 and Id3 helix-loop-helix proteins, suggesting roles for
these genes in maintenance of cardiomyocyte proliferative capacity. In addition
to offering novel insights into the behavior of human fetal cardiomyocytes in
culture, these findings have implications for the development of a cell-based
therapy for cardiac injury using primary fetal heart tissue.

PMID: 15659210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Biol Reprod. 2005 May;72(5):1205-17. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

The helix-loop-helix inhibitor of differentiation (ID) proteins induce
post-mitotic terminally differentiated Sertoli cells to re-enter the cell cycle
and proliferate.

Chaudhary J(1), Sadler-Riggleman I, Ague JM, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman,Washington 99164-4231, USA.

Prior to puberty the Sertoli cells undergo active cell proliferation, and at the 
onset of puberty they become a terminally differentiated postmitotic cell
population that support spermatogenesis. The molecular mechanisms involved in the
postmitotic block of pubertal and adult Sertoli cells are unknown. The four known
helix-loop-helix ID proteins (i.e., Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) are considered
dominant negative regulators of cellular differentiation pathways and act as
positive regulators of cellular proliferation. ID proteins are expressed at low
levels by postpubertal Sertoli cells and are transiently induced by serum. The
hypothesis tested was that ID proteins can induce a terminally differentiated
postmitotic Sertoli cell to reenter the cell cycle if they are constitutively
expressed. To test this hypothesis, ID1 and ID2 were stably integrated and
individually overexpressed in postmitotic rat Sertoli cells. Overexpression of
ID1 or ID2 allowed postmitotic Sertoli cells to reenter the cell cycle and
undergo mitosis. The cells continued to proliferate even after 300 cell
doublings. The functional markers of Sertoli cell differentiation such as
transferrin, inhibin alpha, Sert1, and androgen binding protein (ABP) continued
to be expressed by the proliferating Sertoli cells, but at lower levels. FSH
receptor expression was lost in the proliferating Sertoli cell-Id lines. Some
Sertoli cell genes, such as cyclic protein 2 (cathepsin L) and Sry-related HMG
box protein-11 (Sox11) increase in expression. At no stage of proliferation did
the cells exhibit senescence. The expression profile as determined with a
microarray protocol of the Sertoli cell-Id lines suggested an overall increase in
cell cycle genes and a decrease in growth inhibitory genes. These results
demonstrate that overexpression of ID1 and ID2 genes in a postmitotic, terminally
differentiated cell type have the capacity to induce reentry into the cell cycle.
The observations are discussed in regards to potential future applications in
model systems of terminally differentiated cell types such as neurons or
myocytes.

PMID: 15647457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Int J Oncol. 2005 Feb;26(2):319-27.

Expression of Id proteins in human hepatocellular carcinoma: relevance to tumor
dedifferentiation.

Damdinsuren B(1), Nagano H, Kondo M, Yamamoto H, Hiraoka N, Yamamoto T, Marubashi
S, Miyamoto A, Umeshita K, Dono K, Nakamori S, Wakasa K, Sakon M, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Several studies reported that Id (Inhibitor of DNA binding or Differentiation)
proteins, helix-loop-helix transcription factors, have important roles in
differentiation, cell cycle and angiogenesis in various cells. However, the role 
of Id proteins in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclear. We examined the
immunohistochemical expression of Id1, Id2 and Id3 proteins in 54 surgically
resected HCCs with surrounding HCV or HBV-related chronic hepatitis (n=30) and
liver cirrhosis (n=24). All non-cancerous livers exhibited immunoreactivity for
Id proteins and the expression increased from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis. In 
HCCs (n=45), well-differentiated tumors mostly exhibited strong or moderate
immunostaining for all Id proteins, while proportion of the samples with weak or 
no expression increased with tumor dedifferentiation and frequently observed in
poorly (66.7, 93.3 and 93.3% respectively for Id1, 2, 3) or undifferentiated
(100% for all Ids) HCCs. Clinicopathological survey demonstrated a significant
correlation between Id1, 2 and 3 expression and differentiation of carcinoma
(p=0.0044, 0.0014 and 0.0014, respectively) although univariate analysis
indicated that high expression of Id1 was significant predictive factor for
longer disease-free survival of the patients (p=0.047). A similar tendency was
also observed with Id2 and Id3. The present study demonstrate high expression of 
Id1, 2 and 3 in well-differentiated HCC and low expression in advanced
dedifferentiated HCC, in contrast to its continuous expression during breast,
prostate and colon carcinogenesis. These findings suggested that Id1, 2 and 3
might play a role in the early stages of hepatocarcinogenesis, but not in the
development of advanced carcinoma, and might consequently be related to HCC
dedifferentiation.

PMID: 15645115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Hum Hered. 2004;57(4):172-8.

Analysis of candidate genes for prostate cancer.

Burmester JK(1), Suarez BK, Lin JH, Jin CH, Miller RD, Zhang KQ, Salzman SA,
Reding DJ, Catalona WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, Wisc
54449, USA. burmester.jim@mcrf.mfldclin.edu

Considerable evidence demonstrates that genetic factors are important in the
development and aggressiveness of prostate cancer. To identify genetic variants
that predispose to prostate cancer we tested candidate SNPs from genomic regions 
that show linkage to prostate cancer susceptibility and/or aggressiveness, as
well as genes that show a significant difference in mRNA expression level between
tumor and normal tissue. Cases had histologically verified prostate cancer.
Controls were at least 65 years old, never registered a PSA above 2.5 ng/ml,
always had digital rectal examinations that were not suspicious for cancer, and
have no known family history of prostate cancer. Thirty-nine coding SNPs and nine
non-coding SNPs were tested in up to 590 cases and 556 controls resulting in over
40,000 SNP genotypes. Significant differences in allele frequencies between cases
and controls were observed for ID3 (inhibitor of DNA binding), p = 0.05, HPN
(hepsin), p = 0.009, BCAS1 (breast carcinoma amplified sequence 1), p = 0.007,
CAV2 (caveolin 2), p = 0.007, EMP3 (epithelial membrane protein 3), p < 0.0001,
and MLH1 (mutL homolog 1), p < 0.0001. SNPs in three of these genes (BCAS1, EMP3 
and MLH1) remained significant in an age-matched subsample.

Copyright (c) 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15583422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Dec;89(12):6105-11.

Id1 gene expression is up-regulated in hyperplastic and neoplastic thyroid tissue
and regulates growth and differentiation in thyroid cancer cells.

Kebebew E(1), Peng M, Treseler PA, Clark OH, Duh QY, Ginzinger D, Miner R.

Author information: 
(1)San Francisco Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143-1674, USA. kebebewe@surgery.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Oct;90(10):5906-7.

The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) proteins are a family of helix-loop-helix (HLH)
proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) that lack the basic domain necessary for DNA
binding. The Id1 protein enhances cell proliferation and inhibits cellular
differentiation in a variety of cell types. We have previously demonstrated that 
the Id1 gene is up-regulated in papillary and medullary thyroid cancers. In this 
study we characterized the expression and distribution of the Id1 protein in
normal, hyperplastic, and neoplastic human thyroid tissue. We also evaluated the 
effect of the Id1 gene on thyroid cancer cell growth and markers of thyroid cell 
differentiation. We used semiquantitative immunohistochemistry to characterize
Id1 protein expression in normal, hyperplastic (multinodular goiter and Graves'
disease), and neoplastic thyroid tissue from 103 patients. Normal thyroid tissue 
had the lowest level of Id1 protein expression (P < 0.0001). Anaplastic thyroid
cancer had the highest level (vs. benign and malignant thyroid tissues, P <
0.01). Id1 protein expression was higher in malignant thyroid tissue than in
hyperplastic thyroid tissue (P < 0.02). We found no significant association
between the level of Id1 protein expression and patient age, sex,
tumor-node-metastasis stage, tumor size, primary tumor vs. lymph node metastasis,
primary tumor vs. recurrent tumors, and extent of tumor differentiation.
Inhibiting Id1 mRNA expression in thyroid cancer cell lines using Id1 antisense
oligonucleotides resulted in growth inhibition (P < 0.03) and decreased
thyroglobulin and sodium-iodine symporter mRNA expression (P < 0.02). In
conclusion, Id1 is overexpressed in hyperplastic and neoplastic thyroid tissue
and directly regulates the growth of thyroid cancer cells of follicular cell
origin, but is not a marker of aggressive phenotype in differentiated thyroid
cancer.

PMID: 15579766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Virol. 2004 Dec;78(24):13470-8.

Induction of Id1 and Id3 by latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus and
regulation of p27/Kip and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 in rodent fibroblast
transformation.

Everly DN Jr(1), Mainou BA, Raab-Traub N.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina-Chapel
Hill, Mason Farm Rd., Room 102, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. nrt@med.unc.edu.

Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), the Epstein-Barr virus oncoprotein, activates
NF-kappaB, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and
c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling. To determine global transcriptional changes
induced by LMP1 in epithelial cells, genomic analysis of C33A cells stably
expressing LMP1 was performed. Relatively few genes were induced by LMP1.
Expression of two members of the Id (inhibitor of differentiation) family of
proteins, Id1 and Id3, was induced in the presence of LMP1 and confirmed by mRNA 
and protein in C33A and Rat-1 cells. In Rat-1 foci transformed by LMP1, Id1
protein was also increased. Id proteins are known negative regulators of E-box
proteins that positively regulate p16 and potentially other cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors (cdki's). In LMP1-expressing Rat-1 cells, cdki p27 was
specifically downregulated. Decreased p27 was correlated with increased levels of
Cdk2 and increased levels of phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein. This study
describes new properties of LMP1 that likely contribute to transformation and
oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC533955
PMID: 15564458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Adv Cancer Res. 2004;92:81-94.

A role for Id proteins in mammary gland physiology and tumorigenesis.

de Candia P(1), Benera R, Solit DB.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Program in Cell Biology and Department
of Medicine, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Id helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are regulators of cell growth and
differentiation in embryonic and adult tissues. They are members of the basic HLH
family of transcription factors but lack a DNA binding domain. By binding to
basic HLH transcription factors, Id proteins regulate gene expression. Id1 and
Id3 have extensive sequence homology and similar patterns of expression during
embryogenesis and in adult tissues. They are also expressed at high levels in the
endothelial cells of tumor-infiltrating blood vessels, and breast tumors
spontaneously arising in MMTV-neu mice demonstrate impaired angiogenesis when
growing in an Id1- and/or Id3-deficient background. These lesions are typically
cystic with a small rim of viable tumor cells surrounding an acellular necrotic
core. Id2 plays a critical role in breast differentiation and lactation. Id4
regulates BRCA1 expression and may be involved in hormone-dependent regulation of
BRCA1 homeostasis. Thus, all four members of the Id protein family play pivotal
roles in distinct aspects of normal and malignant breast biology, the subject of 
this review.

PMID: 15530557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 1;173(9):5801-9.

Crucial role of inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation in the vascular
endothelial growth factor-induced activation and angiogenic processes of human
endothelial cells.

Sakurai D(1), Tsuchiya N, Yamaguchi A, Okaji Y, Tsuno NH, Kobata T, Takahashi K, 
Tokunaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2005 Mar 15;174(6):3818.

Angiogenesis plays a pivotal role in the aggressive proliferation of synovial
cells in rheumatoid arthritis. We have previously reported the overexpression of 
inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation (Id) in the endothelial cells within the
synovial tissues of rheumatoid arthritis. In this study, we investigated the role
of Id in inflammation and angiogenesis in an in vitro model using HUVECs.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and TGFbeta induced the expression of
Id1 and Id3 in HUVECs. Forced expression of Id induced proliferative activity in 
HUVECs accompanied by down-regulation of p16INK4a. Overexpression of Id enhanced 
expression of ICAM-1 and E-selectin, and induced angiogenic processes such as
transmigration, matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 expression, and tube formation.
In contrast, knockdown of Id1 and Id3 with RNA interference abolished
proliferation, activation, and angiogenic processes of HUVECs induced by VEGF.
These results indicated that Id plays a crucial role in VEGF-induced signals of
endothelial cells by causing activation and potentiation of angiogenic processes.
Based on these findings, it was proposed that inhibition of expression and/or
function of Id1 and Id3 may potentially be of therapeutic value for conditions
associated with pathological angiogenesis.

PMID: 15494533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Immunity. 2004 Oct;21(4):551-60.

A T cell intrinsic role of Id3 in a mouse model for primary Sjogren's syndrome.

Li H(1), Dai M, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200433, China.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2004 Oct;21(4):457-8.

Sjogren's syndrome is an autoimmune disease with clinical hallmarks of
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes) and xerostomia (dry mouth). The genetic
basis of this autoimmune disease is poorly understood. Id3 is an immediate
early-response gene in growth regulation and is involved in TCR-mediated T cell
selection during T cell development. Here, we show that Id3-deficient mice
develop many disease symptoms found in primary Sjogren's syndrome patients
including dry eyes and mouth, lymphocyte infiltration in lachrymal and salivary
glands, and development of anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies. Adoptive transfer
experiment indicated a T cell intrinsic role for Id3 in the development of
Sjogren's symptoms. Furthermore, genetic ablation of T cells or neonatal 3 day
thymectomy in Id3-deficient mice showed a rescue of disease symptoms, suggesting 
a thymic origin of autoimmune T cells. Thus, this study establishes a critical
connection between Id3-mediated T cell development and autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 15485632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Immunity. 2004 Oct;21(4):457-8.

Id3 knockout mice as a new model for sjogren's syndrome: only a T cell defect or 
more?

Versnel MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2004 Oct;21(4):551-60.

Id3(-/-) mice were found to have autoantibodies, lymphocytic infiltrates in, and 
decreased secretion by exocrine glands. Similar symptoms are found in primary
Sjogren's Syndrome. In this issue of Immunity, Li and colleagues suggest an
important role for Id3 function in T cell development and Sjogren's Syndrome.

PMID: 15485622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Mol Biol. 2004 Oct 15;343(2):361-70.

Ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Id1 and Id3 is mediated by the COP9
signalosome.

Berse M(1), Bounpheng M, Huang X, Christy B, Pollmann C, Dubiel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Molecular Biology, Charité,
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Monbijoustrasse 2, D-10117, Germany.

Recently, evidence is accumulating pointing to a function of the COP9 signalosome
(CSN) in regulation of ubiquitination by specific ubiquitin ligases. Here, we
demonstrate by mammalian two-hybrid analysis that the transcriptional regulators 
and substrates of the ubiquitin system Id1 and Id3, but not Id2 and Id4, bind to 
the CSN subunit CSN5. Pull-down experiments revealed that Id3 physically
interacts with the CSN complex. Additional far Western and pull-down studies with
Id3 support our two-hybrid data and show that the transcription regulator can
bind to CSN5 and CSN7. Recombinant Id3 is not phosphorylated by the
CSN-associated kinases CK2 and PKD. However, it inhibits c-Jun and CSN2
phosphorylation by the isolated CSN complex and by the recombinant CK2. The
inhibitors of CSN associated kinases, curcumin and emodin, significantly induce
ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation of transiently expressed Id3 
in HeLa cells. Proteasome-dependent degradation of endogenous Id1 in HeLa cells
is also stimulated by treatment with curcumin or emodin. Ubiquitination of Id3 is
shown directly by cotransfection of HeLa cells with Id3 and His-ubiquitin cDNA.
Curcumin increased Id3-ubiquitin conjugate formation, as shown by Western
blotting and His-pull-downs. In addition, overexpression of CSN2 leads to
stabilization of Id3 protein. On the basis of these data, it is speculated that
CSN-mediated phosphorylation inhibits ubiquitination of Id1 and Id3.

PMID: 15451666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Exp Dermatol. 2004 Oct;13(10):621-9.

The role of BMP signalling in the control of ID3 expression in the hair follicle.

O'Shaughnessy RF(1), Christiano AM, Jahoda CA.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Department, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Both the production of the hair shaft in anagen and the initiation of a new hair 
cycle at telogen are the result of reciprocal interactions between the dermal
papilla and the overlying epithelial cells. Secreted factors, such as those of
the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) family, play a crucial role in moderating
these interactions. Analysis of hair follicles in different stages of the hair
cycle showed that BMP signalling was only active during anagen and again during
telogen. During catagen, no BMP signalling occurred in the dermal papilla. ID3, a
gene expressed in the dermal papilla of both vibrissa and pelage follicles, is a 
BMP target, and as such, we found that ID3 was expressed from the earliest stages
of morphogenesis. During the hair cycle, ID3 was only expressed in the dermal
papilla at middle anagen and telogen. To test the significance of ID3 expression 
in the dermal papilla, we cultured dermal papilla cells and found that ID3
expression fell significantly after a single passage. ID3 expression was returned
to in vivo levels in low- and high-passage cells by culturing to high confluence 
or by the addition of BMP4. These studies reinforce the requirement for active
BMP signalling and cell-cell contacts in the dermal papilla during specific
stages in the hair cycle.

PMID: 15447722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Endothelium. 2004 May-Aug;11(3-4):175-80.

Inhibitors of differentiation/DNA binding proteins Id1 and Id3 are regulated by
statins in endothelial cells.

Pammer J(1), Reinisch C, Kaun C, Tschachler E, Wojta J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria.

Id proteins (inhibitors of differentiation), which are involved in the control of
cell cycle progression, can delay cellular differentiation and senescence and
have been implicated in angiogenesis. The regulation of Id proteins in
endothelial cells (ECs) by proangiogenic statins has not been investigated yet
and remains unresolved. In this study, human dermal microvascular ECs (HDMECs)
were stimulated with fluvastatin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), and serum in vitro. The regulation of Id1, Id3,
p21, p27, and p53 and the phosphorylation of AKT was investigated by Western
blotting. Id1 was up-regulated by fluvastatin and serum, but not by VEGF and HGF.
Fluvastatin did not regulate p21 and p27, but down-regulated Id3 and p53
slightly. In contrast to VEGF and HGF, fluvastatin did not result in AKT
phosphorylation, indicating that this pathway is not involved in the control of
endothelial Id1 expression. These experiments demonstrate for the first time that
Id1 can be up-regulated and p53 down-regulated by a statin in HDMECs. Regulation 
of these proteins in ECs may account for the proangiogenic effect of statins.

PMID: 15370294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Oct 1;93(2):337-44.

Inhibitory helix-loop-helix transcription factors Id1/Id3 promote bone formation 
in vivo.

Maeda Y(1), Tsuji K, Nifuji A, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

Bone formation is under the control of a set of transcription factors. Ids are
inhibitory helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors and expression of Id
genes in osteoblasts is under the control of calciotropic agents such as BMP and 
vitamin D. However, the function of Ids during bone formation in vivo has not yet
been elucidated. We, therefore, examined the role of Id1 and Id3 in the
regulation of bone metabolism in vivo. Using wild type and Id1/Id3 heterozygous
knockout mice, we analyzed calvarial bone formation in the suture by X-ray
picture, proliferation, and mineralization activities of primary calvarial
osteoblasts by MTT assay and alizarin red staining and onthotopic in vivo bone
formation by BMP injection onto calvaria and micro CT analysis. The width of
calvarial sutures was reduced by more than 50% in Id1/Id3 heterozygous knock out 
mice. Analyses on the cellular basis for the mechanism underlying the defects in 
the mutant mice revealed suppression of proliferation and mineralization in
osteoblasts derived from Id1/Id3 heterozygous knock out mice. Furthermore,
Id1/Id3 heterozygous knock out mice suppressed BMP-induced bone formation in
vivo. These results indicated that Id1 and Id3 are positive factors to promote
bone formation in vivo.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15368360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Oct;19(10):1732-41. Epub 2004 Jul 7.

Comparison of TGF-beta/BMP pathways signaled by demineralized bone powder and
BMP-2 in human dermal fibroblasts.

Zhou S(1), Glowacki J, Yates KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Demineralized bone induces chondrogenic differentiation of human dermal
fibroblasts in vitro. Analyses of signaling gene expression showed that DBP and
BMP-2 regulate common and distinct pathways. Although BMP-2 was originally
isolated as a putative active factor in DBP, rhBMP-2 and DBP do not affect all
the same genes or in the same ways.INTRODUCTION: Demineralized bone powder (DBP) 
induces chondrogenic differentiation of human dermal fibroblasts (hDFs) in 3D
culture, but the initiating mechanisms have not been identified. We tested the
hypotheses that DBP would affect expression of signaling genes and that DBP's
effects would differ from the effects of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A chondroinduction model was used in which hDFs were
cultured with and without DBP in a porous collagen sponge. BMP-2 was delivered in
a square of absorbable collagen felt inserted into a collagen sponge. Total RNA
was isolated after 3 days of culture, a time that precedes expression of the
chondrocyte phenotype. Gene expression was evaluated with two targeted macroarray
screens. Effects of DBP and rhBMP-2 were compared by macroarray, RT-PCR, and
Northern hybridization analysis of selected genes in the transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta/BMP signaling pathways.
RESULTS: By macroarray analysis of 16 signal transduction pathways, the following
pathways were modulated in hDFs by DBP: TGF-beta, insulin/LDL, hedgehog, PI3
kinase/AKT, NF-kappaB, androgen, retinoic acid, and NFAT. There was convergence
and divergence in DBP and rhBMP-2 regulation of genes in the TGF-beta/BMP
signaling pathway. Smad target genes were the predominant group of DBP- or
rhBMP-2-regulated genes. Several genes (IGF-BP3, ID2, and ID3) showed similar
responses (increased expression) to DBP and rhBMP-2. In contrast, many of the
genes that were greatly upregulated by DBP (TGFBI/betaig-h3, Col3A1, TIMP1,
p21/Waf1/Cip1) were barely affected by rhBMP-2.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that multiple signaling pathways are
regulated in fibroblasts by DBP, that one of the major pathways involves Smad
target genes, and that DBP and rhBMP-2 elicit different gene expression responses
in hDFs. Although BMP-2 was originally isolated as a putative inductive factor in
DBP, rhBMP-2 and DBP do not affect all the same genes or in the same ways.

PMID: 15355569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6137-43.

Utilization of bone marrow-derived endothelial cell precursors in spontaneous
prostate tumors varies with tumor grade.

Li H(1), Gerald WL, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cell Biology and Genetics, Weill Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Id1 and Id3 genes are required for vascularization, growth, and metastasis of
xenograft tumors. In Id-deficient mice, tumor transplantation and proangiogenic
factors fail to mobilize and recruit circulating endothelial precursor cells
(CEPs) and hematopoietic cells, leading to defective tumor angiogenesis in
various models. To investigate the requirement of Id genes and bone marrow
incorporation in spontaneous prostate tumors, we crossbred Id mutant mice with
the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice. Id1-/- Id3+/-
TRAMP mice display delayed tumor growth at 24 weeks compared with wild-type TRAMP
mice. Id1 and Id3 were strongly expressed in the endothelial cells of poorly
differentiated prostate adenocarcinoma but not in the vasculature of
well-differentiated tumors, a finding that is corroborated in human prostate
tumor samples. In Id-deficient TRAMP mice, the poorly differentiated tumors show 
extensive hemorrhage, whereas well-differentiated tumors exhibit none.
Transplantation with Id wild-type bone marrow significantly reduced the
hemorrhage in poorly differentiated prostate adenocarcinomas with bone
marrow-derived endothelial cells contributing to 14% of the tumor blood vessels. 
However, in well-differentiated prostate adenocarcinomas, there was little
evidence of bone marrow-derived endothelial cell incorporation. These differences
in the expression of Id genes, the effects of Id loss, and the recruitment of
bone marrow-derived endothelial precursor cells in tumor vasculature between
well-differentiated and poorly differentiated prostate adenocarcinoma suggest
that tumor angiogenesis varies depending on the tumor grade.

PMID: 15342397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Circ Res. 2004 Sep 17;95(6):557-9. Epub 2004 Aug 19.

Phosphorylation regulates Id3 function in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Forrest ST(1), Taylor AM, Sarembock IJ, Perlegas D, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Internal Medicine, and the
Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Understanding the mechanisms that regulate cell cycle progression in vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is key to understanding and modulating vascular
lesion formation. Results of the present study provide the first evidence that
phosphorylation of the helix-loop-helix factor Id3 in VSMCs occurs in vitro and
in vivo and provides a regulatory switch controlling Id3-induced regulation of
p21Cip1 and VSMC growth.

PMCID: PMC2929385
PMID: 15321928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5728-35.

Identification of the genes up- and down-regulated by the high mobility group A1 
(HMGA1) proteins: tissue specificity of the HMGA1-dependent gene regulation.

Martinez Hoyos J(1), Fedele M, Battista S, Pentimalli F, Kruhoffer M, Arra C,
Orntoft TF, Croce CM, Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare e/o Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del CNR, Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia
di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II," Naples, Italy.

High mobility group A (HMGA) proteins are chromatinic proteins that do not have
transcriptional activity per se, however, by interacting with the transcription
machinery, they regulate, negatively or positively, the expression of several
genes. We searched for genes regulated by HMGA1 proteins using microarray
analysis in embryonic stem (ES) cells bearing one or two disrupted hmga1 alleles.
We identified 87 transcripts increased and 163 transcripts decreased of at least 
4-fold in hmga1-/- ES cells. For some of them, a HMGA1-dose dependency was
observed, because an intermediate level was observed in the heterozygous ES
cells. When the expression analysis of these genes was extended to embryonic
fibroblasts and adult tissues such as heart, spleen, and liver from
hmga1-knockout mice, contrasting results were obtained. In fact, aside some genes
showing the same HMGA1 regulation observed in ES cells, there were some genes
that did not modify their expression, and others showing a HMGA1-mediated
regulation but in an opposite direction. These results clearly indicate that
HMGA1-mediated gene regulation depends on the cellular context. Finally for a
couple of analyzed HMGA1-regulated genes, electrophoretic mobility shift assay
and chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed a direct binding of HMGA1 proteins to 
their promoters, suggesting a HMGA1-direct regulation of their expression.

PMID: 15313913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 15;173(4):2453-61.

CD40 ligand rescues inhibitor of differentiation 3-mediated G1 arrest induced by 
anti-IgM in WEHI-231 B lymphoma cells.

Hata K(1), Yoshimoto T, Mizuguchi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tokyo Medical University, Japan.

The engagement of membrane-bound Igs (mIgs) results in growth arrest, accompanied
by apoptosis, in the WEHI-231 murine B lymphoma cells, a cell line model
representative of primary immature B cells. Inhibitor of differentiation (Id)
proteins, members of the helix-loop-helix protein family, functions in
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis in a variety of cell types. In this
study, we analyzed the involvement of Id protein in mIg-induced growth arrest and
apoptosis in WEHI-231 cells. Following stimulation with anti-IgM, expression of
Id3 was up-regulated at both the mRNA and protein levels; this up-regulation
could be reversed by CD40L treatment. Retrovirus-mediated transduction of the Id3
gene into WEHI-231 cells resulted in an accumulation of the cells in G(1) phase, 
but did not induce apoptosis. E box-binding activity decreased in response to
anti-IgM administration, but increased after stimulation with either CD40L alone 
or anti-IgM plus CD40L, suggesting that E box-binding activity correlates with
cell cycle progression. WEHI-231 cells overexpressing Id3 accumulated in G(1)
phase, which was accompanied by reduced levels of cyclin D2, cyclin E, and cyclin
A, and a reciprocal up-regulation of p27(Kip1). Both the helix-loop-helix and the
C-terminal regions of Id3 were required for growth-suppressive activity. These
data suggest that Id3 mimics mIg-mediated G(1) arrest in WEHI-231 cells.

PMID: 15294959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Development. 2004 Sep;131(17):4131-42. Epub 2004 Jul 27.

Interactions between ID and OLIG proteins mediate the inhibitory effects of BMP4 
on oligodendroglial differentiation.

Samanta J(1), Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of
Neurology, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling inhibits the generation of
oligodendroglia and enhances generation of astrocytes by neural progenitor cells 
both in vitro and in vivo. This study examined the mechanisms underlying the
effects of BMP signaling on glial lineage commitment. Treatment of cultured
neural progenitor cells with BMP4 induced expression of all four members of the
inhibitor of differentiation (ID) family of helix-loop-helix transcriptional
inhibitors and blocked oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage commitment. Overexpression of
Id4 or Id2 but not Id1 or Id3 in cultured progenitor cells reproduced both the
inhibitory effects of BMP4 treatment on OL lineage commitment and the stimulatory
effects on astrogliogenesis. Conversely, decreasing the levels of Id4 mRNA by RNA
interference enhanced OL differentiation and inhibited the effects of BMP4 on
glial lineage commitment. This suggests that induction of Id4 expression mediates
effects of BMP signaling. Bacterial two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation studies
demonstrated that ID4, and to a lesser extent ID2, complexed with the
basic-helix-loop-helix transcription (bHLH) factors OLIG1 and OLIG2, which are
required for the generation of OLs. By contrast, ID1 and ID3 did not complex with
the OLIG proteins. In addition, the OLIG and ID proteins both interacted with the
E2A proteins E12 and E47. Further, exposure of cultured progenitor cells to BMP4 
changed the intracellular localization of OLIG1 and OLIG2 from a predominantly
nuclear to a predominantly cytoplasmic localization. These observations suggest
that the induction of ID4 and ID2, and their sequestration of both OLIG proteins 
and E2A proteins mediate the inhibitory effects of BMP signaling on OL lineage
commitment and contribute to the generation of astrocytes.

PMID: 15280210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Anticancer Res. 2004 May-Jun;24(3a):1519-24.

Id3-mediated enhancement of cisplatin-induced apoptosis in a sarcoma cell line
MG-63.

Koyama T(1), Suzuki H, Imakiire A, Yanase N, Hata K, Mizuguchi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Tokyo Medical University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
160-8402, Japan.

The molecular mechanism(s) underlying the resistance to
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (CDDP)-induced growth inhibition include DNA repair,
apoptosis and cell cycle progression. Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins,
which belong to the group of helix-loop-helix proteins, regulate cell cycle
progression, differentiation and apoptosis. We examined whether CDDP exposure
modulates the expression pattern of Ids and whether ectopic expression of Ids
influences CDDP-induced cell death. Cell growth was assessed by WST-8 assay kit. 
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) was evaluated by flow cytometry using
dihydroethidium. MG-63 sarcoma cells were stimulated with CDDP for various times 
and Id expression was assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. CDDP induced a considerable transient up-regulation of Id3 mRNA, but
not Id2, 1-2 h after stimulation. Enforced expression of Id3 caused the MG-63
sarcoma cells to be more sensitive to CDDP-induced growth inhibition, through
generation of ROS and caspase-3 activation. Together, our results suggest that
CDDP-induced cell death appears to involve Id3.

PMID: 15274318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Korean J Ophthalmol. 2004 Jun;18(1):9-14.

Ultrasound biomicroscopic changes after laser iridotomy or trabeculectomy in
angle-closure glaucoma.

Yoon KC(1), Won LD, Cho HJ, Yang KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwang-Ju,
Korea.

This study was performed to demonstrate the ultrasound, biomicroscopic and
dimensional changes of angle structure after laser iridotomy (LI) and primary
trabeculectomy (PT) in primary angle-closure glaucoma (PACG). Angle-opening
distance at a point 500 m from the scleral spur (AOD500), trabecular-iris angle
(theta1), trabecular ciliary process distance (TCPD), ciliary process-iris angle 
(CPI), iris thickness (ID1, ID3), length of iris-lens contact distance (ILCD) and
anterior chamber depth (ACD) were assessed before and after each procedure.
Thirteen patients with LI and 16 with PT were prospectively enrolled. There were 
statistically significant increases in AOD500, theta1, and ILCD in both groups.
CPI was decreased in both groups. ACD, TCPD, and iris thickness were not changed 
significantly. The changes in angle configuration after LI or PT may result more 
from alterations in aqueous pressure gradients across the iris and the changes of
configuration were greater in the iris roots without rotation of ciliary body.
However, we didn't find any significant differences in the changes of parameters 
between the two procedures.

PMID: 15255231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Life Sci. 2004 Jul 23;75(10):1219-29.

Caveolin-1, Id3a and two LIM protein genes are upregulated by estrogen in
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Watanabe T(1), Akishita M, Nakaoka T, He H, Miyahara Y, Yamashita N, Wada Y,
Aburatani H, Yoshizumi M, Kozaki K, Ouchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Estrogen has diverse effects on the vasculature, such as vasodilation,
endothelial growth and inhibition of vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC)
proliferation and migration. However, little is known about the genes that are
regulated by estrogen in the vascular wall. Wistar rats were ovariectomized or
sham-operated (Sham group), and 2 weeks after the operation, were subjected to
subcutaneous implantation of placebo pellets (OVX + V group) or estradiol pellets
(OVX + E group). Endothelium-denuded aortic tissue was examined 2 weeks after
implantation. By applying high-density oligonucleotide microarray analysis, the
expression of approximately 7000 genes was analyzed. Among the genes with
different expression levels between the OVX + E group and the OVX + V group,
those that have been reported to be expressed in the vasculature or muscle
tissue, were chosen. Finally, four genes, caveolin-1, two LIM proteins (enigma
and SmLIM) and Id3a, were identified. Microarray as well as real-time polymerase 
chain reaction showed that the expression levels of these genes were
significantly higher in the OVX + E group than in the OVX + V group. To clarify
whether estrogen directly upregulates these genes in the vascular wall, Northern 
blot analysis was performed using cultured rat VSMC. Addition of 100 nmol/L
estradiol for 24 hours increased the mRNA levels of all four genes. Although the 
precise mechanism remains unclear, regulation of these genes by estrogen might
contribute to its effect on VSMC.

PMID: 15219810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Jul 15;297(2):484-94.

Overexpression of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor induces genes
regulating migration and differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells.

Pahnke J(1), Mix E, Knoblich R, Müller J, Zschiesche M, Schubert B, Koczan D,
Bauer P, Böttcher T, Thiesen HJ, Lazarov L, Wree A, Rolfs A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland.
jens.pahnke@web.de

The glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is involved in the
development and maintenance of neural tissues. Mutations in components of its
signaling pathway lead to severe migration deficits of neuronal crest stem cells,
tumor formation, or ablation of the urinary system. In animal models of
Parkinson's disease, GDNF has been recognized to be neuroprotective and to
improve motor function when delivered into the cerebral ventricles or into the
substantia nigra. Here, we characterize the network of 43 genes induced by GDNF
overproduction of neuronal progenitor cells (ST14A), which mainly regulate
migration and differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells. GDNF down-regulates
doublecortin, Paf-ah1b (Lis1), dynamin, and alpha-tubulin, which are involved in 
neocortical lamination and cytoskeletal reorganization. Axonal guidance depends
on cell-surface molecules and extracellular matrix proteins. Laminin, Mpl3,
Alcam, Bin1, Id1, Id2, Id3, neuregulin1, the ephrinB2-receptor, neuritin, focal
adhesion kinase (FAK), Tc10, Pdpk1, clusterin, GTP-cyclooxygenase1, and
follistatin are genes up-regulated by GDNF overexpression. Moreover, we found
four key enzymes of the cholesterol-synthesis pathway to be down-regulated
leading to decreased farnesyl-pyrophospate production. Many proteins are anchored
by farnesyl-derivates at the cell membrane. The identification of these
GDNF-regulated genes may open new opportunities for directly influencing
differentiation and developmental processes of neurons.

PMID: 15212950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. BMC Immunol. 2004 Jun 14;5:11.

Cloning and functional characterisation of avian transcription factor E2A.

Conlon TM(1), Meyer KB.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Department of Pathology,
University of Cambridge, WT/MRC Building, Addenbrooke's Hospital, CB2 2XY, UK.
tmc33@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: During B lymphocyte development the E2A gene is a critical regulator 
of cell proliferation and differentiation. With regards to the immunoglobulin
genes the E2A proteins contribute to the regulation of gene rearrangement,
expression and class switch recombination. We are now using the chicken cell line
DT40 as a model system to further analyse the function of E2A.
RESULTS: Here we report the cloning and functional analysis of the transcription 
factor E2A from chicken. Using RACE PCR on the chicken lymphoma cell line DT40 we
have isolated full-length clones for the two E2A splice variants E12 and E47.
Sequence conservation between the human and chicken proteins is extensive: the
basic-helix-loop-helix DNA binding domain of human and chicken E47 and E12 are
93% and 92% identical, respectively. In addition high levels of conservation are 
seen in activation domain I, the potential NLS and the ubiquitin ligase
interaction domain. E2A is expressed in a variety of tissues in chicken, with
higher levels of expression in organs rich in immune cells. We demonstrate that
chicken E12 and E47 proteins are strong transcriptional activators whose function
depends on the presence of activation domain I. As in mammals, the dominant
negative proteins Id1 and Id3 can inhibit the function of chicken E47.
CONCLUSIONS: The potential for homologous recombination in DT40 allows the
genetic dissection of biochemical pathways in somatic cells. With the cloning of 
avian E2A and the recent description of an in vitro somatic hypermutation assay
in this cell line, it should now be possible to dissect the potential role of E2A
in the regulation of somatic hypermutation and gene conversion.

PMCID: PMC446191
PMID: 15196311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Sep;82(9):592-9. Epub 2004 Jun 4.

Role of Id proteins in B lymphocyte activation: new insights from knockout mouse 
studies.

Sugai M(1), Gonda H, Nambu Y, Yokota Y, Shimizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kyoto University, 53
Shogoin-Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, 606-8507 Kyoto, Japan. msugai@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Id (inhibitor of differentiation) proteins play important roles in cell
differentiation, cell cycle control, and apoptosis. They act as negative
regulators of basic helix-loop-helix-type transcription factors, which positively
regulate differentiation of various cell types. Id proteins work to block B
lymphocyte (B cell) maturation at an early differentiation step, as demonstrated 
by gain-of-function studies. In recent years a series of gene-targeted mice
lacking different Ids have been generated. Analyses of these gene-targeted mice
provide information useful for understanding the physiological roles of Ids in B 
cell biology. Id3 is required for proper B cell functions and acts by controlling
the cell cycle. Upon B cell activation, Id2 acts as a negative regulator to
prevent potentially harmful effects brought about by excessive immunological
reactions; one of its special roles is to maintain low serum concentrations of
immunoglobulin E (IgE). The Id2 protein does this by antagonizing E2A and Pax5
activities, both of which are required for proper B cell activation. This review 
presents several new insights into B cell differentiation and activation programs
and the physiological role of Id proteins in B cell activation.

PMID: 15184986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32897-903. Epub 2004 May 24.

Intron retention generates a novel Id3 isoform that inhibits vascular lesion
formation.

Forrest ST(1), Barringhaus KG, Perlegas D, Hammarskjold ML, McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Internal Medicine, and Cardiovascular
Research Center, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, 
22908, USA. .

The expression of intron-containing messages has been shown to occur in a variety
of diseases including lactic acidosis, Cowden Syndrome, and several cancers.
However, it is unknown whether these intron-containing messages result in protein
production in vivo. Indeed, intron-containing RNAs are typically retained in the 
nucleus, targeted for degradation, or are repressed translationally. Here, we
show that during vascular lesion formation in rats, an alternative isoform of the
helix-loop-helix transcription factor Id3 (Id3a) generated by intron retention is
abundantly expressed. We demonstrate that Id3 is expressed early in lesion
formation when the proliferative index of the neointima is highest and that Id3
promotes smooth muscle cell (SMC) proliferation and S-phase entry and inhibits
transcription of the cell-cycle inhibitor p21(Cip1). Using an Id3a-specific
antibody developed by our laboratory, we show that Id3a protein is induced during
vascular lesion formation and that Id3a expression peaks late when the
proliferative index is low or declining and extensive apoptosis is observed.
Furthermore, Id3a fails to promote SMC growth and S-phase entry or to inhibit
p21(Cip1) promoter transactivation. In contrast, Id3a stimulates SMC apoptosis
and inhibits endogenous Id3 production. Adenoviral delivery of Id3a inhibited
lesion formation in balloon-injured rat carotid arteries in vivo. These data
describe a novel feedback loop whereby intron retention generates an Id3 isoform 
that acts to limit SMC growth during vascular lesion formation, providing the
first evidence that regulated intron retention can modulate a pathologic process 
in vivo.

PMID: 15159391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Jun;3(6):498-500. Epub 2004 Jun 19.

Tumor angiogenesis in mice and men.

Alani RM(1), Silverthorn CF, Orosz K.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Program in Pharmacology and
Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231-1000, USA. ralani@jhmi.edu

Over the past decade much research has focused on understanding the molecular
pathways that regulate the development of a tumor-associated vasculature. In
1999, Lyden and colleagues showed that mice deficient in one to three Id1 or Id3 
alleles could not support the growth of tumor xenografts due to defects in
tumor-associated angiogenesis. Three recently published manuscripts have now
re-examined the role of Id genes in the development of a tumor-associated
vasculature using more clinically relevant tumor model systems. Remarkably, all
three studies have found strikingly different results compared to the original
xenograft data published in 1999. Below we review the current understanding of
the role of Id genes in the development of a tumor-associated vasculature given
the most recent data and suggest ways in which animal tumor model systems might
be put to better use to provide more clinically relevant information.

PMID: 15153806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Hepatol. 2004 Mar;40(3):464-71.

Mechanism of liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy using mouse cDNA
microarray.

Togo S(1), Makino H, Kobayashi T, Morita T, Shimizu T, Kubota T, Ichikawa Y,
Ishikawa T, Okazaki Y, Hayashizaki Y, Shimada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 3-9
Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. togo@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The liver has the capacity to regenerate after partial
hepatectomy. In order to clarify the mechanism of liver regeneration, we observed
the initial stage, especially the mechanism of gene expression during progress
from G0 to S phase (0-24 h), and attempted to identify new genes controlling
progress to the S phase.
METHODS: We applied large-scale gene expression analysis with complementary DNA
microarrays in mouse hepatectomy models to clarify the mechanism of liver
regeneration after partial hepatectomy.
RESULTS: As a result, 23 new immediate-early gene candidates such as
interleukin-1 receptor associated kinase-1 and karyopherin alpha-1, which are
involved in transportation within the nucleus, were discovered. Candidates for
new genes concerned with the progress to the S phase were discovered: inhibitor
of DNA binding 2 (ID2) and inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (ID3), both new liver
regeneration factors that promoted progress to the S phase, and GADD45 gamma
(growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible protein) as a factor inhibiting that
process.
CONCLUSIONS: The above results not only suggest the importance of NFkappaB in the
initial stage of liver regeneration but also points to the orderly maintenance of
the proliferation of the cells in liver regeneration.

PMID: 15123361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(10):4241-54.

Id2 and Id3 define the potency of cell proliferation and differentiation
responses to transforming growth factor beta and bone morphogenetic protein.

Kowanetz M(1), Valcourt U, Bergström R, Heldin CH, Moustakas A.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.

Transforming growth factors beta (TGF-betas) inhibit growth of epithelial cells
and induce differentiation changes, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). On the other hand, bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) weakly affect
epithelial cell growth and do not induce EMT. Smad4 transmits signals from both
TGF-beta and BMP pathways. Stimulation of Smad4-deficient epithelial cells with
TGF-beta 1 or BMP-7 in the absence or presence of exogenous Smad4, followed by
cDNA microarray analysis, revealed 173 mostly Smad4-dependent, TGF-beta-, or
BMP-responsive genes. Among 25 genes coregulated by both factors, inhibitors of
differentiation Id2 and Id3 showed long-term repression by TGF-beta and sustained
induction by BMP. The opposing regulation of Id genes is critical for
proliferative and differentiation responses. Hence, ectopic Id2 or Id3 expression
renders epithelial cells refractory to growth inhibition and EMT induced by
TGF-beta, phenocopying the BMP response. Knockdown of endogenous Id2 or Id3
sensitizes epithelial cells to BMP, leading to robust growth inhibition and
induction of transdifferentiation. Thus, Id genes sense Smad signals and create a
permissive or refractory nuclear environment that defines decisions of cell fate 
and proliferation.

PMCID: PMC400464
PMID: 15121845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Biomed Inform. 2004 Apr;37(2):99-107.

A computational TW3 classifier for skeletal maturity assessment. A Computing with
Words approach.

Aja-Fernández S(1), De Luis-García R, Martín-Fernández MA, Alberola-López C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Procesado de Imagen, ETSI Telecomunicación, Universidad de
Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain. sanaja@tel.uva.es

This paper proposes a fuzzy methodology to translate the natural language
descriptions of the TW3 method for bone age assessment into an automatic
classifier. The classifier is built upon a modified version of a fuzzy ID3
decision tree. No large data records are needed to train the classifier, i.e., to
find out the classification rules, since the classifier is built upon rules given
by the TW3 method. Only small data records are needed to fine-tune the fuzzy sets
used to implement the rulebase.

PMID: 15120656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Exp Med. 2004 Apr 19;199(8):1101-12. Epub 2004 Apr 12.

Receptor editing and marginal zone B cell development are regulated by the
helix-loop-helix protein, E2A.

Quong MW(1), Martensson A, Langerak AW, Rivera RR, Nemazee D, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that the E2A gene products are required to
initiate B lineage development. Here, we demonstrate that E2A(+/-) B cells that
express an autoreactive B cell receptor fail to mature due in part to an
inability to activate secondary immunoglobulin (Ig) light chain gene
rearrangement. Both RAG1/2 gene expression and RS deletion are severely defective
in E2A(+/-) mice. Additionally, we demonstrate that E2A(+/-) mice show an
increase in the proportion of marginal zone B cells with a concomitant decrease
in the proportion of follicular B cells. In contrast, Id3-deficient splenocytes
show a decline in the proportion of marginal zone B cells. Based on these
observations, we propose that E-protein activity regulates secondary Ig gene
rearrangement at the immature B cell stage and contributes to cell fate
determination of marginal zone B cells. Additionally, we propose a model in which
E-proteins enforce the developmental checkpoint at the immature B cell stage.

PMCID: PMC2211894
PMID: 15078898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):21916-23. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

E2A/HEB and Id3 proteins control the sensitivity to glucocorticoid-induced
apoptosis in thymocytes by regulating the SRG3 expression.

Ko M(1), Ahn J, Lee C, Chung H, Jeon SH, Chung HY, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742.

The E protein family transcription factors encoded by the E2A and HEB genes are
known to play critical roles in the coordinate regulation of lymphocyte
development. Previous studies have shown that T cell receptor (TCR) signals
rapidly induce Id3, a dominant negative antagonist of E2A activity and allow
thymocytes to survive selection events in the thymus. Here we show that SRG3 acts
as a novel downstream target of E2A/HeLa E box-binding (HEB) complex and
modulates glucocorticoid (GC) susceptibility in thymocytes in response to TCR
signals. We have identified a putative E box element in the SRG3 promoter that is
required for optimal promoter activity. The transcription factors E2A and HEB
specifically associate with the E box element. Moreover, E2A-HEB heterodimers
cooperated to activate SRG3 transcription, which was inhibited by the expression 
of Id proteins. TCR-mediated signals rapidly induced Id3 via MEK/ERK activation
and thereby kept the E2A/HEB complex from binding to the E box element in the
SRG3 promoter. Retroviral transduction of Id3 also repressed the SRG3 expression 
by inhibiting the E box binding activity of the E2A/HEB complex. Intriguingly,
enforced Id3 expression conferred thymocyte resistance to GCs, which could be
overcome by the overexpression of SRG3. Taken together, these results suggest
that Id3 may enhance the viability of immature thymocytes by at least rendering
them resistant to GCs through SRG3 down-regulation.

PMID: 15016815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Clin Microbiol. 2003 Dec;41(12):5654-9.

Accuracy of six commercially available systems for identification of members of
the family vibrionaceae.

O'Hara CM(1), Sowers EG, Bopp CA, Duda SB, Strockbine NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, Epidemiology and Laboratory Branch, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
cmo1@cdc.gov

Six commercially available bacterial identification products were tested with
Vibrio alginolyticus (12 strains), V. cholerae (30 strains), Photobacterium
(Vibrio) damselae (10 strains), V. fluvialis (10 strains), V. furnissii (4
strains), V. hollisae (10 strains), V. metschnikovii (9 strains), V. mimicus (10 
strains), V. parahaemolyticus (30 strains), and V. vulnificus (10 strains) to
determine the accuracy of each system for identification. The products included
API 20E, Crystal E/NF, MicroScan Neg ID2 and Rapid Neg ID3, and Vitek GNI+ and
ID-GNB. Each product was tested only with those species that were listed in its
database. Overall, the systems correctly identified 63.9, 80.9, 63.1, 73.6, 73.5,
and 77.7% of the isolates to species level, respectively. Error rates ranged from
0.8% for the API 20E to 10.4% for the Rapid Neg ID3. The API 20E gave "no
identification" for 13.1% of the isolates, while the Neg ID2, GNI+, ID-GNB, and
Crystal were unable to identify 1.8, 2.9, 5.0, and 6.9%, respectively. For V.
cholerae, specifically, accuracy ranged from 50.0 to 96.7%, with the API 20E
having the worst performance and Crystal having the best. V. fluvialis presented 
the biggest challenge for the API 20E and the GNI+, with probabilities averaging 
10%, while V. mimicus was a major problem with the Crystal E/NF, which identified
none of the strains correctly. With the Neg ID2, correct answers were often
obtained only after a modified inoculation of the panel with a bacterial
suspension prepared with 0.85% NaCl. Additional tests required for identification
often included growth in the absence of NaCl, which is not readily available in
most clinical laboratories. The only product to correctly identify at least 90%
of V. cholerae strains was the Crystal E/NF, and only three of the six products, 
the API 20E and both of the Vitek cards, correctly identified more than 90% of
the V. parahaemolyticus strains. Thus, extreme care must be taken in the
interpretation of answers from these six commercially available systems for the
identification of Vibrio species.

PMCID: PMC309021
PMID: 14662957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 15;264(2):339-51.

Cloning and characterization of Xenopus Id4 reveals differing roles for Id genes.

Liu KJ(1), Harland RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 401 Barker Hall, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

We have identified Xenopus Id4, a member of the Id (inhibitor of
differentiation/DNA binding) class of helix-loop-helix proteins. Id factors
dimerize with general bHLH factors, preventing their interaction with
tissue-specific bHLH factors, to inhibit premature differentiation. The presence 
of several Id proteins could reflect simple redundancy in function, or more
interestingly, might suggest different activities for these proteins. During
embryonic development, Xenopus Id4 is expressed in a number of neural tissues,
including Rohon-Beard neurons, olfactory placode, eye primordia, and the
trigeminal ganglia. It is also expressed in other organs, such as the pronephros 
and liver primordium. As embryogenesis progresses, it is expressed in the
migrating melanocytes and lateral line structures. We compare the expression of
Id4 mRNA with that of Id2 and Id3 and find that the Id genes are expressed in
complementary patterns during neurogenesis, myogenesis, kidney development, in
the tailbud, and in the migrating neural crest. To examine the regulation of Id
gene expression during Xenopus neural development, we show that expression of Id3
and Id4 can be induced by overexpression of BMP4 in the whole embryo and in
ectodermal explants. Expression of Id2, Id3, and Id4 in these explants is
unaffected by the expression of FGF-8 or a dominant-negative Ras (N17ras),
suggesting that Id genes are not regulated by the FGF signaling pathway in naive 
ectoderm. We also show that Notch signaling can activate Id2 and Id3 expression
in the whole embryo. In contrast, Id4 expression in the Rohon-Beard cells is
inhibited by activated Notch and increased by a dominant-negative Delta. This may
reflect an increase in Rohon-Beard cells in response to inhibition of Notch
signaling rather than transcriptional regulation of Id4. Finally, to compare the 
activities of Id2, Id3, and Id4, we use animal cap explants and in vivo
overexpression to show that Id proteins can differentially inhibit the activities
of neurogenin and neuroD, both neurogenic bHLH molecules and MyoD, a myogenic
bHLH protein. Id4 is able to inhibit the activity all these bHLH molecules, Id2
inhibits MyoD and neuroD, while Id3 blocks only neuroD activity in our assays.

PMID: 14651922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Comput Biol. 2003;10(5):689-98.

The application of rule-based methods to class prediction problems in genomics.

Michailidis G(1), Shedden K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1027,
USA.

We propose a method for constructing classifiers using logical combinations of
elementary rules. The method is a form of rule-based classification, which has
been widely discussed in the literature. In this work we focus specifically on
issues that arise in the context of classifying cell samples based on RNA or
protein expression measurements. The basic idea is to specify elementary rules
that exhibit a locally strong pattern in favor of a single class. Strict
admissibility criteria are imposed to produce a manageable universe of elementary
rules. Then the elementary rules are combined using a set covering algorithm to
form a composite rule that achieves a perfect fit to the training data. The user 
has explicit control over a parameter that determines the composite rule's level 
of redundancy and parsimony. This built-in control, along with the simplicity of 
interpreting the rules, makes the method particularly useful for classification
problems in genomics. We demonstrate the new method using several microarray
datasets and examine its generalization performance. We also draw comparisons to 
other machine-learning strategies such as CART, ID3, and C4.5.

PMID: 14633393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cancer Cell. 2003 Oct;4(4):277-89.

Effect of angiogenesis inhibition by Id loss and the contribution of
bone-marrow-derived endothelial cells in spontaneous murine tumors.

Ruzinova MB(1), Schoer RA, Gerald W, Egan JE, Pandolfi PP, Rafii S, Manova K,
Mittal V, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Angiogenic defects in Id mutant mice inhibit the growth of tumor xenografts,
providing a genetic model for antiangiogenic stress. Our work tests the
consequences of such stress on progression of more physiological Pten+/- tumors. 
While tumor growth occurs despite impaired angiogenesis, disruption of
vasculature by Id loss causes tumor cells to experience hypoxia and necrosis, the
extent of which is tumor dependent. We show that bone-marrow-derived endothelial 
precursors contribute functionally to neovasculature of some but not all Pten+/- 
tumors, partially rescuing Id mutant phenotype. We demonstrate that loss of Id1
in tumor endothelial cells results in downregulation of several proangiogenic
genes, including alpha6 and beta4 integrins, matrix metalloprotease-2, and
fibroblast growth factor receptor-1. Inhibition of these factors phenocopies loss
of Id in in vivo angiogenesis assays.

PMID: 14585355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Oct 14;100(21):12337-42. Epub 2003 Oct 2.

Angiogenesis impairment in Id-deficient mice cooperates with an Hsp90 inhibitor
to completely suppress HER2/neu-dependent breast tumors.

de Candia P(1), Solit DB, Giri D, Brogi E, Siegel PM, Olshen AB, Muller WJ, Rosen
N, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Id proteins bind basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors and function as
dominant negative inhibitors of gene expression. Id1 and Id3 are required for the
recruitment of bone marrow-derived endothelial cell precursors and tumors
transplanted into Id-deficient mice demonstrate impaired angiogenesis. Mouse
mammary tumor virus-neu mice were bred with Id1-/-Id3+/- mice to ascertain the
role of Id1 and Id3 in mammary tumorigenesis in a more physiologically relevant
model. In mammary tumors from these mice, Id1 and Id3 expression was restricted
to the vascular endothelium. Id1 and Id3 deficiency did not prevent or delay
tumor formation but did alter tumor phenotype. The tumors that developed in the
Id-deficient mice were larger and cystic with a viable rim of tumor cells
surrounding a nonviable core of cellular debris. The Hsp90 chaperone protein is
required for cellular survival under condition of environmental stress and for
the stability of the neu oncogene. 17-Allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin, an
Hsp90 inhibitor, was used to treat these mice. Whereas
17-allylamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin only modestly delayed the growth of
established mammary tumors in WT mice for Id, tumor suppression was dramatically 
more effective in an Id1- or Id3-deficient background. These data suggest that
tumorigenesis can occur in a background of defective angiogenesis but that tumors
developing in such an environment may be especially sensitive to inhibitors of
neu and stress-activated survival pathways. Thus angiogenesis inhibitors in
combination with inhibitors of Hsp90 function should be evaluated for the
treatment of advanced breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC218759
PMID: 14526102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45770-6. Epub 2003 Sep 1.

Id proteins negatively regulate basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
function by disrupting subnuclear compartmentalization.

O'Toole PJ(1), Inoue T, Emerson L, Morrison IE, Mackie AR, Cherry RJ, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom.

Id helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins act as global regulators of metazoan cell
fate, cell growth, and differentiation. They heterodimerize with and inhibit the 
DNA-binding function of members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors. Using real time fluorescence microscopy techniques in
single living cells, we show here that nuclear pools of chromatin-associated bHLH
transcription factor are freely exchangeable and in constant flux. The existence 
of a dynamic equilibrium between DNA-bound and free bHLH protein is also directly
demonstrable in vitro. By contrast, Id protein is not associated with any
subcellular, macromolecular structures and displays a more highly mobile, diffuse
nuclear-cytoplasmic distribution. When co-expressed with antagonist Id protein,
the chromatin-associated sublocalization of bHLH protein is abolished, and there 
is an accompanying 100-fold increase in its nuclear mobility to a level expected 
for freely diffusible Id-bHLH heterodimer. These results suggest that nuclear Id 
protein acts by sequestering pools of transiently diffusing bHLH protein to
prevent reassociation with chromatin domains. Such a mechanism would explain how 
Id proteins are able to overcome the large DNA-binding free energy of bHLH
proteins that is necessary to accomplish their inhibitory effect.

PMID: 12952978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45231-9. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Expression of the aldehyde dehydrogenase 2-like gene is controlled by BOB.1/OBF.1
in B lymphocytes.

Brunner C(1), Laumen H, Nielsen PJ, Kraut N, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ulm, Department of Physiological Chemistry,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89081 Ulm, Germany.

BOB.1/OBF.1 is a lymphocyte-restricted transcriptional coactivator. It binds to
the Oct1 and Oct2 transcription factors and increases their transactivation
potential. Targeted gene disruption experiments revealed that BOB.1/OBF.1 is
critical at different stages of B cell development. A large number of genes
expressed in B cells contain octamer motifs in their regulatory regions. However,
only few genes have been described so far whose expression is dependent on
BOB.1/OBF.1. To understand the molecular basis of BOB.1/OBF.1 function in B cell 
development, we searched for BOB.1/OBF.1 target genes by expression profiling. We
have identified genes both induced and repressed by BOB.1/OBF.1. Using different 
genetic systems, we demonstrate regulation of a selection of these genes.
Identified targets included genes encoding Ahd2-like, AKR1C13, Rbp1, Sdh, Idh2,
protocadherin gamma, alpha-catenin, Ptprs, Id3, and Creg. Classification of
BOB.1/OBF.1 target genes by function suggests that they affect various aspects of
B cell physiology such as cellular metabolism, cell adhesion, and
differentiation. To better understand the mechanism of BOB.1/OBF.1 action, we
cloned the promoter of the gene encoding Ahd2-like, the gene showing the
strongest regulation by BOB.1/OBF.1. This promoter indeed contains a perfect
octamer motif. Furthermore, the motif was recognized by the Oct transcription
factors as well as BOB.1/OBF.1 in vitro and in vivo, as shown by electromobility 
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Transient transfections confirm
that this promoter is activated by BOB.1/OBF.1. Our observations suggest that by 
regulating genes in different functional pathways, BOB.1/OBF.1 has a widespread
effect on B cell development and function.

PMID: 12947107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):3722-31.

Thyroid hormone, retinoic acid, and testosterone suppress proliferation and
induce markers of differentiation in cultured rat sertoli cells.

Buzzard JJ(1), Wreford NG, Morrison JR.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Reproduction and Development and Department of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 3168, Melbourne, Australia.

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2003 Sep;144(9):3719-21.

This study uses a high purity cell culture system to extend previous observations
of factors controlling the end of the Sertoli cell proliferative phase. Thyroid
hormone, retinoic acid, and testosterone were assessed for their ability to halt 
the proliferative phase and regulate the expression of markers associated with
maturation of the Sertoli cell. We show that these hormones share similar
suppressive effects on the rate of Sertoli cell division without any apparent
additive effects. We demonstrate that these hormones induce the progressive
accumulation of cell cycle inhibitors p27Kip1 and p21Cip1 in Sertoli cells, a
likely regulatory mechanism controlling the suppression of proliferation. We used
real-time RT-PCR to examine the effects of these factors on the expression of
mRNA encoding the Id proteins, demonstrating an increase in Id2 and Id3
expression in Sertoli cells treated with thyroid hormone, retinoic acid, or
testosterone. Finally, we examined the expression of a number of genes that have 
been implicated in the Sertoli cell differentiation process. Our results suggest 
that these hormones can induce aspects of Sertoli cell differentiation in vitro, 
providing a valuable in vitro model for studying Sertoli cell function.

PMID: 12933640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Bull Math Biol. 2003 Sep;65(5):835-58.

An illustration of variable precision rough set theory: the gender classification
of the European barn swallow (Hirundo rustica).

Beynon MJ(1), Buchanan KL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff Business School, Cardiff University, Colum Drive, Cardiff CF10 3EU,
Wales, UK. BeynonMJ@cardiff.ac.uk

This paper introduces a new technique in the investigation of object
classification and illustrates the potential use of this technique for the
analysis of a range of biological data, using avian morphometric data as an
example. The nascent variable precision rough sets (VPRS) model is introduced and
compared with the decision tree method ID3 (through a 'leave n out' approach),
using the same dataset of morphometric measures of European barn swallows
(Hirundo rustica) and assessing the accuracy of gender classification based on
these measures. The results demonstrate that the VPRS model, allied with the use 
of a modern method of discretization of data, is comparable with the more
traditional non-parametric ID3 decision tree method. We show that, particularly
in small samples, the VPRS model can improve classification and to a lesser
extent prediction aspects over ID3. Furthermore, through the 'leave n out'
approach, some indication can be produced of the relative importance of the
different morphometric measures used in this problem. In this case we suggest
that VPRS has advantages over ID3, as it intelligently uses more of the
morphometric data available for the data classification, whilst placing less
emphasis on variables with low reliability. In biological terms, the results
suggest that the gender of swallows can be determined with reasonable accuracy
from morphometric data and highlight the most important variables in this
process. We suggest that both analysis techniques are potentially useful for the 
analysis of a range of different types of biological datasets, and that VPRS in
particular has potential for application to a range of biological circumstances.

PMID: 12909253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2003 Aug;58(8):687-97.

Denervation stimulates apoptosis but not Id2 expression in hindlimb muscles of
aged rats.

Alway SE(1), Degens H, Krishnamurthy G, Chaudhrai A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle, Sarcopenia and Muscle Diseases, Division of Exercise
Physiology, West Virginia University School of Medicine, Morgantown 26506-9227,
USA. sa;way@hsc.uwv.edu

Inhibitors of differentiation (Id) proteins are repressors of myogenic regulatory
factors and have been implicated in apoptosis and muscle atrophy during aging.
Indeed, we have previously found that Id levels are elevated in muscles from old 
rodents, possibly as a consequence of loss of alpha-motoneurons during
senescence. To determine if Id2 proteins increase after denervation and if this
is accompanied by increased apoptosis in aged as compared with adult animals, the
gastrocnemius and soleus muscles were denervated in 1 limb of Fischer 344 x Brown
Norway rats aged 9 months (adult, n = 12) and 33 months (aged, n = 9), while the 
contralateral limb served as the intra-animal control. After 14 days, the muscles
in each limb were removed. The levels of Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA and protein were 
significantly greater in muscles of old as compared with young adult rats.
Denervation, however, did not significantly increase Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA in
soleus or gastrocnemius muscles from either young or old rats. Also Id2 protein
levels were similar in denervated and control muscles from young adult and old
rats. In young adult rats only, denervation induced an increase in Id1 and Id3
protein levels in both the soleus (Id1 113%; Id3 900%) and gastrocnemius (Id1
86%; Id3 80%). Denervation induced a significant increase in caspase 8 in both
soleus and gastrocnemius muscles from young (101% and 147%, respectively) and old
rats (167% and 190%, respectively). Bax protein levels, as estimated by western
blots, increased by 726% and 1087% after denervation in the soleus and by 368%
and 49% in the gastrocnemius muscles of young and old rats, respectively. The
data suggest that the denervation-induced muscle loss was at least partly due to 
apoptosis as indicated by elevated caspase 8 and Bax levels in denervated
muscles. While Id2 may have a role in aging-induced sarcopenia, Id2 does not
appear to directly regulate apoptosis during denervation. The elevated Id
expression in muscles from aged animals is therefore not a direct consequence of 
loss of alpha-motoneurons during senescence.

PMID: 12902526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Endocrinology. 2003 Aug;144(8):3306-14.

Identification of a putative autocrine bone morphogenetic protein-signaling
pathway in human ovarian surface epithelium and ovarian cancer cells.

Shepherd TG(1), Nachtigal MW.

Author information: 
(1)Dalhousie University, Department of Pharmacology, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
B3H 1X5.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are members of the TGFbeta superfamily of
cytokines that are involved in development, differentiation, and disease. In an
analysis of normal ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) and ovarian cancer (OC)
cells, we observed BMP4 mRNA expression and found that primary OC cells produce
mature BMP4. In addition, each member of the downstream signaling pathway was
expressed in primary OSE and OC cells. Smad1 was phosphorylated and underwent
nuclear translocation in normal OSE and OC cells upon treatment with BMP4.
Interestingly, the BMP target genes ID1 and ID3 were up-regulated 10- to 15-fold 
in primary OC cells, compared with a 2- to 3-fold increase in normal OSE. The
growth of several primary OC cells was relatively unaltered by BMP4 treatment;
however, long-term BMP4 treatment of primary OC cells resulted in decreased cell 
density as well as increased cell spreading and adherence. These data demonstrate
the existence and putative function of BMP signaling in normal OSE and OC cells, 
and thus the continued examination of BMP4 signaling in the regulation of these
two processes will be critical to further our current understanding of the role
of BMP biology in OC pathogenesis.

PMID: 12865307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2002;67:249-54.

A genetic approach to understanding tumor angiogenesis.

Benezra R(1), de Candia P, Li H, Romero E, Lyden D, Rafii S, Ruzinova M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York 10021, USA.

PMID: 12858547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. EMBO J. 2003 Jun 16;22(12):2992-3003.

Noggin overexpression inhibits eyelid opening by altering epidermal apoptosis and
differentiation.

Sharov AA(1), Weiner L, Sharova TY, Siebenhaar F, Atoyan R, Reginato AM, McNamara
CA, Funa K, Gilchrest BA, Brissette JL, Botchkarev VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Boston University School of Medicine, 609 Albany
Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Contact of developing sensory organs with the external environment is established
via the formation of openings in the skin. During eye development, eyelids first 
grow, fuse and finally reopen, thus providing access for visual information to
the retina. Here, we show that eyelid opening is strongly inhibited in transgenic
mice overexpressing the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist noggin from
the keratin 5 (K5) promoter in the epidermis. In wild-type mice, enhanced
expression of the kinase-inactive form of BMPR-IB mediated by an adenovirus
vector also inhibits eyelid opening. Noggin overexpression leads to reduction of 
apoptosis and retardation of cell differentiation in the eyelid epithelium, which
is associated with downregulation of expression of the apoptotic receptors (Fas, 
p55 kDa TNFR), Id3 protein and keratinocyte differentiation markers (loricrin,
involucrin). BMP-4, but not EGF or TGF-alpha, accelerates opening of the eyelid
explants isolated from K5-Noggin transgenic mice when cultured ex vivo. These
data suggest that the BMP signaling pathway plays an important role in regulation
of genetic programs of eyelid opening and skin remodeling during the final steps 
of eye morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC162143
PMID: 12805214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Cell. 2003 Apr;11(4):915-26.

A self-enabling TGFbeta response coupled to stress signaling: Smad engages stress
response factor ATF3 for Id1 repression in epithelial cells.

Kang Y(1), Chen CR, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Genome-wide transcriptional profiling of human epithelial cells revealed that
repression of Id inhibitors of differentiation (Id1, Id2, and Id3) is a general
feature of the TGFbeta cytostatic program. Opposite responses of Id1 to TGFbeta
and the related factor BMP are dictated by the specific ability of the TGFbeta
mediator, Smad3, to activate expression of stress response factor ATF3 and then
recruit this factor to the Id1 promoter. Thus, a Smad3-mediated primary gene
response, ATF3 induction, enables Smad3 to participate in an ATF3-mediated,
secondary gene response. As a common target of TGFbeta/Smad signals and stress
signals via p38 kinase, ATF3 additionally serves to channel synergy between these
pathways in the response of epithelial cells to stress and injury.

PMID: 12718878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Nat Immunol. 2003 Jun;4(6):586-93. Epub 2003 Apr 28.

E-proteins directly regulate expression of activation-induced deaminase in mature
B cells.

Sayegh CE(1), Quong MW, Agata Y, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

Activated mature B cells in which the DNA-binding activity of E-proteins has been
disrupted fail to undergo class switch recombination. Here we show that activated
B cells overexpressing the antagonist helix-loop-helix protein Id3 do not induce 
expression of the murine Aicda gene encoding activation-induced deaminase (AID). 
A highly conserved intronic regulatory element in Aicda binds E-proteins both in 
vitro and in vivo. The transcriptional activity of this element is regulated by
E-proteins. We show that the enforced expression of AID in cells overexpressing
Id3 partially restores class switch recombination. Taken together, our
observations link helix-loop-helix activity and Aicda gene expression in a common
pathway, in which E-protein activity is required for the efficient induction of
Aicda transcription.

PMID: 12717431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Circ Res. 2003 May 2;92(8):840-7. Epub 2003 Mar 27.

Smooth muscle alpha-actin gene requires two E-boxes for proper expression in vivo
and is a target of class I basic helix-loop-helix proteins.

Kumar MS(1), Hendrix JA, Johnson AD, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, 415 Lane Rd, MR5 Room 1220, PO Box 801394, Charlottesville, Va 22908,
USA.

Changes in the differentiated state of smooth muscle cells (SMCs) play a key role
in vascular diseases, yet the mechanisms controlling SMC differentiation are
still largely undefined. We addressed the role of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
proteins in SMC differentiation by first determining the role of two E-box
(CAnnTG) motifs, binding sites for bHLH proteins, in the transcriptional
regulation of the SMC differentiation marker gene, smooth muscle alpha-actin (SM 
alpha-actin), in vivo. Mutation of one or both E-boxes significantly reduced the 
expression of a -2560- to 2784-bp SM alpha-actin promoter/LacZ reporter gene in
vivo in transgenic mice. We then determined the potential role of class I bHLH
proteins, E12, E47, HEB, and E2-2, in SM alpha-actin regulation. In
cotransfection experiments, E12, HEB, and E2-2 activated the SM alpha-actin
promoter. Activation by HEB and E2-2 was synergistic with serum response factor. 
Additionally, the dominant-negative/inhibitory HLH proteins, Id2, Id3, and Twist,
inhibited both the E12 and serum response factor-induced activations of the SM
alpha-actin promoter. Finally, we demonstrated that E2A proteins (E12/E47)
specifically bound the E-box-containing region of the SM alpha-actin promoter in 
vivo in the context of intact chromatin in SMCs. Taken together, these results
provide the first evidence of E-box-dependent regulation of a SMC differentiation
marker gene in vivo in transgenic mice. Moreover, they demonstrate a potential
role for class I bHLH factors and their inhibitors, Id and Twist, in SM
alpha-actin regulation and suggest that these factors may play an important role 
in control of SMC differentiation and phenotypic modulation.

PMID: 12663487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2002 Nov;53(9):683-90.

[Intelligent system to perform a diagnostic protocol for lymphatic invasion in
laryngeal cancer].

[Article in Spanish]

Zapater E(1), Moreno S, Armengot M, Campos A, Taleb C, Alba JR, Basterra J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital General Universitario de Valencia. 
ezapater@ctv.es

Erratum in
    Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2003 Mar;54(3):326.

Laryngeal carcinoma is the most frequent malignant tumour in head and neck. Node 
invasion is known to be one of the most important prognostic factors. The aim of 
this study has been to design an intelligent system to perform a diagnostic
algorithm of metastasic neck nodes. 122 clinical reports of patients diagnosed of
laryngeal carcinoma in our department have been reviewed. The compiled data have 
been: tumor site, T stage, N stage (clinical, after CT scan and post-surgery).
The method used to design the intelligent system has been the ID3, which is able 
to generate a minimal decision tree. Palpation has been the variable that has
given more information about node invasion. CT has proved to be more efficient in
supraglottic tumours. ID3 method has shown to be useful in performing diagnostic 
algorithms, specially when the number of cases and diagnostic tests are high.

PMID: 12584884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Am J Pathol. 2003 Feb;162(2):533-46.

Global expression profiling of fibroblast responses to transforming growth
factor-beta1 reveals the induction of inhibitor of differentiation-1 and provides
evidence of smooth muscle cell phenotypic switching.

Chambers RC(1), Leoni P, Kaminski N, Laurent GJ, Heller RA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiopulmonary Biochemistry and Respiratory Medicine, Royal Free
and University College Medical School, University College London, Rayne
Institute, London, United Kingdom. r.chambers@ucl.ac.uk

Transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) plays a central role in promoting
extracellular matrix protein deposition by promoting the transformation of
fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. To gain new insights into the transcriptional
programs involved, we profiled human fetal lung fibroblast global gene expression
in response to TGF-beta1 up to 24 hours using oligonucleotide microarrays. In
this report, we present data for 146 genes that were up-regulated at least
twofold at two time points. These genes group into several major functional
categories, including genes involved in cytoskeletal reorganization (n = 30),
matrix formation (n = 25), metabolism and protein biosynthesis (n = 27), cell
signaling (n = 21), proliferation and survival (n = 13), gene transcription (n = 
9), and of uncertain function (n = 21). For 80 of these genes, this is the first 
report that they are TGF-beta1-responsive. The early induction of two members of 
the inhibitor of differentiation (ID) family of transcriptional regulators, ID1
and ID3, was followed by the up-regulation of a number of genes that are usually 
expressed by highly differentiated smooth muscle cells, including smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain, basic calponin, and smoothelin. These findings were confirmed
at the protein level for primary adult lung fibroblasts. ID1 further behaved like
a typical immediate-early gene and, unlike ID3, was expressed and induced at the 
protein level. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that ID1 was highly expressed 
by (myo)fibroblasts within fibrotic foci in experimentally induced pulmonary
fibrosis. ID1 acts as a dominant-negative antagonist of basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factors that drive cell lineage commitment and differentiation.
These findings have important implications for our understanding of fibroblast
transcriptional programming in response to TGF-beta1 during development,
oncogenesis, tissue repair, and fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC1851161
PMID: 12547711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 4;278(14):12182-90. Epub 2003 Jan 3.

Molecular recognition in helix-loop-helix and helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper
domains. Design of repertoires and selection of high affinity ligands for natural
proteins.

Ciarapica R(1), Rosati J, Cesareni G, Nasi S.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Biologia and Patologia Molecolari Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Università La Sapienza, 00185 Roma, Italy.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) and helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (HLHZip) are
dimerization domains that mediate selective pairing among members of a large
transcription factor family involved in cell fate determination. To investigate
the molecular rules underlying recognition specificity and to isolate molecules
interfering with cell proliferation and differentiation control, we assembled two
molecular repertoires obtained by directed randomization of the binding surface
in these two domains. For this strategy we selected the Heb HLH and Max Zip
regions as molecular scaffolds for the randomization process and displayed the
two resulting molecular repertoires on lambda phage capsids. By affinity
selection, many domains were isolated that bound to the proteins Mad, Rox, MyoD, 
and Id2 with different levels of affinity. Although several residues along an
extended surface within each domain appeared to contribute to dimerization, some 
key residues critically involved in molecular recognition could be identified.
Furthermore, a number of charged residues appeared to act as switch points
facilitating partner exchange. By successfully selecting ligands for four of four
HLH or HLHZip proteins, we have shown that the repertoires assembled are rather
general and possibly contain elements that bind with sufficient affinity to any
natural HLH or HLHZip molecule. Thus they represent a valuable source of ligands 
that could be used as reagents for molecular dissection of functional regulatory 
pathways.

PMID: 12514181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Clin Microbiol. 2002 Oct;40(10):3750-2.

Ability of the MicroScan rapid gram-negative ID type 3 panel to identify
nonenteric glucose-fermenting and nonfermenting gram-negative bacilli.

O'Hara CM(1), Miller JM.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Laboratory Branch, Division of Healthcare Quality Promotion, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. cmo1@cdc.gov

The MicroScan Rapid Neg ID3 panel is designed for the identification of
Enterobacteriaceae and nonenteric glucose-fermenting and nonfermenting
gram-negative bacilli. We evaluated this panel for its ability to identify
gram-negative non-Enterobacteriaceae bacteria. A total of 134 strains,
representing 26 genera and 42 species, were taken from storage at -70(o)C,
passaged three times before testing, and inoculated into the panels according to 
the manufacturer's directions before being inserted into a Walk/Away 96
instrument loaded with version 22.28 software. At the end of the initial 2.5-h
incubation period, 89 isolates (66.4%) were correctly identified at a probability
level of > or =85%. After additional testing recommended by the manufacturer was 
completed, another 11 isolates (8.2%) were correctly identified at probability
levels of > or =85%. Twenty-five (18.7%) isolates were correctly identified after
additional testing, but the probability levels were less than 85%. Two isolates
were unidentified, and seven (5.2%) were incorrectly identified. The seven
misidentified strains were not concentrated in any one genus. With an accuracy
approaching 75%, this product may be used for the identification of the commonly 
isolated non-Enterobacteriaceae bacteria but may present problems in
identification of other non-glucose-fermenting gram-negative bacilli.

PMCID: PMC130902
PMID: 12354875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2002 Sep 24;65(3):203-11.

Analysis by cDNA microarrays of altered gene expression in middle ears of rats
following pneumococcal infection.

Lin J(1), Tsuboi Y, Pan W, Giebink GS, Adams GL, Kim Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Minnesota Otitis Media Research
Center, University of Minnesota School of Medicine, 2001 Sixth Street S.E., Room 
216, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. linxx004@tc.umn.edu

OBJECTIVE: Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common pathogen in otitis media. 
Infection of the middle ear with S. pneumoniae potentiates development of thick
effusion in the middle ear which frequently causes hearing loss and communication
disorders in children. What has changed immediately in the middle ear cleft
following pneumococcal infection is extensively studied and characterized but
what has changed ever after remains elusive. The purpose of this study is to
explore the cellular and molecular basis that remains on a longer time after
acute pneucmococcal middle ear infection and potentiates development of thick
effusion in the middle ear.
METHODS: 12 rats were intrabullarly inoculated with pneumococcus at 2.5x10(6)
CFU/ear and profiles of gene expression in the middle ear were examined by cDNA
microarrays in combination with reverse transcription-polymer chain reaction
(RT-PCR) 6 weeks after infection while the morphologic changes in middle ear were
simultaneously characterized by histopathologic techniques. Twelve rats receiving
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) served as controls.
RESULTS: it demonstrated that pneumococcus infected ears had the expression of
the following genes at a high level compared to the controls: mitogenic signaling
proteins (mitogen-activated protein kinase [MEK1 and MEK2], helix-loop-helix
transcriptional regulators (Id3 and Id1), ion channels (sodium channel beta 1 and
sodium channel 2), and mucin glycoproteins (Muc2 and Muc5). The morphology
demonstrated a thickened mucosa and submucosa with increased expression of
macroglycoconjugates compared to the controls.
CONCLUSION: the expression of several genes remains high even after the acute
episode of pneumococcal otitis media has been resolved. The up-regulated
expression of these genes may serve as the basis for the development of thick
effusion and mucous cell metaplasia/hyperplasia once it is complicated with other
factors such as dysfunction of the Eustachian tube.

PMID: 12242135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2002 Aug 15;104(2):148-58.

Altered expression of novel genes in the cerebral cortex following experimental
brain injury.

Kobori N(1), Clifton GL, Dash P.

Author information: 
(1)The Vivian L. Smith Center for Neurological Research, Department of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, The University of Texas Medical School, PO Box 20708,
Houston, TX 77255, USA.

Damage to the cerebral cortex results in neurological impairments such as motor, 
attention, memory and executive dysfunctions. To examine the molecular mechanisms
contributing to these deficits, mRNA expression was profiled using high-density
cDNA microarray hybridization after experimental cortical impact injury in mice. 
The mRNA levels at 2 h, 6 h, 24 h, 3 days and 14 days after injury were compared 
with those of control animals. This revealed 86 annotated genes and 24 expression
sequence tags (ESTs) as being differentially expressed with a 1.5-fold or greater
change. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis was used to independently verify
these results for selected genes. Seven functional classes of genes were found to
be altered following injury, including transcription factors, signal transduction
genes and inflammatory proteins. While a few of these genes have been previously 
reported to be differentially regulated following injury, the most of the genes
have not been previously implicated in traumatic brain injury (TBI)
pathophysiology. For example, consistent with previous reports, the transcription
factor c-jun and the neurotrophic factor bdnf mRNA levels were altered as a
result of TBI. Among the novel genes, the mRNA levels for the high mobility group
protein 1 (hmg-1), the regulator of G-protein signaling 2 (rgs-2), the
transforming growth factor beta inducible early growth response (tieg), the
inhibitor of DNA binding 3 (id3), and the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
H (hnrnp h) were changed following injury. The functional significance of these
genes in neurite outgrowth, neuronal regeneration, and plasticity following
injury are discussed.

PMID: 12225869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Sep 10;279(1):62-70.

Study of gene expression in thyrotropin-stimulated thyroid cells by cDNA
expression array: ID3 transcription modulating factor as an early response
protein and tumor marker in thyroid carcinomas.

Deleu S(1), Savonet V, Behrends J, Dumont JE, Maenhaut C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Interdisciplinary Research, School of Medicine, Free University
of Brussels, Campus Erasme, route de Lennik 808, B-1070, Brussels, Belgium.

Induction of cell proliferation by mitogen or growth factor stimulation leads to 
the specific induction or repression of a large number of genes. To identify
genes differentially regulated by the cAMP-dependent transduction pathway, which 
is poorly characterized so far, we used the cDNA expression array technology.
Hybridizations of Atlas human cDNA expression arrays with (32)P-labeled cDNA
probes derived from control or thyrotropin (TSH)-stimulated dog thyrocytes in
primary culture generated expression profiles of hundreds of genes
simultaneously. Among the genes that displayed modified expression, we selected
the transcription factor ID3, whose expression was increased by a cAMP-dependent 
stimulus. ID3 overexpression after TSH stimulation was first verified by Northern
blotting analysis, and its mRNA regulation was then investigated in response to a
variety of agents acting on thyrocyte proliferation and/or differentiation. We
show that: (1) ID3 mRNA induction was stronger after stimulation of the cAMP
cascade, but was not restricted to this signaling pathway, as phorbol myristate
ester (TPA) and insulin also stimulated mRNA accumulation; (2) in contrast,
powerful mitogens for thyroid cells, epidermal growth factor and hepatocyte
growth factor, did not significantly modify ID3 mRNA levels; (3) ID3 protein
levels closely parallelled mRNA levels, as revealed by immunofluorescence
experiments showing a nuclear signal regulated by TSH; (4) in papillary thyroid
carcinomas, ID3 mRNA was downregulated. Our results suggest that ID3 expression
might be more related to the differentiating process induced by TSH than to the
proliferative action of this hormone.

PMID: 12213214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Sep;22(17):6199-208.

Identification of novel MyoD gene targets in proliferating myogenic stem cells.

Wyzykowski JC(1), Winata TI, Mitin N, Taparowsky EJ, Konieczny SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 
47907-1392, USA.

A major control point for skeletal myogenesis revolves around the muscle basic
helix-loop-helix gene family that includes MyoD, Myf-5, myogenin, and MRF4.
Myogenin and MRF4 are thought to be essential to terminal differentiation events,
whereas MyoD and Myf-5 are critical to establishing the myogenic cell lineage and
producing committed, undifferentiated myogenic stem cells (myoblasts). Although
mouse genetic studies have revealed the importance of MyoD and Myf-5 for myoblast
development, the genetic targets of MyoD and Myf-5 activity in undifferentiated
myoblasts remain unknown. In this study, we investigated the function of MyoD as 
a transcriptional activator in undifferentiated myoblasts. By using conditional
expression of MyoD, in conjunction with suppression subtractive hybridizations,
we show that the Id3 and NP1 (neuronal pentraxin 1) genes become
transcriptionally active following MyoD induction in undifferentiated myoblasts. 
Activation of Id3 and NP1 represents a stable, heritable event that does not rely
on continued MyoD activity and is not subject to negative regulation by an
activated H-Ras G12V protein. These results are the first to demonstrate that
MyoD functions as a transcriptional activator in myogenic stem cells and that
this key myogenic regulatory factor exhibits different gene target specificities,
depending upon the cellular environment.

PMCID: PMC133998
PMID: 12167713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Immunol. 2002 Aug 15;169(4):1713-20.

Thymocyte development in early growth response gene 1-deficient mice.

Bettini M(1), Xi H, Milbrandt J, Kersh GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Early growth response gene 1 (Egr1) codes for a transcriptional regulator that
contains a zinc-finger DNA binding domain. Egr1 expression is induced by a
variety of extracellular stimuli including TCR-ligand interactions. Its pattern
of expression in the thymus and dependence on ERK activation have led to
speculation that it has a role in T cell development, but the exact nature of
this role has been undefined. To more clearly define the role of Egr1 in
thymocyte development, we have analyzed thymocytes from Egr1-deficient mice. We
find that thymuses from Egr1-deficient mice contain twice as many cells as
age-matched controls, and the increase in thymocyte number is apparent at the
early CD4/CD8 double negative stage of development. Subsequent maturation to the 
CD4/CD8 double positive stage and survival of the double positive cells both
appear normal in Egr1-deficient animals. We also find that Egr1 promotes positive
selection of both CD4 and CD8 single positive cells without playing a major role 
in negative selection. Egr1 influences positive selection by enhancing expression
of the helix-loop-helix inhibitor Id3 and the anti-apoptosis molecule bcl-2.
Thus, Egr1 translates developmental signals into appropriate changes in gene
expression at multiple stages of thymocyte development.

PMID: 12165491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Immunity. 2002 Jul;17(1):51-62.

Blimp-1 orchestrates plasma cell differentiation by extinguishing the mature B
cell gene expression program.

Shaffer AL(1), Lin KI, Kuo TC, Yu X, Hurt EM, Rosenwald A, Giltnane JM, Yang L,
Zhao H, Calame K, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Blimp-1, a transcriptional repressor, drives the terminal differentiation of B
cells to plasma cells. Using DNA microarrays, we found that introduction of
Blimp-1 into B cells blocked expression of a remarkably large set of genes, while
a much smaller number was induced. Blimp-1 initiated this cascade of gene
expression changes by directly repressing genes encoding several transcription
factors, including Spi-B and Id3, that regulate signaling by the B cell receptor.
Blimp-1 also inhibited immunoglobulin class switching by blocking expression of
AID, Ku70, Ku86, DNA-PKcs, and STAT6. These findings suggest that Blimp-1
promotes plasmacytic differentiation by extinguishing gene expression important
for B cell receptor signaling, germinal center B cell function, and proliferation
while allowing expression of important plasma cell genes such as XBP-1.

PMID: 12150891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Eur Respir J. 2002 Jun;19(6):1064-71.

Alterations in gene expression in hamster diaphragm after emphysema and lung
volume reduction surgery.

Reynders V(1), Marchand E, Gayan-Ramirez G, De Leyn P, Verhoeven G, Decramer M.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Muscle Research Unit, University Hospitals, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

The authors have demonstrated previously that emphysema and lung volume reduction
surgery (LVRS) resulted in a significant shift of type IIx/b to type IIa fibres
in the diaphragm of hamsters with elastase-induced emphysema. To explore the
mechanisms leading to this fibre switching, the mRNA expression of the myogenic
regulatory factors, the inhibitors of DNA binding proteins (Id-proteins) and
insulin-like growth factor-I were examined. Ribonucleic acid was extracted from
the diaphragm of control, emphysematous, emphysematous and sham operated and LVRS
hamsters and subjected to reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Compared to control, the ratio MyoD to myogenin declined with emphysema, sham and
even more after LVRS, due to a decrease in MyoD mRNA and an increase in myogenin 
mRNA. Similarly, compared to control, Id-1 protein mRNA levels decreased
significantly in sham and even more in LVRS. Id-2 protein mRNA levels decreased
in all groups, but reached statistical significance in LVRS only, compared to
control.IN CONCLUSION: 1) the reduced MyoD/myogenin ratio may be the mechanism of
the shift to a slower fibre type, 2) the decreased MyoD/myogenin ratio in lung
volume reduction surgery animals suggests that lung volume reduction surgery
enhances rather than decreases the load placed on the diaphragm and 3) the
observed down-regulation of the inhibiting factors may facilitate the diaphragm
adaptation to overload.

PMID: 12108858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. FASEB J. 2002 Jul;16(9):1077-86.

Redox-sensitive vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation is mediated by GKLF and
Id3 in vitro and in vivo.

Nickenig G(1), Baudler S, Müller C, Werner C, Werner N, Welzel H, Strehlow K,
Böhm M.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätskliniken des Saarlandes, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik,
Innere Medizin III, 66424 Homburg/Saar, Germany. nickenig@med-in.uni-sb.de

Reactive oxygen species such as superoxide and hydroxyl radicals have been
implicated in the pathogenic growth of various cell types. The molecular
mechanisms involved in redox-sensitive cell growth control are poorly understood.
Stimulation of cultured vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) with xanthin/xanthin 
oxidase (X/XO) increases proliferation, whereas stimulation with hydrogen
peroxide and Fe3+NTA (H-Fe) causes growth arrest of VSMC. Differential Display
led to the identification of two novel, differentially regulated redox-sensitive 
genes. The dominant negative helix-loop-helix protein Id3 is induced by X/XO and 
down-regulated by H-Fe. The transcription factor gut-enriched Kruppel-like factor
(GKLF) is induced by H-Fe but not by X/XO. Induction of GKLF and inhibition of
Id3 via transfection experiments leads to growth arrest, whereas overexpression
of Id3 and inhibition of GKLF cause cell growth. Id3 down-regulation is induced
via binding of GKLF to the Id3 promotor and concomitantly reduced Id3 gene
transcription rate. GKLF induction by H-Fe is mediated through hydroxyl radicals,
p38MAP kinase-, calcium-, and protein synthesis-dependent pathways. Id3 is
induced by X/XO via superoxide, calcium, p38, and p42/44 MAP kinase. GKLF induces
and Id3 depresses expression of p21WAF1/Cip1, p27KIP1, p53. Induction of Id3 is
accomplished by angiotensin II via superoxide release. A vascular injury mouse
model revealed that Id3 is overexpressed in proliferating vascular tissue in
vivo. These findings reveal novel mechanisms of redox-controlled cellular
proliferation involving GKLF and Id3 that may have general implications for our
understanding of vascular and nonvascular growth control.

PMID: 12087069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Methods. 2002 Mar;26(3):254-9.

Immunoprecipitation techniques for the analysis of transcription factor
complexes.

Klenova E(1), Chernukhin I, Inoue T, Shamsuddin S, Norton J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Gene Regulation Laboratory, University of
Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, UK.

Interactions among transcription factors can be detected and analyzed by a
variety of in vitro and in vivo approaches. In many studies, the existence of
putative interactions among transcription factor partners is initially
established from yeast two-hybrid screening and in vitro protein association
analysis. The ability to detect candidate interacting proteins in
coimmunoprecipitates from cell lysates provides an important criterion for
establishing the authenticity of such protein interactions in vivo. This article 
describes methodology developed for detecting interactions between the
helix-loop-helix protein, Id3, and the paired homeodomain protein, Pax5, and
interactions involving the zinc finger transcription factor, CTCF. The importance
of empirically establishing optimum conditions for cell lysis, selection of
appropriate antibodies, conditions for immunoprecipitation, and detection of
interacting partners are discussed.

PMID: 12054881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2002 Mar;40(2):145-52.

Fuzzy rules to predict degree of malignancy in brain glioma.

Ye CZ(1), Yang J, Geng DY, Zhou Y, Chen NY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Image Processing & Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, China.

The current pre-operative assessment of the degree of malignancy in brain glioma 
is based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings and clinical data. 280
cases were studied, of which 111 were high-grade malignancies and 169 were
low-grade, so that regular and interpretable patterns of the relationships
between glioma MRI features and the degree of malignancy could be acquired.
However, as uncertainties in the data and missing values existed, a fuzzy rule
extraction algorithm based on a fuzzy min-max neural network (FMMNN) was used.
The performance of a multi-layer perceptron network (MLP) trained with the error 
back-propagation algorithm (BP), the decision tree algorithm ID3, nearest
neighbour and the original fuzzy min-max neural network were also evaluated. The 
results showed that two fuzzy decision rules on only six features achieved an
accuracy of 84.6% (89.9% for low-grade and 76.6% for high-grade cases).
Investigations with the proposed algorithm revealed that age, mass effect,
oedema, postcontrast enhancement, blood supply, calcification, haemorrhage and
the signal intensity of the T1-weighted image were important diagnostic factors.

PMID: 12043794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Carcinogenesis. 2002 May;23(5):741-8.

Kinetics of gene expression profiling in Swiss 3T3 cells exposed to aqueous
extracts of cigarette smoke.

Bosio A(1), Knörr C, Janssen U, Gebel S, Haussmann HJ, Müller T.

Author information: 
(1)MEMOREC Stoffel GmbH, Stöckheimer Weg 1, D-50829 Köln, Germany.

Previous studies from different laboratories have demonstrated that cigarette
smoke (CS) harbours a strong oxidative stress potential, which broadly impacts
exposed cells. Many of these studies have been devoted to identifying
differentially expressed genes in exposed cells. Emerging DNA microarray
techniques provide a sophisticated tool to characterize gene expression on a more
comprehensive basis. Here, we report on kinetic studies performed to characterize
gene expression profiles in Swiss 3T3 cells exposed to aqueous extracts of CS
('smoke-bubbled phosphate-buffered saline') up to 24 h through glass chips
containing 513 different cDNA probes. The results obtained display a distinct
expression pattern of up regulated and repressed genes, which was most evident
after 4-8 h of exposure. The CS-related stress response involves mainly
antioxidant response genes coding for, e.g. haem oxygenase-1 (HO-1),
metallothionein 1/2 (MT1/2) and heat shock proteins (HSPs); genes coding for
transcription factors, e.g. JunB and CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP); cell 
cycle-related genes, e.g. gadd34 and gadd45; and notably, genes described as
mediators of an inflammatory/immune-regulatory response, e.g. st2, kc and id3.
From a kinetic perspective, the stress response is characterized by the
synchronized up regulation of antioxidant pathways, e.g. as reflected by the
co-ordinated expression of ho-1 and ferritin. This expression pattern is
obviously orchestrated by stress-responsive transcription factors, as exemplified
by the early and strong expression of junB and c/ebp. Interestingly, among the 10
most up regulated genes are five which are known to counteract stress brought
about by peroxynitrite. Altogether, these results demonstrate that CS induces a
distinct signature of differential gene expression in exposed cells.

PMID: 12016146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Circulation. 2002 May 21;105(20):2423-8.

Identification of a novel redox-sensitive gene, Id3, which mediates angiotensin
II-induced cell growth.

Mueller C(1), Baudler S, Welzel H, Böhm M, Nickenig G.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik Innere Medizin III, Universität des Saarlandes, Homburg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Reactive oxygen species, such as superoxide (O(2)(-)), are involved
in the abnormal growth of various cell types. Angiotensin II (Ang II) is one of
the most potent inducers of oxidative stress in the vasculature. The molecular
events involved in Ang II-induced proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs) are only partially understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ang II as well as xanthine/xanthine oxidase (X/XO) led to
enhanced DNA synthesis and proliferation of VSMCs. The effect of Ang II was
abolished by diphenylene iodonium. Consequently, VSMCs were incubated with X/XO, 
and modulation of gene expression was monitored by differential display, leading 
to the identification of a novel redox-sensitive gene, the dominant-negative
helix-loop-helix protein Id3, which was upregulated within 30 minutes by X/XO and
Ang II. Superoxide dismutase but not catalase inhibited this effect.
Overexpression of antisense Id3 via transfection in VSMCs completely abolished
Ang II- and X/XO-induced cell proliferation. Ang II, X/XO, and overexpression of 
sense Id3 downregulated protein expression of p21(WAF1/Cip1), p27(Kip1), and p53.
Overexpression of antisense Id3 abrogated the effect of Ang II on the expression 
of p21(WAF1/Cip1), p27(Kip1), and p53. Ang II and overexpression of sense Id3
caused hyperphosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein. Ang II-induced
phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein was decreased by overexpression of 
antisense Id3.
CONCLUSIONS: Ang II induces proliferation of VSMCs via production of superoxide, 
which enhances the expression of Id3. Id3 governs the downstream mitogenic
processing via depression of p21(WAF1/Cip1), p27(Kip1), and p53. These findings
reveal a novel redox-sensitive pathway involved in growth control.

PMID: 12021231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Glia. 2002 Jun;38(4):329-38.

Expression and distribution of id helix-loop-helix proteins in human astrocytic
tumors.

Vandeputte DA(1), Troost D, Leenstra S, Ijlst-Keizers H, Ramkema M, Bosch DA,
Baas F, Das NK, Aronica E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of (Neuro)Pathology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The Id family of helix-loop-helix proteins is involved in a variety of processes,
such as development, proliferation, and angiogenesis. In this study, we
investigated the expression pattern of Id1, Id2, and Id3 in surgical specimens of
human glial tumors. Western blot analysis demonstrated that all three Id proteins
were expressed in astrocytic tumors. Expression levels in high-grade tumors were 
higher than in low-grade tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that many
of the tumor astrocytes exhibited strong Id1-3 IR. In contrast, in adult human
normal brain, Id expression was low both in resting astrocytes and in endothelial
cells. In tumor cells, Id proteins displayed cytoplasmic as well as nuclear
localization. Id1-3 IR scores in tumor cells were positively correlated with
proliferation indices. Moreover, Id1-3 IR was detected in endothelial cells of
the astrocytic tumor blood vessels. The vascular Id1-3 expression correlated
positively with tumor vascularity and grade. These results support the role of
the Id gene family in the enhanced proliferative potential of tumor astrocytes.
The evidence also supports the involvement of the Id gene family in tumor
angiogenesis, a process that critically influences the malignant behavior of
glial tumors.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12007145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25297-304. Epub 2002 May 8.

Activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway by retinoic
acid is required for neural differentiation of SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells.

López-Carballo G(1), Moreno L, Masiá S, Pérez P, Barettino D.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Spain.

Retinoic acid (RA) induces neural differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.
We show that the mRNA levels of the differentiation-inhibiting basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors ID1, ID2, and ID3 are down-regulated
during RA-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells. The levels of ID proteins
decreased in parallel to the observed transcriptional repression. The expression 
of other basic helix-loop-helix genes changed during RA-induced differentiation: 
expression of neuroblast-specific ASCL1 (HASH-1) gene was promptly reduced after 
RA treatment, whereas expression of differentiation-promoting genes NEUROD6
(NEX-1, HATH-2) and NEUROD1 was increased. Treatments with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, another inducer of neuroblastoma cell
differentiation, also resulted in coordinated down-regulation of ID gene
expression, underscoring the role of ID genes in differentiation. Down-regulation
of ID gene expression by RA involves a complex mechanism because full
transcriptional repression required newly synthesized proteins and signaling by
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). RA treatment activates the PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway, resulting in increased PI3K activity in extracts from
RA-treated cells and a rapid increase in phosphorylation of Akt in Ser-473.
Inhibition of PI3K by LY294002 impaired RA-induced differentiation, as assessed
by morphological and biochemical criteria. We propose that RA, by activating the 
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, plays an important role in the regulation of neuronal
cell survival.

PMID: 12000752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(9):2893-905.

The MyoD-inducible p204 protein overcomes the inhibition of myoblast
differentiation by Id proteins.

Liu CJ(1), Ding B, Wang H, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8024, USA.

The murine p204 protein level is highest in heart and skeletal muscle. During the
fusion of cultured myoblasts to myotubes, the p204 level increases due to
transcription dependent on the muscle-specific MyoD protein, and p204 is
phosphorylated and translocated from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. p204
overexpression accelerates myoblast fusion in differentiation medium and triggers
this process even in growth medium. Here we report that p204 is required for the 
differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. We propose that it enables the
differentiation, at least in part, by overcoming the inhibition of the activities
of the MyoD and E47 proteins by the Id proteins: Id1, Id2, and Id3. These are
known to inhibit skeletal muscle differentiation by binding and blocking the
activity of MyoD, E12/E47, and other myogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
proteins. Our hypothesis is based on the following findings. (i) A decrease in
the p204 level in C2C12 myoblasts by antisense RNA (a) increased the level of the
Id2; (b) inhibited the MyoD-, E12/E47-, and other bHLH protein-dependent
accumulation of the muscle-specific myosin heavy-chain protein; and (c) inhibited
the fusion of myoblasts to myotubes in differentiation medium. (ii) p204 bound to
the Id proteins in vitro and in vivo. (iii) In the binding of p204 to Id2, the b 
segment of p204 and the HLH segment of Id2 were involved. (iv) Addition of p204
overcame the inhibition by the Id proteins of the binding of MyoD and E47 to DNA 
in vitro. (v) Overexpression of p204 in myoblasts (a) decreased the level of the 
Id proteins, even in a culture in growth medium, and (b) overcame the inhibition 
by the Id proteins of MyoD- and E47 dependent transcription and also overcame the
inhibition by Id2 of the fusion of myoblasts to myotubes.

PMCID: PMC133750
PMID: 11940648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Forensic Sci. 2002 Mar;47(2):424-7.

Commentary on: McBride DG, Dietz MJ, Vennemeyer MT, Meadors SA, Benfer RA, Furbee
L. Bootstrap methods for sex determination from the os coxae using the ID3
algorithm.

Konigsberg LW, Herrmann NP, Wescott DJ.

Comment on
    J Forensic Sci. 2001 May;46(3):427-31.

PMID: 11908629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mech Dev. 2002 Apr;113(1):99-102.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix gene id3 in the zebrafish embryo.

Dickmeis T(1), Rastegar S, Lam CS, Aanstad P, Clark M, Fischer N, Rosa F, Korzh
V, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 163, F-67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Proteins of the Extramacrochaetae and Id subfamily of Helix-Loop-Helix (HLH)
proteins are negative regulators of bHLH transcription factors. We cloned a cDNA 
from zebrafish which encodes a member of the id3 subfamily. High levels of
transcripts accumulated in the germ ring and in the embryonic shield. Towards the
end of gastrulation, Id3 was highly expressed in the anterior prechordal plate
and hypoblast. At later stages, id3 expression was turned on and off in a large
variety of tissues within short periods of time. These include the lateral
mesoderm, the cornea, the lens, the brain, the neural crest, the retina and the
fins.

PMID: 11900982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Annu Rev Immunol. 2002;20:301-22. Epub 2001 Oct 4.

E protein function in lymphocyte development.

Quong MW(1), Romanow WJ, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
MC 0366, La Jolla, California 92093-0366, USA. quong@biomail.ucsd.edu

Lymphocytes arise from hematopoietic stem cells through the coordinated action of
transcription factors. The E proteins (E12, E47, HEB and E2-2) have emerged as
key regulators of both B and T lymphocyte differentiation. This review summarizes
the current data and examines the various functions of E proteins and their
antagonists, Id2 and Id3, throughout lymphoid maturation. Beyond an established
role in B and T lineage commitment, E proteins continue to be essential at
subsequent stages of development. E protein activity regulates the expression of 
surrogate and antigen receptor genes, promotes Ig and TCR rearrangements, and
coordinates cell survival and proliferation with developmental progression in
response to TCR signaling. Finally, this review also discusses the role of E47 as
a tumor suppressor.

PMID: 11861605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Differentiation. 2002 Jan;69(4-5):198-208.

Notch signaling is involved in the regulation of Id3 gene transcription during
Xenopus embryogenesis.

Reynaud-Deonauth S(1), Zhang H, Afouda A, Taillefert S, Beatus P, Kloc M, Etkin
LD, Fischer-Lougheed J, Spohr G.

Author information: 
(1)Departement de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Genève, Sciences III, 1211
Genève 4, Switzerland.

During Xenopus embryogenesis, XId3, a member of the Id helix-loop-helix protein
family, is expressed in a large variety of differentiating tissues including
epidermis, cement gland, brain, neural tube, neural crest cell derivatives,
somites, and tailbud. Transcription of XId3 is mediated by several cis-regulatory
elements including an enhancer of 440 bp located 870 bp upstream from the
transcription initiation site. The enhancer activity in embryos was studied using
transgenic methodology. A galactosidase reporter gene, driven by a regulatory
element composed of the enhancer and a minimal promoter derived from the XId3
gene, was expressed in transgenic embryos with a profile that faithfully
reproduced that of the endogenous XId3 gene. The pattern resulted from a
synergistic effect between the enhancer and the promoter, and in vitro
transactivation assays showed that transcription can be stimulated by Notch
signaling. The presence of potential Su(H) binding sites, in both the enhancer
and the promoter, suggests that these represent candidates for in vivo
cis-regulatory elements. The data presented here suggest that Notch control of
differentiation may involve activation of transcription of Id, a negative
regulator of bHLH transcription factors.

PMID: 11841478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8334-41.

The Id proteins and angiogenesis.

Benezra R(1), Rafii S, Lyden D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York 
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. r-benezra@ski.mskcc.org

Since the identification of the Id proteins over a decade ago, a great many cell 
cycle and cell fate decisions have been shown to be under the control of these
proteins as described in other sections of this review issue. Perhaps the most
unsuspected activity of this class of proteins has been their essential role in
angiogenesis, both in the forebrain during development and during the growth and 
metastasis of tumors in adults. This section of the review issue will focus on
the key observations which have led to these conclusions, speculations about
potential mechanisms and the outlook for potential therapeutic interventions.

PMID: 11840326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8326-33.

Id proteins at the cross-road of development and cancer.

Lasorella A(1), Uo T, Iavarone A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

A large body of evidence has been accumulated that demonstrates dominant effects 
of Id proteins on different aspects of cellular growth. Generally, constitutive
expression of Id not only blocks cell differentiation but also drives
proliferation. In some settings, it is sufficient to render cells immortal or
induce oncogenic transformation. The participation of Id proteins in advanced
human malignancy, where they are frequently deregulated, has been dramatically
bolstered by the recent discovery that Id exert pivotal contributions to many of 
the essential alterations that collectively dictate malignant growth. Relentless 
proliferation associated with self-sufficiency in growth signals and
insensitivity to growth inhibitory signals, sustained neoangiogenesis, tissue
invasiveness and migration capabilities of tumor cells all share dependency on
the unlimited availability of Id proteins. It is remarkable that many of these
features recapitulate those physiologically propelled by Id proteins to support
normal development. We propose that the participation of Id in multiple
fundamental traits of cancer may be the basis for unprecedented therapeutic
opportunities.

PMID: 11840325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8317-25.

Id proteins in cell cycle control and cellular senescence.

Zebedee Z(1), Hara E.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Cell Cycle Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie
Hospital NHS Trust, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

The Id family of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are thought to affect the
balance between cell growth and differentiation by negatively regulating the
function of basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. Although it has 
been suggested for some time that Id is involved in cell cycle regulation, little
is known about the molecular mechanism of this control. Recent studies, however, 
have revealed that Id binds to important cell cycle regulatory proteins other
than bHLH proteins. Two such proteins, pRB (retinoblastoma tumour suppressor
protein) family proteins and Ets-family transcription factors are known to play
key roles in cell cycle regulation, transformation and tumour suppression.
Through the characterization of these pathways we will begin to understand the
mechanisms by which Id controls normal and abnormal cell cycle progression.

PMID: 11840324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8308-16.

The regulation and function of the Id proteins in lymphocyte development.

Rivera R(1), Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 0366, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. r3@biomail.ucsd.edu

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are essential factors for lymphocyte development 
and function. One class of HLH proteins, the E-proteins, regulate many aspects of
lymphocyte maturation, survival, proliferation, and differentiation. E-proteins
are negatively regulated by another class of HLH proteins known as the Id
proteins. The Id proteins function as dominant negative inhibitors of E-proteins 
by inhibiting their ability to bind DNA. Here we discuss the function and
regulation of the Id proteins in lymphocyte development.

PMID: 11840323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8299-307.

Emc, a negative HLH regulator with multiple functions in Drosophila development.

Campuzano S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
scampuzano@cbm.uam.es

Expression and functional analyses of Emc have demonstrated that it is a
prototype for a protein required for multiple processes in development. Initially
characterized as a negative regulator of sensory organ development, it was later 
found to regulate many other developmental processes and cell proliferation. Its 
ability to block the function of bHLH proteins by forming heterodimers, which are
ineffective in DNA binding, accounts for the role of Emc in preventing the
acquisition of several cell fates which are under the control of bHLH proteins.
However, while maintaining this repressive molecular mechanism, emc also appears 
to act as a positive regulator of differentiation.

PMID: 11840322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8290-8.

Id and development.

Yokota Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Fukui Medical University, Shimoaizuki 23-3,
Matsuoka, Fukui 910-1193, Japan. yyokota@fmsrsa.fukui-med.ac.jp

During development, it is obvious that enormous multiplication and
diversification of cells is required to build a body plan from a single
fertilized egg and that these two processes, proliferation and differentiation,
must be coordinated properly. Id proteins, negative regulators of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, possess the ability to inhibit
differentiation and to stimulate proliferation, and are useful molecules for
investigating the mechanisms regulating development. In the past few years, our
understanding of the roles of Id proteins has been substantially enhanced by the 
detailed investigation of genetically modified animals. The data have indicated
that the functions of Id proteins in vivo are functionally related to those
revealed by earlier work in cell culture systems. However, unexpected organs and 
cell types have also been found to require Id proteins for their normal
development. This review looks at the advances made in our understanding of the
in vivo functions of Id proteins. The topics discussed include neurogenesis,
natural killer cell development, lymphoid organogenesis, mammary gland
development and spermatogenesis.

PMID: 11840321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2002 Feb;282(2):R411-22.

Increased myogenic repressor Id mRNA and protein levels in hindlimb muscles of
aged rats.

Alway SE(1), Degens H, Lowe DA, Krishnamurthy G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle, Sarcopenia, and Muscle Diseases, Division of Exercise
Physiology, West Virginia University School of Medicine, Morgantown, West
Virginia 26506-9227, USA. salway@hsc.wvu.edu

The objective of this study was to determine if levels of repressors to myogenic 
regulatory factors (MRFs) differ between muscles from young adult and aged
animals. Total RNA from plantaris, gastrocnemius, and soleus muscles of Fischer
344 x Brown Norway rats aged 9 mo (young adult, n = 10) and 37 mo (aged, n = 10) 
was reverse transcribed and then amplified by PCR. To obtain a semiquantitative
measure of the mRNA levels, PCR signals were normalized to cyclophilin or 18S
signals from the corresponding reverse transcription product. Normalization to
cyclophilin and 18S gave similar results. The mRNA levels of MyoD and myogenin
were approximately 275-650% (P < 0.001) and approximately 500-1,100% (P < 0.001) 
greater, respectively, in muscles from aged compared with young adults. In
contrast, the protein levels were lower in plantaris and gastrocnemius muscles
and similar in the soleus muscle of aged vs. young adult rats. Id repressor mRNA 
levels were approximately 300-900% greater in fast and slow muscles of aged
animals (P < or = 0.02), and Mist 1 mRNA was approximately 50% greater in the
plantaris and gastrocnemius muscles (P < 0.01). The mRNA level of Twist mRNA was 
not significantly affected by aging. Id-1, Id-2, and Id-3 protein levels were
approximately 17-740% greater (P < 0.05) in hindlimb muscles of aged rats
compared with young adult rats. The elevated levels of Id mRNA and protein
suggest that MRF repressors may play a role in gene regulation of fast and slow
muscles in aged rats.

PMCID: PMC2778214
PMID: 11792650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Kidney Int. 2002 Jan;61(1):51-60.

BMP-7 regulates chemokine, cytokine, and hemodynamic gene expression in proximal 
tubule cells.

Gould SE(1), Day M, Jones SS, Dorai H.

Author information: 
(1)Curis, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. sgould@curis.com

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2002 Jan;61(1):351-2.

BACKGROUND: Proximal tubule epithelial cells (PTEC) play a central role in the
response of the kidney to insult by virtue of their production of chemokines and 
cytokines that signal an inflammatory response. Bone morphogenic protein-7
(BMP-7/OP-1), a member of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)
superfamily, has previously been demonstrated to reduce macrophage infiltration
and tissue damage in animal models of acute and chronic renal failure. The
present study was designed to define the molecular mechanism of BMP-7 action in
human PTEC.
METHODS: Expression of BMP-7 in the adult mouse kidney was determined indirectly 
through X-gal staining of heterozygous BMP-7/lacZ mice in combination with
cell-type specific markers. Primary human PTEC were cultured in the presence of
the pro-inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), with and 
without BMP-7. RNA isolated from these two populations was then used to identify 
differentially regulated genes via gene-array analysis. Modulation of potential
target genes was subsequently confirmed through ELISA and/or quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Expression from the BMP-7/lacZ transgene was detected in the collecting 
duct, thick ascending limb, distal convoluted tubule, and podocytes within
glomeruli. No expression was detected within PTEC; however, these cells were
found to express mRNA for BMP receptors including, ActR-I, BMPR-IA, ActR-II,
ActR-IIB, and BMPR-II. BMP-7 significantly reduced TNF-alpha stimulated increases
in mRNA for the pro-inflammatory genes, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), and the chemoattractants monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 (MCP-1) and interleukin-8 (IL-8) in primary human PTEC. In addition,
BMP-7 also reduced the expression of mRNA for endothelin-2 (ET-2), a
vasoconstrictor, and increased the expression of mRNA for heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1), a vasodilator, although the latter was not statistically significant. In 
experiments designed to examine MCP-1 and IL-6 protein levels in response to
additional TGF-beta superfamily members, TGF-beta1 was unable to mimic the
effects of BMP-7 in reducing IL-6 production. However, the closely related BMP-6 
exhibited similar properties to those of BMP-7. Each of the factors reduced MCP-1
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: BMP-7 represses the basal and TNF-alpha-stimulated expression of the
pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-1beta, the chemokines MCP-1 and IL-8, and 
the vasoconstrictor ET-2 in PTEC. This data are consistent with the in vivo
observations that BMP-7 administration in a model of chronic and acute renal
failure results in a reduction in the infiltration of macrophages in the renal
interstitium. Taken together, these observations suggest that BMP-7 may be a
novel therapeutic agent for kidney disorders involving inflammation and ischemic 
damage of PTEC.

PMID: 11786084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2001 Dec;10(4):248-54.

Expression of ID genes in differentiated elements of human male germ cell tumors.

Albanese JM(1), Reuter VE, Bosl GJ, Houldsworth J, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The ID genes are members of a family of genes that encode helix-loop-helix
(HLH)-containing proteins. The Id proteins, unlike other HLH proteins, lack an
adjacent DNA binding domain and hence act as dominant negative regulators of HLH 
transcription factors that have been implicated in control of cellular
differentiation. Although the role of Id genes in murine development has been
documented, their roles in human embryogenesis remain unknown. In this study,
human male germ cell tumors (GCTs) were used as a model for examining the
expression of the ID genes in various histologies that are reflective of
different temporal phases of human development. In seminomas, little or no
expression of IDI, ID2, and ID3 was detected, consistent with the uncommitted
germ cell-like phenotype of this tumor histology. Likewise, GCTs with histologies
reflective of extraembryonic and embryonic patterns of differentiation exhibited 
patterns of expression of the three ID genes often similar to those noted during 
murine development. It was also evident, as revealed by ID expression patterns,
that despite the overall aberrant spatial differentiation patterns displayed by
these tumors, some tissue-tissue interactions reminiscent of those observed
during normal embryogenesis are retained. Thus, adult male GCTs offer a unique
system in which the role of genes such as the IDs can be studied in human
embryogenesis.

PMID: 11763316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9118-26. Epub 2001 Dec 27.

Modulation of basic helix-loop-helix transcription complex formation by Id
proteins during neuronal differentiation.

Jögi A(1), Persson P, Grynfeld A, Påhlman S, Axelson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, Lund
University, University Hospital MAS, S-205 02 Malmö, Sweden.

It is assumed that the Id helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins act by associating with
ubiquitously expressed basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factors, such as E47 and
E2-2, which prevents these factors from forming functional hetero- or homodimeric
DNA binding complexes. Several tissue-specific bHLH proteins, including HASH-1,
dHAND, and HES-1, are important for development of the nervous system.
Neuroblastoma tumors are derived from the sympathetic nervous system and exhibit 
neural crest features. In differentiating neuroblastoma cells, HASH-1 is
down-regulated, and there is coincident up-regulation of the transcriptional
repressor HES-1, which is known to bind the HASH-1 promoter. We found that the
three Id proteins expressed in neuroblastoma cells (Id1, Id2, and Id3) were
down-regulated during induced differentiation, indicating that Id proteins help
keep the tumor cells in an undifferentiated state. Studying interactions, we
noted that all four Id proteins could dimerize with E47 or E2-2, but not with
HASH-1 or dHAND. However, the Id proteins did complex with HES-1, and increased
levels of Id2 reduced the DNA binding activity of HES-1. Furthermore, HES-1
interfered with Id2/E2-2 complex formation. The ability of Id proteins to affect 
HES-1 activity is of particular interest in neuronal cells, where regulation of
HES-1 is essential for the timing of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 11756408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8803-10.

Expression of Id helix-loop-helix proteins in colorectal adenocarcinoma
correlates with p53 expression and mitotic index.

Wilson JW(1), Deed RW, Inoue T, Balzi M, Becciolini A, Faraoni P, Potten CS,
Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign Epithelial Biology Group, Paterson Institute for
Cancer Research, Christie Hospital, National Health Service Trust, Manchester M20
4BX, United Kingdom.

Id helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins function as regulators of cell growth and
differentiation and when overexpressed can induce malignant transformation. In a 
series of 34 cases of primary human colorectal adenocarcinoma, immunoreactivity
for Id1, Id2, and Id3 was found to be significantly elevated in tumor compared
with normal mucosa (P = 0.001 for Id1 and Id2; P = 0.002 for Id3). No elevation
of Id expression was observed in 17 cases of adenoma. Expression of Id1 and to a 
lesser extent of Id2 was correlated with mitotic index (P = 0.005 for Id1; P =
0.042 for Id2) in human adenocarcinomas, and expression of all three Id proteins 
was correlated with p53 immunoreactivity (a marker of mutational 'inactivation'
of p53 function; P = 0.002 for Id1; P = 0.006 for Id2; P = 0.016 for Id3). In
normal intestinal mucosa of p53-null mice and in spontaneous tumors arising in
Min+/- mice, expression of all three Id proteins was also found to be
up-regulated. Antisense oligonucleotide blockade of Id protein expression
inhibited the proliferation of human adenocarcinoma cells. Enforced, ectopic
expression of the E47 basic HLH (bHLH) protein in human adenocarcinoma cell lines
efficiently sequestered endogenous Id proteins as Id-bHLH heterodimers, as shown 
by coimmunoprecipitation and subcellular colocalization studies. This led to
growth arrest of the cells. Enforced overexpression of a mutant E47 protein,
deficient in transactivation and DNA binding function, also partially inhibited
cell growth. Taken together, these data imply that deregulated expression of Id
proteins in colorectal adenocarcinoma arises at least in part as a consequence of
loss of p53 function and contributes to the uncontrolled proliferation of tumor
cells in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 11751402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Neurosci Res. 2001 Dec 15;66(6):1161-72.

Upregulation of the HLH Id gene family in neural progenitors and glial cells of
the rat spinal cord following contusion injury.

Tzeng SF(1), Bresnahan JC, Beattie MS, de Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Mental Retardation Research Center, UCLA School of
Medicine, 760 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1759, USA.

Spinal cord injury (SCI) leads to a complex sequence of cellular responses,
including astrocyte activation, oligodendrocyte death, and ependymal cell
proliferation. Inhibitors of DNA binding (Id1, Id2, Id3) belong to a
helix-loop-helix (HLH) gene family. Id genes have been implicated in playing a
vital role in the proliferation of many cell types, including astrocytes and
myoblasts. In the present study, the expression of Id family members in spinal
cord after contusion injury was investigated by in situ hybridization. Id1, Id2, 
and Id3 mRNA expression was upregulated 5 mm rostral and caudal to the lesion
center, and reached maximal levels 3 days after SCI. In addition, cell
populations expressing Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA were maximally increased 3 days
after SCI. The increase in Id2 and Id3 mRNA expression and Id2 and Id3 mRNA+
cells was still observed at 8 days. The Id mRNA expressing cells were phenotyped 
by combining immunostaining of cell-specific markers with in situ hybridization. 
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)+ astrocytes were found to express all
three Id mRNA, whereas S-100alpha+ astrocytes only expressed high levels of Id2
and Id3 mRNA. Cells having a neural progenitor morphology and the marker nestin
appeared after SCI and they expressed Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA. Interestingly, some
Rip+ oligodendrocytes located in the areas close to the central canal expressed
Id3 mRNA after injury. In conclusion, Id genes are upregulated in a
time-dependent manner in astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neural progenitor
subpopulations after SCI, suggesting that they play major roles in cellular
responses following SCI.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Dec 1;10(25):2917-31.

DNA methyltransferase 3B mutations linked to the ICF syndrome cause dysregulation
of lymphogenesis genes.

Ehrlich M(1), Buchanan KL, Tsien F, Jiang G, Sun B, Uicker W, Weemaes CM, Smeets 
D, Sperling K, Belohradsky BH, Tommerup N, Misek DE, Rouillard JM, Kuick R,
Hanash SM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Program and Department of Biochemistry, Tulane Medical School, 
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. ehrlich@tulane.edu

ICF (immunodeficiency, centromeric region instability and facial anomalies) is a 
recessive disease caused by mutations in the DNA methyltransferase 3B gene
(DNMT3B). Patients have immunodeficiency, chromosome 1 (Chr1) and Chr16
pericentromeric anomalies in mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes, a small decrease in 
overall genomic 5-methylcytosine levels and much hypomethylation of Chr1 and
Chr16 juxtacentromeric heterochromatin. Microarray expression analysis was done
on B-cell lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from ICF patients with diverse DNMT3B 
mutations and on control LCLs using oligonucleotide arrays for approximately 5600
different genes, 510 of which showed a lymphoid lineage-restricted expression
pattern among several different lineages tested. A set of 32 genes had consistent
and significant ICF-specific changes in RNA levels. Half of these genes play a
role in immune function. ICF-specific increases in immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy
constant mu and delta RNA and cell surface IgM and IgD and decreases in Ig(gamma)
and Ig(alpha) RNA and surface IgG and IgA indicate inhibition of the later steps 
of lymphocyte maturation. ICF-specific increases were seen in RNA for RGS1, a
B-cell specific inhibitor of G-protein signaling implicated in negative
regulation of B-cell migration, and in RNA for the pro-apoptotic protein kinase C
eta gene. ICF-associated decreases were observed in RNAs encoding proteins
involved in activation, migration or survival of lymphoid cells, namely,
transcription factor negative regulator ID3, the enhancer-binding MEF2C, the iron
regulatory transferrin receptor, integrin beta7, the stress protein heme
oxygenase and the lymphocyte-specific tumor necrosis factor receptor family
members 7 and 17. No differences in promoter methylation were seen between ICF
and normal LCLs for three ICF upregulated genes and one downregulated gene by a
quantitative methylation assay [combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA)].
Our data suggest that DNMT3B mutations in the ICF syndrome cause
lymphogenesis-associated gene dysregulation by indirect effects on gene
expression that interfere with normal lymphocyte signaling, maturation and
migration.

PMID: 11741835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):341-5.

Id4 expression and its relationship to other Id genes during avian embryonic
development.

Kee Y(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 139-74 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

We present the sequence and expression pattern of chick Id4 and compare its
distribution to that of other vertebrate Id genes. At early stages, Id4
expression is discrete, with transcript transiently expressed in subsets of
migrating neural crest cells, the dorsal myocardium, the segmental plate
mesoderm, and the tail bud. Later, expression is also observed in the
telencephalic vesicles and corneal epithelium. Of all the Id genes, Id4 exhibits 
the most restricted pattern in the developing nervous system, with little
expression in the presumptive neural crest or placodes. Id4 appears in the neural
tube much later than other Id genes. However, all four Id genes display
overlapping patterns in the branchial arches and tail bud.

PMID: 11731247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):337-40.

The transcriptional regulator Id3 is expressed in cranial sensory placodes during
early avian embryonic development.

Kee Y(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 
91125, USA.

The chick homologue of the helix-loop-helix gene Id3 was isolated, and its
expression pattern was analyzed during early stages of chick development. Chick
Id3 is dynamically expressed in the olfactory, lens, and otic placodes. It is
also observed in the epiphysis, nephric primordium, stomodeum, dermomyotome,
distal branchial arches, dorsolateral hindbrain, foregut endoderm, dorsal spinal 
cord, and somites.

PMID: 11731246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. FEBS Lett. 2001 Nov 23;508(3):337-40.

Gene silencing by S-adenosylmethionine in muscle differentiation.

Fuso A(1), Cavallaro RA, Orrù L, Buttarelli FR, Scarpa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Research Laboratory,
Rome, Italy.

A well-characterised experimental system, the myogenin gene in C2C12 muscle cell 
culture, was chosen to better understand the methylation mechanism underlying the
regulation of gene expression. We already demonstrated that demethylation
dynamics of a specific CpG site in the 5'-flanking region of myogenin well
correlates with gene expression and terminal differentiation. Here we demonstrate
that S-adenosylmethionine-sulphate-p-toluenesulphonate (SAM) inhibits myogenin
expression and myoblast differentiation by delaying the demethylation of specific
CpG in differentiating myoblasts. These results suggest new perspectives in
methylation mechanisms and the use of SAM in the partial silencing of gene
expression, as it could be required in disease treatment.

PMID: 11728447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Nat Med. 2001 Nov;7(11):1194-201.

Impaired recruitment of bone-marrow-derived endothelial and hematopoietic
precursor cells blocks tumor angiogenesis and growth.

Lyden D(1), Hattori K, Dias S, Costa C, Blaikie P, Butros L, Chadburn A, Heissig 
B, Marks W, Witte L, Wu Y, Hicklin D, Zhu Z, Hackett NR, Crystal RG, Moore MA,
Hajjar KA, Manova K, Benezra R, Rafii S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, USA.

The role of bone marrow (BM)-derived precursor cells in tumor angiogenesis is not
known. We demonstrate here that tumor angiogenesis is associated with recruitment
of hematopoietic and circulating endothelial precursor cells (CEPs). We used the 
angiogenic defective, tumor resistant Id-mutant mice to show that transplantation
of wild-type BM or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mobilized stem cells
restore tumor angiogenesis and growth. We detected donor-derived CEPs throughout 
the neovessels of tumors and Matrigel-plugs in an Id1+/-Id3-/- host, which were
associated with VEGF-receptor-1-positive (VEGFR1+) myeloid cells. The angiogenic 
defect in Id-mutant mice was due to impaired VEGF-driven mobilization of VEGFR2+ 
CEPs and impaired proliferation and incorporation of VEGFR1+ cells. Although
targeting of either VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 alone partially blocks the growth of tumors,
inhibition of both VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 was necessary to completely ablate tumor
growth. These data demonstrate that recruitment of VEGF-responsive BM-derived
precursors is necessary and sufficient for tumor angiogenesis and suggest new
clinical strategies to block tumor growth.

PMID: 11689883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Neuroscience. 2001;106(1):79-88.

Differential regulation of basic helix-loop-helix mRNAs in the dentate gyrus
following status epilepticus.

Elliott RC(1), Khademi S, Pleasure SJ, Parent JM, Lowenstein DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Brain Plasticity and Epilepsy, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck 
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

In various chemoconvulsant models of human temporal lobe epilepsy, the induction 
of epileptogenesis by a prolonged period of continuous seizure activity is
accompanied by significant changes in hippocampal structure. These changes
include an increase in neurogenesis within the proliferative subgranular zone
(SGZ) of the dentate gyrus and induction of mossy fiber sprouting in mature
dentate granule cells. As dentate granule cell neurogenesis and axon outgrowth
are also hallmarks of hippocampal development, we hypothesized that molecules
involved in normal development may also play a role in similar changes associated
with epileptogenesis. To begin to test this hypothesis, we have analyzed the
expression patterns of multiple members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
family of transcription factors in both normal and epileptic adult rats. bHLH
protein expression has been found recently in dentate granule cells at specific
developmental stages, and analysis of developmental models suggests specific
neural differentiation functions for these molecules. We show that mRNA
expression of all seven bHLH family members examined in this study, as well as
the divergent homeobox protein Prox1, is present in the adult. Patterns of
expression varied considerably between family members, ranging from the limited
expression of Mash1 in the neurogenic SGZ of the dentate gyrus to the scattered, 
widespread profile of Hes5 throughout the dentate gyrus and the hippocampus
proper. Moreover, these varied profiles of expression were differentially
regulated following status epilepticus, with some increasing (Mash1, Id2), some
falling (Hes5, Prox1), and others remaining mostly unchanged (NeuroD/BETA2,
NeuroD2/NDRF, Id3, Rath2/Nex1). While the function of these molecules in the
adult brain remains to be characterized, our findings support the idea that
molecules controlling cell-fate decisions in the developing dentate gyrus are
also operative during seizure-induced neurogenesis and plasticity.

PMID: 11564418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Exp Med. 2001 Sep 17;194(6):733-45.

Early thymocyte development is regulated by modulation of E2A protein activity.

Engel I(1), Johns C, Bain G, Rivera RR, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

The E2A gene encodes the E47 and E12 basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription 
factors. T cell development in E2A-deficient mice is partially arrested before
lineage commitment. Here we demonstrate that E47 expression becomes uniformly
high at the point at which thymocytes begin to commit towards the T cell lineage.
E47 protein levels remain high until the double positive developmental stage, at 
which point they drop to relatively moderate levels, and are further
downregulated upon transition to the single positive stage. However, stimuli that
mimic pre-T cell receptor (TCR) signaling in committed T cell precursors inhibit 
E47 DNA-binding activity and induce the bHLH inhibitor Id3 through a
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-dependent pathway. Consistent with these 
observations, a deficiency in E2A proteins completely abrogates the developmental
block observed in mice with defects in TCR rearrangement. Thus E2A proteins are
necessary for both initiating T cell differentiation and inhibiting development
in the absence of pre-TCR expression. Mechanistically, these data link pre-TCR
mediated signaling and E2A downstream target genes into a common pathway.

PMCID: PMC2195962
PMID: 11560990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Neuroreport. 2001 Aug 8;12(11):2461-5.

Expression of Id proteins increases in astrocytes in the hippocampus of epileptic
rats.

Aronica E(1), Vandeputte DA, van Vliet EA, Lopes da Silva FH, Troost D, Gorter
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of (Neuro) Pathology H2, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9,
University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam; The Netherlands.

Reactive gliosis is a prominent morphological feature of temporal lobe epilepsy. 
The molecular mechanisms underlying glial cell activation remain unclear. We
examined expression of Id1-3 protein, a family of helix--loop--helix proteins
involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation, in glial
cells after electrically induced status epilepticus (SE) in the rat. In control
hippocampus, Id3 was weakly expressed in astrocytes, while Id1-2 were below
detection level. After SE, Id1-3 protein expression increased markedly in
reactive astrocytes within 1 day and this persisted up to 3 weeks after SE. Three
months after SE when rats experience spontaneous seizures, Id expression had
returned to control levels. These results support a role of the Id gene family in
regulating astrocyte reactivity in epileptic tissue.

PMID: 11496130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cancer Res. 2001 Aug 1;61(15):5703-6.

Overexpression of Id-1 protein is a marker for unfavorable prognosis in
early-stage cervical cancer.

Schindl M(1), Oberhuber G, Obermair A, Schoppmann SF, Karner B, Birner P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pathology, University of Vienna, Waeringer Guertel
18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding (Id) proteins are transcription factors,
involved in cell cycle regulation and neoangiogenesis. Using
immunohistochemistry, we investigated the prognostic influence of Id-1, Id-2, and
Id-3 expression in 89 patients with cervical cancer stage pT(1b). In univariate
and multivariate analysis, patients with strong or moderate expression of Id-1
had a significant shorter overall survival time (P = 0.0144, log-rank test) and
disease-free survival time (P = 0.0107, log-rank test) compared with those with
low or absent Id-1 expression. Id-1 expression is an independent prognostic
marker in early-stage cervical cancer.

PMID: 11479201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 8;284(2):436-42.

Expression of ID family genes in the synovia from patients with rheumatoid
arthritis.

Sakurai D(1), Yamaguchi A, Tsuchiya N, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by
aggressive proliferation of synovial tissue leading to destruction of cartilage
and bone. To identify molecules which play a crucial role for the pathogenesis,
we compared mRNA expression pattern of RA synovium with that of osteoarthritis
(OA), using the differential display. From the panel of differentially expressed 
genes, ID1 (inhibitor of differentiation 1) was considered to be particularly
relevant to the pathogenesis of RA, because Id family genes have been shown to
play a role in cell proliferation and angiogenesis. To examine whether the
up-regulation of these genes is consistently observed in the patients with RA,
mRNA levels of ID1 and ID3 in the synovial tissues from 13 patients with RA and 6
patients with OA were semi-quantitatively analyzed by RT-PCR. Mean mRNA levels of
ID1 and ID3 were significantly elevated in RA synovia compared with OA by
8.6-fold (P = 0.0044) and 3.3-fold (P = 0.0085), respectively.
Immunohistochemistry revealed striking staining of Id1 and Id3 in the endothelial
cells, suggesting a possible role of Id in severe angiogenesis observed in RA.
The expression of Id family genes in the synovium constitutes a new finding of
particular interest. Their functional role as well as their contribution to the
genetic susceptibility to RA requires further investigation.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11394898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Forensic Sci. 2001 May;46(3):427-31.

Bootstrap methods for sex determination from the os coxae using the ID3
algorithm.

McBride DG(1), Dietz MJ, Vennemeyer MT, Meadors SA, Benfer RA Jr, Furbee NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Missouri-Columbia, 65211, USA.
ldmcbride@socket.net

Comment in
    J Forensic Sci. 2002 Mar;47(2):424-7.

This study presents a method for identifying small subsets of morphological
attributes of the skeletal pelvis that have consistently high reliability in
assigning the sex of unknown individuals. An inductive computer algorithm (ID3)
was applied to a bootstrapped training set/test set design in which the model was
developed from 70% of the sample and tested on the remaining 30%. Relative
accuracy of sex classification was evaluated for seven subsets of 31
morphological features of the adult os coxae. Using 115 ossa coxarum selected
from the Terry Collection, a selected suite of the three most consistently
diagnostic attributes averaged 93.1% correct classification of individuals by sex
over ten trials. Attribute suites developed collaboratively with three well known
skeletal experts averaged 87.8, 91.3, and 89.6% correct. The full set of 31
attributes averaged 90.0% accuracy. We demonstrate a small set of three criteria,
selected and ordered by ID3, that is more accurate than other combinations, and
suggest that ID3 is a useful approach for developing identification systems.

PMID: 11372978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 May;21(5):752-8.

Vascular injury induces posttranscriptional regulation of the Id3 gene: cloning
of a novel Id3 isoform expressed during vascular lesion formation in rat and
human atherosclerosis.

Matsumura ME(1), Li F, Berthoux L, Wei B, Lobe DR, Jeon C, Hammarskjöld ML,
McNamara CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Virginia Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Erratum in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2001 Aug;21(8):1384.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 May;21(5):727-8.

The molecular mechanisms that regulate the proliferation of smooth muscle cells
(SMCs) of the vasculature in response to injury are poorly understood. Members of
the inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) class of helix-loop-helix transcription factors
are known to regulate the growth of a variety of cell types; however, the
expression of the various Id genes in SMCs and in vascular lesions has not been
examined. In the present study, the yeast 2-hybrid system was used to clone Id
genes from a cultured rat aortic SMC library. By use of ubiquitous E proteins as 
bait, Id3 and a novel isoform of Id3 (Id3a) were cloned. Id3a is the product of
alternative splicing of the Id3 gene, resulting in inclusion of a 115-bp "coding 
intron," which encodes a unique 29-amino acid carboxyl terminus for the Id3a
protein. Unlike Id3, Id3a mRNA was not detected in the normal rat carotid artery.
However, after balloon injury, Id3a was abundantly expressed throughout the
neointimal layer. In addition, mRNA of the human homologue of Id3a (Id3L) was
detected in human carotid atherosclerotic plaques. Adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of these Id3 isoforms in cultured rat aortic SMCs revealed that
infection of SMCs with an adenovirus overexpressing Id3a (in contrast to Id3)
resulted in a significant decrease in cell number versus AdLacZ-infected cells.
DNA fragmentation analysis suggested that this decrease in SMC viability was due 
to increased apoptotic activity in cells infected with adenovirus overexpressing 
Id3a. These results provide evidence that alternative splicing of the Id3 gene
may represent an important mechanism by which neointimal SMC growth is attenuated
during vascular lesion formation.

PMID: 11348870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 May;21(5):727-8.

A role for an alternatively spliced Id3 isoform in vascular lesions?

Christy BA.

Comment on
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 May;21(5):752-8.

PMID: 11348865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Diabetologia. 2001 Apr;44(4):453-63.

Glucose and other insulin secretagogues induce, rather than inhibit, expression
of Id-1 and Id-3 in pancreatic islet beta cells.

Wice BM(1), Bernal-Mizrachi E, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Metabolism, Washington University
School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Saint Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Basic helix loop helix transcription factors regulate insulin
gene transcription. Therefore, molecules that regulate their function should
affect insulin production and secretion. As Id proteins inhibit basic helix loop 
helix function, it is important to determine whether they are expressed in beta
cells and if insulin secretagogues regulate their expression.
METHODS: Human islets or insulinoma cells were cultured in different glucose
concentrations or treated with secretagogues. Insulin secretion was measured
using RIA. The Id mRNA and protein concentrations were measured using northern
blots, RT-PCR, and western blots. Transfections of promoter-reporter constructs
were used to estimate Id-1 gene transcription.
RESULTS: The Id-1 mRNA concentrations were twofold higher in islets cultured
overnight in 10 mmol/l than in 2.5 mmol/l glucose. Addition of high glucose to
islets previously cultured in low glucose, increased Id-1 mRNA concentrations
within 30 min. Analyses using insulinoma cells revealed that Id-1 and Id-3 mRNA
concentrations peaked 30 min after glucose was added, returned to near basal
concentrations by 2 h and then progressively increased for 24 h. The Id-1 protein
concentrations changed in a similar pattern. Insulin secretagogues that act
through different signaling pathways also induced Id expression. The Id response 
required glucose metabolism, calcium, and RNA synthesis but not protein
synthesis. Glucose-responsive elements are confined to the 5'-region of the Id-1 
gene.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The concomitant induction of Id-1 and Id-3 expression,
insulin gene transcription, and insulin secretion suggests that physiological
concentrations of Ids do not inhibit insulin gene transcription and Ids could
play unexpected and novel roles in promoting beta-cell function.

PMID: 11357476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 8;98(10):5868-73. Epub 2001 May 1.

BMP2-mediated alteration in the developmental pathway of fetal mouse brain cells 
from neurogenesis to astrocytogenesis.

Nakashima K(1), Takizawa T, Ochiai W, Yanagisawa M, Hisatsune T, Nakafuku M,
Miyazono K, Kishimoto T, Kageyama R, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

We show that when telencephalic neural progenitors are briefly exposed to bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) in culture, their developmental fate is changed
from neuronal cells to astrocytic cells. BMP2 significantly reduced the number of
cells expressing microtubule-associated protein 2, a neuronal marker, and cells
expressing nestin, a marker for undifferentiated neural precursors, but BMP2
increased the number of cells expressing S100-beta, an astrocytic marker. In
telencephalic neuroepithelial cells, BMP2 up-regulated the expression of negative
helix-loop-helix (HLH) factors Id1, Id3, and Hes-5 (where Hes is homologue of
hairy and Enhancer of Split) that inhibited the transcriptional activity of
neurogenic HLH transcription factors Mash1 and neurogenin. Ectopic expression of 
either Id1 or Id3 (where Id is inhibitor of differentiation) inhibited
neurogenesis of neuroepithelial cells, suggesting an important role for these HLH
proteins in the BMP2-mediated changes in the neurogenic fate of these cells.
Because gliogenesis in the brain and spinal cord, derived from implanted neural
stem cells or induced by injury, is responsible for much of the failure of
neuronal regeneration, this work may lead to a therapeutic strategy to minimize
this problem.

PMCID: PMC33305
PMID: 11331769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Tissue Res. 2001 Mar;303(3):371-9.

ID gene expression varies with lineage during differentiation of pluripotential
male germ cell tumor cell lines.

Houldsworth J(1), Reuter VE, Bosl GJ, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Box 30, 1275
York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Human male germ cell tumors (GCTs) comprise an excellent model system for
understanding the molecular events controlling cellular differentiation and
lineage decision. Pluripotential embryonal carcinoma cell lines derived from GCTs
can be induced to undergo terminal differentiation along specific lineages
dependent upon the differentiating agent. We report here that one such cell line,
NTera2/clone D1 (NT2/D1), previously shown to undergo differentiation along a
neuronal lineage by all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), can be induced along a distinct
non-neuronal lineage by the mammalian morphogens, bone morphogenetic proteins-2
and -4 (BMP-2 and -4). Very little is known regarding the molecular events that
govern such human lineage decisions. In this study, the role of the ID (inhibitor
of differentiation and DNA-binding) family of genes that act as inhibitors of the
function of helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional activators involved in lineage
commitment was investigated using two pluripotential GCT cell lines as a model
system. In the differetiation programs studied, Id1 was noted to decline, an
event often associated with the decrease in proliferative rate occurring during
differentiation. However, differences in the expression of ID2 and ID3 family
members were detected between the programs. Notably, an increase in Id3 during
RA-induced differentiation of NT2/D1 cells was observed, while Id2 levels
increased during BMP-2 and -4 treatment of NT2/D1 cells and during the induction 
of an endodermal-like differentiation program in the cell line, 27X-1. The
pluripotential male GCT cell lines comprise a unique system in which the roles of
specific genes such as the ID family of genes in human cell differentiation and
lineage decision can be studied.

PMID: 11320653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Diabetologia. 2001 Mar;44(3):377-86.

Effect of dexamethasone on adipocyte differentiation markers and tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha expression in human PAZ6 cells.

Zilberfarb V(1), Siquier K, Strosberg AD, Issad T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute Cochin of Molecular Genetics, Paris, France.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Adipose tissue-derived tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) 
has been implicated in the insulin resistance observed in animal models of
obesity. Moreover, TNF-alpha has inhibitory effects on adipocyte differentiation.
Glucocorticoids play important roles in the regulation of insulin sensitivity and
adipose tissue distribution. We therefore studied the effect of dexamethasone on 
TNF-alpha expression and adipocyte differentiation in human PAZ6 cells.
METHODS: The expression of TNF-alpha and adipocyte differentiation markers was
assessed by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction in PAZ6 cells.
RESULTS: In cells cultured for 15 days in the presence of dexamethasone,
adipocyte differentiation marker expression was higher and TNF-alpha expression
was lower than in cells cultured in the absence of dexamethasone. The presence of
dexamethasone was necessary during the whole period of differentiation because
removal of dexamethasone during the second week resulted in poorly differentiated
adipocytes that express higher levels of TNF-alpha. Dexamethasone also reduced
TNF-alpha expression during early stages of differentiation. The use of a
TNF-alpha-neutralising antibody showed, however, that endogenously-produced
TNF-alpha did not play an important part in the control of PAZ6 cell
differentiation. During early stages of adipocyte differentiation, dexamethasone 
induced the expression of the transcription factors PPAR gamma (peroxisome
proliferator activated receptor gamma) and C/EBP alpha (CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein alpha) while inhibiting the expression of the inhibitor of DNA binding
Id2.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The effect of dexamethasone on human adipocyte
differentiation is not mediated by reduction of TNF-alpha expression but more
likely by regulation of the expression of nuclear factors such as PPAR gamma,
CEBP alpha and Id2.

PMID: 11317672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Endocrinology. 2001 May;142(5):1727-36.

Hormonal regulation and differential actions of the helix-loop-helix
transcriptional inhibitors of differentiation (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) in Sertoli
cells.

Chaudhary J(1), Johnson J, Kim G, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4231, USA.

The testicular Sertoli cells support spermatogenesis by providing a
microenvironment and structural support for the developing germ cells. Sertoli
cell functions are regulated by the gonadotropin FSH. Sertoli cells become a
terminally differentiated nongrowing cell population in the adult. In response to
FSH, the Sertoli cells express a large number of differentiated gene products,
such as transferrin, which transports iron to the developing germ cells.
Previously, members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription 
factors have been shown to influence FSH-mediated gene expression in Sertoli
cells. The functions of the bHLH proteins are modulated by Id (inhibitor of
differentiation) proteins, which lack the DNA-binding basic domain. The Id
proteins form transcriptionally inactive dimers with bHLH proteins and thus
regulate cell proliferation and differentiation. The current study investigated
the expression and function of Id proteins in the postmitotic Sertoli cell.
Freshly isolated and cultured Sertoli cells coexpress all four isoforms of Id
(Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4), as determined by immunoprecipitation with
isoform-specific anti-Id antibodies, RT-PCR, and Northern blot analysis. Id2 and 
Id3 expression levels seem higher than Id1. Interestingly, the expression of Id4 
in Sertoli cells is only detectable after stimulation with FSH or cAMP. The Id1
expression is down-regulated by FSH and cAMP, whereas Id2 and Id3 levels remain
unchanged in response to FSH. In contrast, serum induces the expression of Id1,
Id2, and Id3. Treatment of Sertoli cells with serum significantly reduces the
expression of the larger 4-kb Id4 transcript and promotes the presence of a novel
1.3-kb transcript of Id4. The regulatory role of FSH in the expression of all
four isoforms of Id is mimicked by a cAMP analog, suggesting that the actions of 
FSH are mediated through the protein kinase A pathway. An antisense approach was 
used to study the functional significance of Id proteins in Sertoli cells.
Antisense to Id1 stimulated transferrin promoter activity in a transient
transfection assay. Interestingly, an antisense to Id2 down-regulated transferrin
promoter activity. Id3 and Id4 antisense oligonucleotides had no effect on
FSH-mediated transferrin promoter activation. Contrary to the hypothesis that Id 
proteins have redundant functions, the results of the current study suggest that 
Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 are differentially regulated and may have distinct
functions. Id1 may act to maintain Sertoli cell growth potential, whereas Id2 and
Id4 may be involved in the differentiation and hormone regulation of Sertoli
cells.

PMID: 11316735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):25057-65. Epub 2001 Apr 18.

Positive and negative regulation of myogenic differentiation of C2C12 cells by
isoforms of the multiple homeodomain zinc finger transcription factor ATBF1.

Berry FB(1), Miura Y, Mihara K, Kaspar P, Sakata N, Hashimoto-Tamaoki T, Tamaoki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada. fberry@ualberta.ca

The ATBF1 gene encodes two protein isoforms, the 404-kDa ATBF1-A, possessing four
homeodomains and 23 zinc fingers, and the 306-kDa ATBF1-B, lacking a 920-amino
acid N-terminal region of ATBF1-A which contains 5 zinc fingers. In vitro,
ATBF1-A was expressed in proliferating C2C12 myoblasts, but its expression levels
decreased upon induction of myogenic differentiation in low serum medium. Forced 
expression of ATBF1-A in C2C12 cells resulted in repression of MyoD and myogenin 
expression and elevation of Id3 and cyclin D1 expression, leading to inhibition
of myogenic differentiation in low serum. In contrast, transfection of C2C12
cells with the ATBF1-B isoform led to an acceleration of myogenic
differentiation, as indicated by an earlier onset of myosin heavy chain
expression and formation of a higher percentage of multinucleated myotubes. The
fourth homeodomain of ATBF1-A bound to an AT-rich element adjacent to the E1
E-box of the muscle regulatory factor 4 promoter mediating transcriptional
repression. The ATBF1-A-specific N-terminal region possesses general
transcription repressor activity. These results suggest that ATBF1-A plays a role
in the maintenance of the undifferentiated myoblast state, and its
down-regulation is a prerequisite to initiate terminal differentiation of C2C12
cells.

PMID: 11312261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Exp Hematol. 2001 Apr;29(4):499-506.

T-cell factor-1 expression during human natural killer cell development and in
circulating CD56(+) bright natural killer cells.

Toor AA(1), Lund TC, Miller JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Harvard Street 
at East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Transcription factors are essential to govern differentiation along the lymphoid 
lineage from uncommitted hematopoietic stem cells. Although many of these
transcription factors have putative roles based on murine knockout experiments,
their function in human lymphoid development is less known and was studied
further. Transcription factor expression in fresh and cultured adult human bone
marrow and umbilical cord blood progenitors was evaluated. We found that fresh
CD34(+)Lin(-) cells that are human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR(-) or CD38(-)
constitutively express GATA-3 but not T-cell factor-1 (TCF-1) or Id-3. Culture
with the murine fetal liver cell line AFT024 and defined cytokines was capable of
inducing TCF-1 mRNA. However, no T-cell receptor gene rearrangement was
identified in cultured progeny. Id-3, a basic helix loop helix factor with
dominant negative function for T-cell differentiation transcription factors, also
was upregulated and may explain unsuccessful T-cell maturation. To better
understand the developmental link between natural killer (NK) cells derived from 
progenitors, we studied NK cell subsets circulating in blood. CD56(+bright), but 
not CD56(+dim), NK cells constitutively express TCF-1 by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis. The TCF-1 isoform found in
CD56(+bright) cells, which express lectin but not immunoglobulin class I
recognizing inhibitory receptors, was identical to that induced in NK cell
differentiation culture and was distinctly different from isoforms in T cells.
These results suggest that TCF-1 does not target human killer immunoglobulin
receptor genes, TCF-1 is uniquely expressed in circulating CD56(+bright) NK
cells, and specific TCF-1 isoforms may play an important role in regulating NK
differentiation from a common NK/T-cell progenitor.

PMID: 11301190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed. 2001 Mar;5(1):33-45.

A knowledge-based system for patient image pre-fetching in heterogeneous database
environments--modeling, design, and evaluation.

Wei CP(1), Hu PJ, Sheng OR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Management, College of Management, National Sun
Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC. cwei@mis.nsysu.edu.tx

When performing primary reading on a newly taken radiological examination, a
radiologist often needs to reference relevant prior images of the same patient
for confirmation or comparison purposes. Support of such image references is of
clinical importance and may have significant effects on radiologists' examination
reading efficiency, service quality, and work satisfaction. To effectively
support such image reference needs, we proposed and developed a knowledge-based
patient image pre-fetching system, addressing several challenging requirements of
the application that include representation and learning of image reference
heuristics and management of data-intensive knowledge inferencing. Moreover, the 
system demands an extensible and maintainable architecture design capable of
effectively adapting to a dynamic environment characterized by heterogeneous and 
autonomous data source systems. In this paper, we developed a synthesized
object-oriented entity- relationship model, a conceptual model appropriate for
representing radiologists' prior image reference heuristics that are heuristic
oriented and data intensive. We detailed the system architecture and design of
the knowledge-based patient image pre-fetching system. Our architecture design is
based on a client-mediator-server framework, capable of coping with a dynamic
environment characterized by distributed, heterogeneous, and highly autonomous
data source systems. To adapt to changes in radiologists' patient prior image
reference heuristics, ID3-based multidecision-tree induction and CN2-based
multidecision induction learning techniques were developed and evaluated.
Experimentally, we examined effects of the pre-fetching system we created on
radiologists' examination readings. Preliminary results show that the
knowledge-based patient image pre-fetching system more accurately supports
radiologists' patient prior image reference needs than the current practice
adopted at the study site and that radiologists may become more efficient,
consultatively effective, and better satisfied when supported by the pre-fetching
system than when relying on the study site's pre-fetching practice.

PMID: 11300215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nat Immunol. 2001 Feb;2(2):165-71.

Regulation of the helix-loop-helix proteins, E2A and Id3, by the Ras-ERK MAPK
cascade.

Bain G(1), Cravatt CB, Loomans C, Alberola-Ila J, Hedrick SM, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 0366, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA.

Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways leads to cellular 
differentiation and/or proliferation in a wide variety of cell types, including
developing thymocytes. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins E12 and E47 and
an inhibitor HLH protein, Id3, play key roles in thymocyte differentiation. We
show here that E2A DNA binding is lowered in primary immature thymocytes
consequent to T cell receptor (TCR)-mediated ligation. Whereas expression of E2A 
mRNA and protein are unaltered, Id3 transcripts are rapidly induced upon
signaling from the TCR. Activation of Id3 transcription is regulated in a
dose-dependent manner by the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) MAPK
module. These observations directly connect the ERK MAPK cascade and HLH proteins
in a linear pathway.

PMID: 11175815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):97-8.

Intertwining proteins in thymocyte development and cancer.

Murre C.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2000 Aug;1(2):138-44.

PMID: 11248796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:45-50.

Controlling lymphopoiesis with a combinatorial E-protein code.

Barndt RJ(1), Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

PMID: 11232321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Apoptosis. 2000 Jun;5(3):277-90.

Biological and molecular characterization of an ECV-304-derived cell line
resistant to p53-mediated apoptosis.

Maxwell SA(1), Davis GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, College of Medicine, Texas
A&M University System Health Science Center, College Station 77843-1114, USA.
s-maxwell@tamu.edu

Upregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor protein by infection with a recombinant 
p53 adenovirus resulted in extensive apoptosis in ECV-304 cells and the eventual 
death of almost all the cells. To establish a system to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms involved in p53-mediated apoptosis of these cells, we established a
variant of ECV-304 that is resistant to p53-induced apoptosis by repeated
infections with a recombinant p53 adenovirus. We have designated this variant as 
the DECV cell line (Differentiated ECV-304). DECV cells expressed similar amounts
of nuclear-localized p53 as ECV-304 cells when infected with recombinant p53
adenovirus, but in contrast to ECV-304 cells, greater than 95% of DECV cells
survived and remained viable after 24 hours of infection. In further contrast to 
ECV-304 cells, DECV cells grew less efficiently in soft agar and exhibited
contact inhibition in growth assays. Moreover, DECV cells formed unusual lattice 
or cyst-like structures in culture and formed lumenal structures indicative of
epithelial differentiation in three-dimensional collagen matrices, while parental
ECV-304 cells showed minimal evidence of these cellular behaviors. A comparative 
molecular analysis of gene expression in DECV and ECV-304 cells was conducted by 
cDNA microarray technology. Protocadherin-1 was found to be expressed in DECV
cells but not in ECV-304 cells, while the Id-3 gene was observed expressed in
ECV-304 cells but not in DECV cells. Moreover, upregulated expression of p53 in
ECV-304 cells induced the EPHB2 (Ephrin) receptor tyrosine kinase and the
ephrin-B1 ligand mRNAs compared to DECV cells treated in the same manner. These
data demonstrate that a new variant of the ECV-304 cell line, which is resistant 
to p53-mediated apoptosis, exhibits differential gene expression as well as
distinct cell behaviors as compared to the parental ECV-304 cell line. DECV cells
should prove to be a useful tool in future studies to elucidate mechanisms of
p53-mediated apoptosis and differentiation.

PMID: 11225849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nat Immunol. 2001 Mar;2(3):242-7.

Id3 inhibits B lymphocyte progenitor growth and survival in response to TGF-beta.

Kee BL(1), Rivera RR, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093,
USA. bkee@biomail.ucsd.edu

E proteins function in many developmental processes and are essential for the
formation of lymphocyte progenitors. However, it is not known whether E proteins 
regulate lymphocyte survival, proliferation or differentiation or how their
activity is regulated during lymphocyte development. We show here a role for Id3,
an inhibitor of E protein activity, in the induction of apoptosis and growth
arrest. Id3 is induced in response to transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta),
a pleiotropic cytokine that inhibits the growth and survival of normal and
transformed lymphocyte progenitors. In the absence of Id3, the response of
lymphocyte progenitors to TGF-beta is perturbed, which indicates that Id3 is a
mediator of this response. Our data show a key role for E proteins in lymphocyte 
survival and link the activity of E proteins, and their antagonists, to members
of the TGF-beta family of cytokines.

PMID: 11224524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Parasitol. 2000 Dec;86(6):1362-6.

Monoclonal antibodies to Hammondia hammondi allowing immunological
differentiation from Toxoplasma gondii.

Riahi H(1), Leboutet MJ, Labrousse F, Bouteille B, Dardé ML.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Parasitologie-Mycologie, CHU Dupuyten, Limoges, France.

Five murine monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) were developed against purified
sporozoites of Hammondia hammondi. Despite a large antigenic similarity between
the 2 closely related coccidia, H. hammondi and Toxoplasma gondii, these MAbs
only reacted with H. hammondi. Three MAbs, ID3, 3F2, and 4C9-7, recognized
antigens of 38 kDa localized in rhoptries (1D3), in rhoptries and in oocyst and
cyst walls (3F2), and in rhoptries and the apical region (4C9-7). Another MAb,
4C9-10, reacted with a 27-kDa antigen in dense granules of sporozoites and
tachyzoites, and MAB 11B3 labeled an antigen of >94 kDa located in the pellicular
membrane of the 3 stages of the parasite. These MAbs could be used for a rapid
discrimination of the 2 coccidia in epidemiological studies or for diagnostic
purposes in tissues.

PMID: 11191919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Br J Cancer. 2001 Feb 2;84(3):352-9.

Decreased expression of the Id3 gene at 1p36.1 in ovarian adenocarcinomas.

Arnold JM(1), Mok SC, Purdie D, Chenevix-Trench G.

Author information: 
(1)The Queensland Institute of Medical Research, PO Box Royal Brisbane Hospital, 
Herston, Queensland, 4029, Australia.

The molecular events that drive the initiation and progression of ovarian
adenocarcinoma are not well defined. We have investigated changes in gene
expression in ovarian cancer cell lines compared to an immortalized human ovarian
surface epithelial cell line (HOSE) using a cDNA array. We identified 17 genes
that were under-expressed and 10 genes that were over-expressed in the cell lines
compared to the HOSE cells. One of the genes under-expressed in the ovarian
cancer cell lines, Id3, a transcriptional inactivator, was selected for further
investigation. Id3 mRNA was expressed at reduced levels in 6 out of 9 ovarian
cancer cell lines compared to the HOSE cells while at the protein level, all 7
ovarian cancer cell lines examined expressed the Id3 protein at greatly reduced
levels. Expression of Id3 mRNA was also examined in primary ovarian tumours and
was found in only 12/38 (32%) cases. A search was conducted for mutations of Id3 
in primary ovarian cancers using single stranded conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
analysis. Only one nucleotide substitution, present also in the corresponding
constitutional DNA, was found in 94 ovarian tumours. Furthermore no association
was found between LOH at 1p36 and lack of expression of Id3. These data suggest
that Id3 is not the target of LOH at 1p36.

PMCID: PMC2363740
PMID: 11161400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biol Chem. 2000 Nov;381(11):1127-32.

Trichostatin A-mediated regulation of gene expression and protein kinase
activities: reprogramming tumor cells for ribotoxic stress-induced apoptosis.

Eickhoff B(1), Germeroth L, Stahl C, Köhler G, Rüller S, Schlaak M, van der Bosch
J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Borstel, Division of Experimental Immunopharmacology, Borstel,
Germany.

Recently we described a new signal transduction-based tumor therapeutic strategy 
involving first sensitization of tumor cells by trichostatin A (TSA), an
inhibitor of histone deacetylation, and thereafter efficient apoptotic triggering
by ribotoxic agents, which activate stress-activated protein kinases. In the
present work we investigate the molecular basis of the sensitization step in this
therapeutic model system and describe TSA-induced changes in mRNA and protein
expression of several candidate genes identified previously by complex
hybridization. Furthermore, activities of 15 different protein kinases were
followed after TSA application, using a new filter-based technique
(PhosphoSpots-Assay). The obtained data suggest that TSA induces pro-apoptotic
genes like ID1, ID2, ID3, and down-regulates anti-apoptotic genes like Hsp27 and 
Bcl-xL, thereby shifting the cellular equilibrium from life to death.
Furthermore, activities of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II and protein
kinase C, which have been assigned pro-apoptotic function in other systems, are
induced.

PMID: 11154071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(2):524-33.

Id helix-loop-helix proteins antagonize pax transcription factor activity by
inhibiting DNA binding.

Roberts EC(1), Deed RW, Inoue T, Norton JD, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.

The Id subfamily of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins plays a fundamental role in
the regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation. The major mechanism
by which Id proteins are thought to inhibit differentiation is through
interaction with other HLH proteins and inhibition of their DNA-binding activity.
However, Id proteins have also been shown to interact with other proteins
involved in regulating cellular proliferation and differentiation, suggesting a
more widespread regulatory function. In this study we demonstrate functional
interactions between Id proteins and members of the Pax-2/-5/-8 subfamily of
paired-domain transcription factors. Members of the Pax transcription factor
family have key functions in regulating several developmental processes
exemplified by B lymphopoiesis, in which Pax-5 plays an essential role. Id
proteins bind to Pax proteins in vitro and in vivo. Binding occurs through the
paired DNA-binding domain of the Pax proteins and results in the disruption of
DNA-bound complexes containing Pax-2, Pax-5, and Pax-8. In vivo, Id proteins
modulate the transcriptional activity mediated by Pax-5 complexes on the
B-cell-specific mb-1 promoter. Our results therefore demonstrate a novel facet of
Id function in regulating cellular differentiation by functionally antagonizing
the action of members of the Pax transcription factor family.

PMCID: PMC86614
PMID: 11134340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Exp Med. 2000 Dec 18;192(12):1775-84.

Id2 and Id3 inhibit development of CD34(+) stem cells into predendritic cell
(pre-DC)2 but not into pre-DC1. Evidence for a lymphoid origin of pre-DC2.

Spits H(1), Couwenberg F, Bakker AQ, Weijer K, Uittenbogaart CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, 10066 CX Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2000 Dec 18;192(12):F39-44.

We found previously that Id3, which inhibits transcriptional activities of many
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, blocked T and B cell development
but stimulated natural killer (NK) cell development. Here we report that ectopic 
expression of Id3 and another Id protein, Id2, strongly inhibited the development
of primitive CD34(+)CD38(-) progenitor cells into CD123(high) dendritic cell
(DC)2 precursors. In contrast, development of CD34(+)CD38(-) cells into
CD4(+)CD14(+) DC1 precursors and mature DC1 was not affected by ectopic Id2 or
Id3 expression. These observations support the notion of a common origin of DC2
precursors, T and B cells. As Id proteins did not block development of NK cells, 
a model presents itself in which these proteins drive common lymphoid precursors 
to develop into NK cells by inhibiting their options to develop into T cells, B
cells, and pre-DC2.

PMCID: PMC2213506
PMID: 11120774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Dec;14(12):1976-85.

The nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR) contains three isoleucine motifs
(I/LXXII) that serve as receptor interaction domains (IDs).

Webb P(1), Anderson CM, Valentine C, Nguyen P, Marimuthu A, West BL, Baxter JD,
Kushner PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Unit, University of California School of Medicine, San
Francisco 94143-0540, USA.

Unliganded thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) repress transcription through
recruitment of corepressors, including nuclear receptor corepressor (N-CoR). We
find that N-CoR contains three interaction domains (IDs) that bind to TR, rather 
than the previously reported two. The hitherto unrecognized ID (ID3) serves as a 
fully functional TR binding site, both in vivo and in vitro, and may be the most 
important for TR binding. Each ID motif contains a conserved hydrophobic core
(I/LXXII) that resembles the hydrophobic core of nuclear receptor boxes (LXXLL), 
which mediates p160 coactivator binding to liganded nuclear receptors. Although
the integrity of the I/LXXII motif is required for ID function, substitution of
ID isoleucines with leucines did not allow ID peptides to bind to liganded TR,
and substitution of NR box leucines with isoleucines did not allow NR box
peptides to bind unliganded TR. This indicates that the binding preferences of
N-CoR for unliganded TR and p160s for liganded TR are not dictated solely by the 
identity of conserved hydrophobic residues within their TR binding motifs.
Examination of sequence conservation between IDs, and mutational analysis of
individual IDs, suggests that they are comprised of the central hydrophobic core 
and distinct adjacent sequences that may make unique contacts with the TR
surface. Accordingly, a hybrid peptide that contains distinct adjacent sequences 
from ID3 and ID1 shows enhanced binding to TR.

PMID: 11117528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Sep 24;276(2):803-12.

Regulation of Id gene expression during embryonic stem cell-derived hematopoietic
differentiation.

Nogueira MM(1), Mitjavila-Garcia MT, Le Pesteur F, Filippi MD, Vainchenker W,
Dubart Kupperschmitt A, Sainteny F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U362, Villejuif,
France.

To elucidate the role of helix-loop-helix (HLH) Id proteins in hematopoietic
differentiation, we used a model of embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation in
vitro which gives access not only to hematopoietic myeloid progenitor cells but
also to the more primitive blast colony-forming cell (BL-CFC), the in vitro
equivalent of the hemangioblast that gives rise to blast cell colonies in the
presence of VEGF. We first demonstrated that ES cell-derived blast cell colonies 
could be used as a model to study hematopoietic differentiation and maturation.
We next established the expression profile of Id genes in this model. Transcripts
of the four Id genes were present in ES cells. Id1, Id3 and Id4 gene expression
was down-regulated during the development of blast cell colonies while that of
Id2 was maintained. Thus, Id1, Id3, and Id4 proteins are candidates for being
negative regulators of hematopoiesis in the model of hematopoietic ES cell
differentiation in vitro.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Clin Microbiol. 2000 Oct;38(10):3577-80.

Evaluation of the MicroScan rapid neg ID3 panel for identification of
Enterobacteriaceae and some common gram-negative nonfermenters.

O'Hara CM(1), Miller JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
cmo1@cdc.gov

The MicroScan Rapid Neg ID3 panel (Dade Behring, Inc., West Sacramento, Calif.)
is designed for the identification of gram-negative bacilli. We evaluated its
ability to accurately identify Enterobacteriaceae that are routinely encountered 
in a clinical laboratory and glucose nonfermenting gram-negative bacilli. Using
511 stock cultures that were maintained at -70 degrees C and passaged three times
before use, we inoculated panels according to the manufacturer's instructions and
processed them in a Walk/Away instrument using version 22.01 software. The time
to identification was 2 h and 30 min. All panel identifications were compared to 
reference identifications previously determined by conventional tube
biochemicals. At the end of the initial 2.5-h incubation period, 405 (79.3%)
identifications were correct. An additional 49 (9.6%) isolates were correctly
identified after required additional off-line biochemical tests were performed.
Thus, at 24 h, 88.8% of the 511 strains tested were correctly identified.
Twenty-two (4.3%) were identified to the genus level only. Twenty-six (5.1%)
strains were misidentified. Because the system is based on fluorogenics, there
are no conventional tests readily available with which to compare possibly
incorrect reactions. Of the 28 Salmonella strains that were tested, 5 were
incorrectly reported. The 21 remaining errors were scattered among the genera
tested. Testing on nine strains gave a result of "no identification" (very rare
biotype). The Rapid Neg ID3 panel in this study approached 89% accuracy for the
identification of gram-negative organisms encountered in the hospital laboratory.

PMCID: PMC87439
PMID: 11015366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Gene. 2000 Aug 22;254(1-2):163-71.

Genomic organization and promoter analysis of the murine Id3 gene.

Yeh K(1), Lim RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO
65212, USA.

Overexpression of the helix-loop-helix motif-containing transcription inhibitor
Id3 has been shown to repress muscle-specific gene expression. Consistent with
its putative negative regulatory role in the myogenic process, Id3 is highly
expressed in proliferating myoblasts but down regulated when myoblasts are
induced to differentiate. To investigate how Id3 expression may be
transcriptionally regulated, we isolated a mouse Id3 genomic DNA fragment and
characterized its organization and promoter activity. Comparison of the Id3 gene 
from human and mouse demonstrated a conserved exon-intron organization in which
the first intron interrupts the C-terminal protein coding region and the second
intron interrupts the 3' untranslated region at analogous positions in the two
species. Sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region revealed an unexpected mouse
strain-specific genetic polymorphism due to a single base substitution. Deletion 
analysis revealed that as little as 180 base pairs of the mouse Id3 promoter
upstream of the transcription start site is sufficient for a high level of gene
expression in proliferating C2C12 myoblasts. In particular, the region between
the nucleotide position -180 and -34 appeared to be crucial for maximal reporter 
gene activity and interacted specifically with C2C12 nuclear proteins. Finally,
we showed that, despite the creation of a putative transcription factor-binding
site, the genetic polymorphism observed did not affect Id3 promoter activity in
proliferating C2C12 cells.

PMID: 10974547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 15;20(16):6095-105.

Unique expression patterns of cell fate molecules delineate sequential stages of 
dentate gyrus development.

Pleasure SJ(1), Collins AE, Lowenstein DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Research Laboratory, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The dentate gyrus of the hippocampus is uniquely organized with a displaced
proliferative zone that continues to generate dentate granule cells throughout
life. We have analyzed the expression of Notch receptors, Notch ligands, and
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes during dentate gyrus development to determine
whether the need to maintain a pool of undifferentiated precursors is reflected
in the patterns of expression of these genes. Many of these genes are expressed
diffusely throughout the cortical neuroepithelium at embryonic days 16 and 17 in 
the rat, just preceding the migration of newly born granule cells and dentate
precursor cells into the dentate anlage. However, at this time, Mash1, Math3, and
Id3 expression are all concentrated in the area that specifically gives rise to
granule cells and dentate precursor cells. Two days later, at the time of
migration of the first granule cells and dentate precursor cells, cells
expressing Mash1 are seen in the migratory route from the subventricular zone to 
the developing dentate gyrus. Newly born granule cells expressing NeuroD are also
present in this migratory pathway. In the first postnatal week, precursor cells
expressing Mash1 reside in the dentate hilus, and by the third postnatal week
they have largely taken up their final position in the subgranular zone along the
hilar side of the dentate granule cell layer. After terminal differentiation,
granule cells born in the hilus or the subgranular zone begin to express NeuroD
followed by NeuroD2. This study establishes that the expression patterns of bHLH 
mRNAs evolve during the formation of the dentate gyrus, and the precursor cells
resident in the mature dentate gyrus share features with precursor cells found in
development. Thus, many of the same mechanisms that are known to regulate cell
fate and precursor pool size in other brain regions are likely to be operative in
the dentate gyrus at all stages of development.

PMID: 10934259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2000 Jul;47(7):934-40.

Staging of cervical cancer with soft computing.

Mitra P(1), Mitra S, Pal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Machine Intelligence Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta, India.

This paper describes a way of designing a hybrid decision support system in soft 
computing paradigm for detecting the different stages of cervical cancer.
Hybridization includes the evolution of knowledge-based subnetwork modules with
genetic algorithms (GA's) using rough set theory and the Interactive Dichotomizer
3 (ID3) algorithm. Crude subnetworks obtained via rough set theory and the ID3
algorithm are evolved using GA's. The evolution uses a restricted mutation
operator which utilizes the knowledge of the modular structure, already
generated, for faster convergence. The GA tunes the network weights and structure
simultaneously. The aforesaid integration enhances the performance in terms of
classification score, network size and training time, as compared to the
conventional multilayer perceptron. This methodology also helps in imposing a
structure on the weights, which results in a network more suitable for extraction
of logical rules and human interpretation of the inferencing procedure.

PMID: 10916265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Histol Histopathol. 2000 Apr;15(2):603-18.

Id genes in nervous system development.

Andres-Barquin PJ(1), Hernandez MC, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0520, USA.

Id genes encode helix-loop-helix proteins that function to mediate processes
important for normal development including cellular differentiation,
proliferation and apoptosis. Id proteins act as negative regulators of other
transcription factors, which are essential for cell determination and
differentiation in diverse cell types, and interact with proteins important for
cell cycle regulation. Studies of Id gene expression in the nervous system and in
neural cells in culture indicate that Id proteins contribute to the regulation of
mammalian nervous system development. Also, recognition of a wide variety of
proteins with which Id transcription factors are capable of interacting suggests 
that it will be possible to understand more precisely their specific functions
and importantly how these are integrated.

PMID: 10809382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biol Chem. 2000 Feb;381(2):107-12.

Trichostatin A modulates expression of p21waf1/cip1, Bcl-xL, ID1, ID2, ID3,
CRAB2, GATA-2, hsp86 and TFIID/TAFII31 mRNA in human lung adenocarcinoma cells.

Eickhoff B(1), Rüller S, Laue T, Köhler G, Stahl C, Schlaak M, van der Bosch J.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center Borstel, Division of Experimental Immunopharmacology, Germany.

Lung adenocarcinoma cells treated for 16 h with trichostatin A (TSA), an
inhibitor of histone deacetylases, and untreated cells were analyzed with respect
to differential gene expression. Complex hybridization of cDNA arrays revealed
repression of Bcl-xL, CRAB2 and TFIID/TAFII31 as well as induction of
p21waf1/cip1, GATA-2, hsp86, ID1, ID2 and ID3 mRNA expression, which could be
verified by Northern blotting. ID2 induction was further confirmed by Taqman
realtime quantitative RT-PCR. The described alterations of gene expression due to
TSA renders the lung adenocarcinoma cells susceptible to induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 10746741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Immunity. 2000 Jan;12(1):17-26.

Thymocyte selection is regulated by the helix-loop-helix inhibitor protein, Id3.

Rivera RR(1), Johns CP, Quan J, Johnson RS, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 0366 University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093, USA.

E2A, HEB, E2-2, and daughterless are basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins that 
play key roles in multiple developmental pathways. The DNA binding activity of
E2A, HEB, and E2-2 is regulated by a distinct class of inhibitor HLH proteins,
the Id gene products. Here, we show that Id3 is required for major
histocompatability (MHC) class I- and class II-restricted thymocyte positive
selection. Additionally, H-Y TCR-mediated negative selection is severely
perturbed in Id3 null mutant mice. Finally, we show that E2A and Id3 interact
genetically to regulate thymocyte development. These observations identify the
HLH inhibitory protein Id3 as an essential component required for proper
thymocyte maturation.

PMID: 10661402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1999 Dec;14(6):519-28.

Reciprocal Id expression and myelin gene regulation in Schwann cells.

Thatikunta P(1), Qin W, Christy BA, Tennekoon GI, Rutkowski JL.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Department of Neurology,
University of Pennsylvania, 19104-4318, USA.

Id proteins are thought to act as dominant negative antagonists of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors that direct differentiation in
various cell types. We found that Schwann cells express all four Id-family genes 
and that their transcript levels were reciprocally regulated in pairs during
nerve maturation in vivo and cAMP-mediated differentiation in vitro. The rapid
induction as part of the early response to axonal membranes and cytokines
suggested that Id3 is involved in myelin gene repression. An inverse relationship
between Id1/3 and myelin P0 expression was consistent with a role for these two
Id proteins as inhibitors of differentiation, and Id1/3 proteins strongly
repressed myelin gene promoter activity. Nuclear factors isolated from Schwann
cells and intact sciatic nerves were found to bind three different HLH
recognition sequences (E boxes) in the proximal region of the P0 promoter, and
production of these DNA binding complexes was altered during differentiation.
These data support the concept that Id proteins regulate myelin gene expression
by controlling the formation of specific bHLH DNA binding complexes with
different E-box preferences.

PMID: 10656257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Growth Differ. 1999 Dec;41(6):731-43.

Expression of helix-loop-helix type negative regulators of differentiation during
limb regeneration in urodeles and anurans.

Shimizu-Nishikawa K(1), Tazawa I, Uchiyama K, Yoshizato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Hiroshima University,
Higashihiroshima, Japan.

The urodele is capable of regenerating its limb by forming a blastema even in the
adult. By contrast, the anuran, which is phylogenetically close to the urodele,
loses this ability during metamorphosis and forms blastema-like tissues that
develop only into a spike-like structure in the adult. In order to compare the
molecular mechanism of the formation and maintenance of the blastema between the 
urodele and anuran, the genes encoding helix-loop-helix (HLH) type negative
regulators of differentiation were characterized for both the Japanese newt,
Cynops pyrrhogaster, and African clawed frog, Xenopus laevis. Cynops homologs of 
Id2, Id3, and HES1 and Xenopus Id2 were identified. To learn the roles of these
genes in regeneration, their expression was examined. The expression of Id2 and
Id3 was low in unamputated limbs, but was up-regulated in blastemas of both adult
newt and Xenopus. Interestingly, transcripts of the two Id genes showed specific 
localizations in the blastema and the expression patterns were very similar in
both species through the early to medium bud stage. Id2 was expressed
predominantly in the blastemal epidermis, and Id3 was expressed equally in the
blastemal epidermis and mesenchyme including cells in precartilage condensations.
HES1 expression was up-regulated in the newt blastemal epidermis. It was thought 
that the up-regulation of these genes in the epidermis was related to the
proliferation of the cells and that increased expression of these genes in the
mesenchyme was related to the undifferentiated state of the blastemal cells.
These results and considerations strongly suggested that the state of
differentiation is similar in the early to medium bud blastema of both urodeles
and anurans. The expression of Id3 remained high through to the digits stage in
newts. In contrast, its expression in Xenopus decreased in spike-like
regenerates, which correspond to palette-digits stage of newt regenerates. From
these results, it was suggested that the blastema redifferentiates earlier in the
frog than in the newt, and therefore the timing of redifferentiation of the
cartilage is crucial for complete regeneration.

PMID: 10646803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Development. 2000 Feb;127(3):549-58.

Id-2 regulates critical aspects of human cytotrophoblast differentiation,
invasion and migration.

Janatpour MJ(1), McMaster MT, Genbacev O, Zhou Y, Dong J, Cross JC, Israel MA,
Fisher SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biomedical Sciences; Department of Stomatology, University
of California, San Francisco, USA.

During early human placental development, the conceptus attaches itself to the
uterus through cytotrophoblast invasion. Invasive cytotrophoblast cells
differentiate from precursor villous cytotrophoblasts, but the essential
regulating factors in this process are unknown. Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor dimers are essential regulators of mouse trophoblast
development. We therefore examined the importance of this family of factors in
the human placenta. In many cell lineages, bHLH factors are sequestered by
members of the Id family, HLH proteins that lack the basic DNA binding domain
(Inhibitor of DNA binding proteins (Id-1 to Id-4)). During differentiation of
some tissues, Id expression declines, allowing bHLH factors to dimerize, bind DNA
and trans-activate lineage-specific genes. To begin to study the role of bHLH
transcription factors in human placental development, we first characterized Id
expression in cytotrophoblast cells. The cells expressed Id-3 constitutively;
Id-2 was downregulated, at the mRNA and protein levels, as the cells
differentiated in culture and in situ, respectively. In cases when
cytotrophoblast differentiation was compromised (in placentas from women with
preeclampsia, or in cells grown under hypoxic conditions in culture), Id-2
expression was maintained. To assess the functional relevance of these
correlations, we used an adenovirus vector to maintain Id-2 protein expression in
cultured cytotrophoblasts. Compared to control (lacZ-expressing) cells,
cytotrophoblasts transduced to constitutively express Id-2 retained
characteristics of undifferentiated cells: (alpha)1 integrin expression was low
and cyclin B expression was retained. Furthermore, invasion through Matrigel was 
partially inhibited and migration was strikingly enhanced in Id-2-expressing
cells. These results suggest that Id-2 and the bHLH factors that it partners play
important roles in human cytotrophoblast development.

PMID: 10631176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. FASEB J. 1999 Dec;13(15):2257-64.

Degradation of Id proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Bounpheng MA(1), Dimas JJ, Dodds SG, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular and Structural Biology University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

Id proteins act as negative regulators of bHLH transcription factors by forming
transcriptionally inactive protein complexes. The proposed function of these
proteins includes promotion of cell growth and cell cycle progression, induction 
of apoptosis, and inhibition of cellular differentiation. We investigated the
role of the ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway in the degradation of the Id3 
protein. We found Id3 to be a short-lived protein and estimated the half-life to 
be approximately 20 min in 293 cells. Using specific inhibitors of the 26S
proteasome and mutant fibroblast cells with a temperature-sensitive defect in the
essential E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, we show that Id3 and the related Id1
and Id2 proteins are degraded through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We found 
the Id4 protein to be much less sensitive to inhibitors of the 26S proteasome,
but its degradation was dependent on the E1 enzyme. In addition, we observed that
coexpression of the bHLH protein E47 with Id3 significantly reduced the rate of
degradation of Id3, suggesting that Id3 is less susceptible to degradation by the
26S proteasome when complexed to a bHLH protein. -Bounpheng, M. A., Dimas, J. J.,
Dodds, S. G., Christy, B. A. Degradation of Id proteins by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

PMID: 10593873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem J. 1999 Dec 15;344 Pt 3:873-80.

Functional antagonism between inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) and adipocyte
determination and differentiation factor 1/sterol regulatory element-binding
protein-1c (ADD1/SREBP-1c) trans-factors for the regulation of fatty acid
synthase promoter in adipocytes.

Moldes M(1), Boizard M, Liepvre XL, Fève B, Dugail I, Pairault J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UPRES-A 7079 CNRS, Paris, France.

We show that Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) 2 and Id3, dominant negative members
of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) family, interact with the adipocyte determination
and differentiation factor 1 (ADD1)/sterol regulatory element-binding protein
(SREBP) 1c, a transcription factor of the basic HLH-leucine zipper family that
controls the expression of several key genes of adipose metabolism. Gel
mobility-shift assays performed with in vitro-translated ADD1, Id2 or Id3
proteins and a fatty acid synthase (FAS) promoter oligonucleotide showed evidence
for a marked inhibition of the formation of DNA-ADD1 complexes by Id2 or Id3
proteins. Co-immunoprecipitation studies using in vitro-translated proteins
demonstrated further the physical interaction of Id and ADD1/SREBP-1c proteins in
the absence of DNA. Using the FAS gene as a model of an ADD1-regulated promoter
in transiently transfected isolated rat adipocytes or mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes, a
potent inhibition of the activity of the FAS-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene was observed by overexpression of Id2 or Id3. Reciprocally,
co-transfection of Id3 antisense and ADD1 expression vectors in preadipocytes
potentiated the ADD1/SREBP-1c effect on the FAS promoter activity. Finally, in
the non adipogenic NIH-3T3 cell line, most of the ADD1-mediated trans-activation 
of the FAS promoter was counteracted by co-transfection of Id2 or Id3 expression 
vectors. Previous studies have indicated Id gene expression to be down-regulated 
during adipogenesis [Moldes, Lasnier, Fève, Pairault and Djian (1997) Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 17, 1796-1804]. We here demonstrated that there was a dramatic rise of Id2 
and Id3 mRNA levels when 3T3-L1 adipocytes or isolated rat fat cells were exposed
to lipolytic and anti-lipogenic agents, forskolin and isoproterenol. Taken
together, our data show that Id products are functionally involved in modulating 
ADD1/SREBP-1c transcriptional activity, and thus lipogenesis in adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC1220711
PMID: 10585876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Exp Med. 1999 Dec 6;190(11):1605-16.

Thymocyte maturation is regulated by the activity of the helix-loop-helix
protein, E47.

Bain G(1), Quong MW, Soloff RS, Hedrick SM, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

The E2A proteins, E12 and E47, are required for progression through multiple
developmental pathways, including early B and T lymphopoiesis. Here, we provide
in vitro and in vivo evidence demonstrating that E47 activity regulates
double-positive thymocyte maturation. In the absence of E47 activity, positive
selection of both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I- and class
II-restricted T cell receptors (TCRs) is perturbed. Additionally, development of 
CD8 lineage T cells in an MHC class I-restricted TCR transgenic background is
sensitive to the dosage of E47. Mice deficient for E47 display an increase in
production of mature CD4 and CD8 lineage T cells. Furthermore, ectopic expression
of an E2A inhibitor helix-loop-helix protein, Id3, promotes the in vitro
differentiation of an immature T cell line. These results demonstrate that E2A
functions as a regulator of thymocyte positive selection.

PMCID: PMC2195738
PMID: 10587351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 1999 Jun-Aug;25(3-4):156-65.

Induction of globin synthesis in K562 cells is associated with differential
expression of transcription factor genes.

Plonczynski M(1), Hardy CL, Safaya S, Harrell A, McCoy L, Brinson A, Agwarangbo
L, Steinberg MH.

Author information: 
(1)G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, USA.

Globin gene switching may be mediated by proteins expressed during different
stages of development. Their identification may clarify the mechanisms of the
conversion from fetal to adult globin production and lead to new approaches to
reversing or retarding the gamma- to beta-globin gene switch. To explore this
hypothesis, K562 erythroleukemia cells were induced to differentiate with 1.25,
2.5, and 5 mM sodium butyrate and gene expression was studied after 24, 48, and
72 h. Erythroid differentiation was verified by benzidine staining and by
measuring the activity of a transduced A gamma-globin gene promoter linked to a
luciferase reporter gene. Using differential display polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), total mRNA extracted from induced cells at each time point of induction
was reverse transcribed in the presence of A, G, and C anchored primers and 16
arbitrary primers, calculated to amplify approximately 50% of expressed genes.
Amplified mRNAs from induced and uninduced cells were separated in polyacrylamide
gels and compared. More than 110 cDNA fragments which appeared to represent
either up- or downregulated mRNA species in induced K562 cells were identified.
Sixty-four of these fragments had more than 95% homology to known GenBank
sequences. Seventeen fragments with characteristics of transcription factors were
cloned. These include differentiation-related gene-1 (drg-1), PAX 3/forkhead
transcription factor, HZF2 which is a Kruppel-related zinc finger protein, three 
helix-loop-helix proteins (heir-1, Id3, and GOS8), alpha-NAC transcriptional
coactivator, LIM domain protein, and trophoblast hypoxia regulating factor.
Differential expression of all 17 fragments over 72 h was confirmed by reverse
Northern dot blot analysis, semiquantitative PCR using nested primers, and
Northern analysis. Erythroid maturation in induced K562 cells is associated with 
differential expression of numerous genes. Some encode transcription factors that
could effect the initiation of HbF synthesis. Almost half of the differentially
expressed clones contained cDNAs of unidentified open reading frames and these
are the object of continued study.

PMID: 10575541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. EMBO J. 1999 Nov 15;18(22):6307-18.

E2A activity is induced during B-cell activation to promote immunoglobulin class 
switch recombination.

Quong MW(1), Harris DP, Swain SL, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix protein, E2A, is required for proper early B
lymphopoiesis. Specifically, in E2A-deficient mice, B-cell development is blocked
at the progenitor stage prior to the onset of immunoglobulin (Ig) V(D)J
recombination. Here, we demonstrate that E2A plays an additional role during
peripheral B lymphopoiesis. Upon activation of primary mature B lymphocytes, both
E2A protein levels and DNA-binding activity are induced. Furthermore, we show
that mature B cells, expressing a dominant-negative E2A antagonist, proliferate
normally in response to mitogenic signaling and appropriately express the early
and late activation markers CD69, CD44, IgD and B220. However, in the absence of 
E2A activity, B lymphocytes are blocked in their ability to express secondary Ig 
isotypes. We demonstrate that the defect lies at the level of DNA rearrangements 
between the Ig switch regions. These data suggest that E2A is an essential target
during B-cell activation and its induction is required to promote Ig class switch
recombination.

PMCID: PMC1171694
PMID: 10562543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nature. 1999 Oct 14;401(6754):670-7.

Id1 and Id3 are required for neurogenesis, angiogenesis and vascularization of
tumour xenografts.

Lyden D(1), Young AZ, Zagzag D, Yan W, Gerald W, O'Reilly R, Bader BL, Hynes RO, 
Zhuang Y, Manova K, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1999 Oct 14;401(6754):657-8.

Id proteins may control cell differentiation by interfering with DNA binding of
transcription factors. Here we show that targeted disruption of the dominant
negative helix-loop-helix proteins Id1 and Id3 in mice results in premature
withdrawal of neuroblasts from the cell cycle and expression of neural-specific
differentiation markers. The Id1-Id3 double knockout mice also display vascular
malformations in the forebrain and an absence of branching and sprouting of blood
vessels into the neuroectoderm. As angiogenesis both in the brain and in tumours 
requires invasion of avascular tissue by endothelial cells, we examined the Id
knockout mice for their ability to support the growth of tumour xenografts. Three
different tumours failed to grow and/or metastasize in Id1+/- Id3-/- mice, and
any tumour growth present showed poor vascularization and extensive necrosis.
Thus, the Id genes are required to maintain the timing of neuronal
differentiation in the embryo and invasiveness of the vasculature. Because the Id
genes are expressed at very low levels in adults, they make attractive new
targets for anti-angiogenic drug design.

PMID: 10537105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mech Dev. 1999 Oct;88(1):15-31.

Localized XId3 mRNA activation in Xenopus embryos by cytoplasmic polyadenylation.

Afouda AB(1), Reynaud-Deonauth S, Mohun T, Spohr G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Genève, Switzerland.

In Xenopus development, during meiosis and cleavage, the extent of
polyadenylation plays a central role in regulating the expression of transcripts 
and this is mediated by cis regulatory cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPE)
in the 3'-UTRs. We have identified a palindromic CPE in the mRNA of Xenopus Id3
which is conserved in the Id genes from other vertebrates. It promotes
cytoplasmic polyadenylation and is negatively regulated by sequences further
upstream in the 3'-UTR. This palindromic CPE promotes polyadenylation in both the
epithelial and sensorial layers of the dorsal ectoderm in early embryos, but
association with the upstream negative element blocks this effect in the
epithelial layer. The asymmetric polyadenylation may be important for
establishing a prepattern of transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 10525185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Blood. 1999 Oct 15;94(8):2637-46.

Genetic modification of human B-cell development: B-cell development is inhibited
by the dominant negative helix loop helix factor Id3.

Jaleco AC(1), Stegmann AP, Heemskerk MH, Couwenberg F, Bakker AQ, Weijer K, Spits
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Huis, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Transgenic and gene targeted mice have contributed greatly to our understanding
of the mechanisms underlying B-cell development. We describe here a model system 
that allows us to apply molecular genetic techniques to the analysis of human
B-cell development. We constructed a retroviral vector with a multiple cloning
site connected to a gene encoding green fluorescent protein by an internal
ribosomal entry site. Human CD34(+)CD38(-) fetal liver cells, cultured overnight 
in a combination of stem cell factor and interleukin-7 (IL-7), could be
transduced with 30% efficiency. We ligated the gene encoding the dominant
negative helix loop helix (HLH) factor Id3 that inhibits many enhancing basic HLH
transcription factors into this vector. CD34(+)CD38(-) FL cells were transduced
with Id3-IRES-GFP and cultured with the murine stromal cell line S17. In
addition, we cultured the transduced cells in a reaggregate culture system with
an SV-transformed human fibroblast cell line (SV19). It was observed that
overexpression of Id3 inhibited development of B cells in both culture systems.
B-cell development was arrested at a stage before expression of the IL-7Ralpha.
The development of CD34(+)CD38(-) cells into CD14(+) myeloid cells in the S17
system was not inhibited by overexpression of Id3. Moreover, Id3(+) cells,
although inhibited in their B-cell development, were still able to develop into
natural killer (NK) cells when cultured in a combination of Flt-3L, IL-7, and
IL-15. These findings confirm the essential role of bHLH factors in B-cell
development and demonstrate the feasibility of retrovirus-mediated gene transfer 
as a tool to genetically modify human B-cell development.

PMID: 10515867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28690-6.

Characterization of the mUBC9-binding sites required for E2A protein degradation.

Huggins GS(1), Chin MT, Sibinga NE, Lee SL, Haber E, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Mammalian Ubc9 (mUbc9) is required for rapid degradation of the E2A proteins E12 
and E47 by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. We have shown elsewhere that mUbc9
interacts with amino acids 477-530 of E12/E47. Here we test the hypothesis that
this region, rich in proline, glutamic acid, serine, and threonine (PEST)
residues, serves as the E2A protein degradation domain (DD). An E2A protein
lacking this region, E47Delta(478-531), was significantly more stable than
wild-type E47(half-life of more than 6 h versus 55 min). Deletion of the E2A DD
had no effect on the E-box-binding and transcriptional activity of E47. We mapped
two discreet mUbc9-interacting regions within the E2A DD: amino acids 476-494 and
505-513. E2A(505-513) interacted with mUbc9 but not with human Ubc5, MyoD, Id3,
or the polymyositis-scleroderma autoantigen. Substitution of the E2A(505-513)
central hydrophobic residues with basic residues abolished interaction with
mUbc9. Also, full-length E47 lacking the second mUbc9-interacting region was
significantly more stable than wild-type E47. Reintroduction of the E2A DD into
the long-lived, naturally occurring chimeric oncoprotein E2A-HLF (hepatic
leukemic factor) destabilized it, suggesting that this domain can transfer a
degradation signal to a heterologous protein. E2A-HLF-DD chimeric protein was
stabilized by the proteasome inhibitor LLNL, indicating the role of the
ubiquitin-proteasome system mediating degradation through the E2A degradation
domain. Our experiments indicate that the E2A DD mediates E2A protein
interactions with the ubiquitin-proteasome system and that the E2A DD is required
for metabolism of these widely expressed proteins.

PMID: 10497239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Pathol. 1999 Sep;155(3):815-22.

Id-1 and Id-2 are overexpressed in pancreatic cancer and in dysplastic lesions in
chronic pancreatitis.

Maruyama H(1), Kleeff J, Wildi S, Friess H, Büchler MW, Israel MA, Korc M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of California,
Irvine, USA.

Id proteins antagonize basic helix-loop-helix proteins, inhibit differentiation, 
and enhance cell proliferation. In this study we compared the expression of Id-1,
Id-2, and Id-3 in the normal pancreas, in pancreatic cancer, and in chronic
pancreatitis (CP). Northern blot analysis demonstrated that all three Id mRNA
species were expressed at high levels in pancreatic cancer samples by comparison 
with normal or CP samples. Pancreatic cancer cell lines frequently coexpressed
all three Ids, exhibiting a good correlation between Id mRNA and protein levels, 
as determined by immunoblotting with highly specific anti-Id antibodies.
Immunohistochemistry using these antibodies demonstrated the presence of faint
Id-1 and Id-2 immunostaining in pancreatic ductal cells in the normal pancreas,
whereas Id-3 immunoreactivity ranged from weak to strong. In the cancer tissues, 
many of the cancer cells exhibited abundant Id-1, Id-2, and Id-3
immunoreactivity. Scoring on the basis of percentage of positive cells and
intensity of immunostaining indicated that Id-1 and Id-2 were increased
significantly in the cancer cells by comparison with the respective controls.
Mild to moderate Id immunoreactivity was also seen in the ductal cells in the
CP-like areas adjacent to these cells and in the ductal cells of small and
interlobular ducts in CP. In contrast, in dysplastic and atypical papillary ducts
in CP, Id-1 and Id-2 immunoreactivity was as significantly elevated as in the
cancer cells. These findings suggest that increased Id expression may be
associated with enhanced proliferative potential of pancreatic cancer cells and
of proliferating or dysplastic ductal cells in CP.

PMCID: PMC1866883
PMID: 10487839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):5969-80.

Impaired immune responses and B-cell proliferation in mice lacking the Id3 gene.

Pan L(1), Sato S, Frederick JP, Sun XH, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

B-lymphocyte activation and proliferation induced by the B-cell receptor (BCR)
signals are important steps in the initiation of humoral immune responses. How
the BCR signals are translated by nuclear transcription factors into cell cycle
progression is poorly understood. Id3 is an immediate-early gene responding to
growth and mitogenic signals in many cell types including B cells. The primary
function of the Id3 protein has been defined as that of inhibitor of
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. The interaction between Id3 
and bHLH proteins, many of which are essential for cellular differentiation, has 
been proposed as a key regulatory event leading to cellular proliferation instead
of differentiation. To further investigate the role of Id3 in tissue and embryo
development and the mechanism of Id3-mediated growth regulation, we generated and
analyzed Id3-deficient mice. While these mice display no overt abnormality in
tissue and embryo development, their humoral immunity is compromised. The amounts
of immunoglobulins produced in Id3-deficient mice immunized with a
T-cell-dependent antigen and a type 2 T-cell-independent antigen are attenuated
and severely impaired, respectively. Further analysis of lymphocytes isolated
from Id3-deficient mice reveals a B-cell defect in their proliferation response
to BCR cross-linking but not to lipopolysaccharide or a combination of BCR
cross-linking and interleukin-4. Analyses of cultured lymphocytes also suggest
involvement of Id3 in cytokine production in T cells and isotype switching in B
cells. Finally, the proliferation defect in Id3-deficient B cells can be rescued 
by ectopic expression of Id1, a homologue of Id3. Taken together, these results
define a necessary and specific role for Id3 in mediating signals from BCR to
cell cycle progression during humoral immune responses.

PMCID: PMC84466
PMID: 10454544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jul 9;274(28):19838-45.

Id genes are direct targets of bone morphogenetic protein induction in embryonic 
stem cells.

Hollnagel A(1), Oehlmann V, Heymer J, Rüther U, Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, D-30625
Hannover, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are morphogenetic signaling molecules
essential for embryonic patterning. To obtain molecular insight into the
influence of BMPs on morphogenesis, we searched for new genes directly activated 
by BMP signaling. In vitro cultured mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells were used,
cultivated in chemically defined growth medium (CDM). CDM-cultured ES cells
responded very selectively to stimulation by various mesoderm inducers (BMP2/4,
activin A, and basic fibroblast growth factor). BMP2/4 rapidly induced transcript
levels of the homeobox genes Msx-1 and Msx-2 and the proto-oncogene JunB, whereas
c-jun transcripts displayed delayed albeit prolonged increase. Using differential
display cDNA cloning, six direct BMP target genes were identified. These include 
Id3, which showed strong mRNA induction, and the moderately induced Cyr61, DEK,
and eIF4AII genes, as well as a gene encoding a GC-binding protein. Besides Id3, 
also the Id1 and Id2 genes were activated by BMP4 in both ES cells and a range of
different cell lines. Id genes encode negative regulators of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors. In vivo we observed local ectopic
expression of Id3 and Msx-2 mRNAs in Ft/+ embryos at overlapping regions of
ectopic Bmp4 misexpression. We therefore propose that the Msx and Id genes are
direct target genes of embryonic BMP4 signaling in vivo.

PMID: 10391928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Glia. 1999 Apr;26(2):139-52.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha regulation of the Id gene family in astrocytes and
microglia during CNS inflammatory injury.

Tzeng SF(1), Kahn M, Liva S, De Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, UCLA School of Medicine, USA.

The inhibitors of DNA binding (Id) gene family is highly expressed during
embryogenesis and throughout adulthood in the rat central nervous system (CNS).
In vitro studies suggest that the Id gene family is involved in the regulation of
cell proliferation and differentiation. Recently, Id gene expression was shown to
be expressed in immature and mature astrocytes during development and upregulated
in reactive astrocytes after spinal cord injury. These results suggest that the
Id gene family may play an important role in regulating astrocyte development and
reactivity; however, the factors regulating Id expression in astrocytes remain
undefined. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF alpha), a proinflammatory cytokine,
is thought to play a crucial role in astrocyte/microglia activation after injury 
to the CNS. To determine if TNF alpha plays a role in Id gene expression, we
exogenously administered TNF alpha into developing postnatal rats. We report that
TNF alpha injections resulted in a rapid and transient increase in both cell
number and mRNA expression for Id2 and Id3 when compared to levels observed in
noninjected or control-injected animals. Id1 mRNA levels were also upregulated
after TNF alpha treatment, but to a lesser degree. Significant increases in TNF
alpha-induced Id2 and Id3 mRNA were observed in the ventricular/subventricular
zone, cingulum and corpus callosum. TNF alpha also increased Id2 mRNA expression 
in the caudate putamen and hippocampus at the injection site. Id2 and Id3 mRNA+
cells were identified as GFAP+ and S100 alpha + astrocytes as well as ED1+
microglia. This is the first report to show TNF-alpha-induced modulation of the
Id gene family and suggests that Id may be involved in the formation of reactive 
astrocytes and activated microglia in the rodent brain. These results suggest a
putative role for the Id family in the molecular mechanisms regulating cellular
responsiveness to TNF alpha and CNS inflammation.

PMID: 10384879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Nutr. 1999 Jun;129(6):1223-8.

Iron deficiency in young rats alters the distribution of vitamin A between plasma
and liver and between hepatic retinol and retinyl esters.

Rosales FJ(1), Jang JT, Piñero DJ, Erikson KM, Beard JL, Ross AC.

Author information: 
(1)The Nutrition Department and The Department of Veterinary Science,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

We assessed whether iron deficiency alters the concentration of vitamin A (VA) in
plasma or liver and the chemical distribution between hepatic unesterified and
esterified retinol. Weanling male Sprague-Dawley rats (n = 10/group) were
allocated to one of four diet groups: low iron (ID3, 3 mg of elemental iron/kg
diet), marginal iron (ID15, 15 mg/kg), control diet food-restricted to the ID3
group (FR, 35 mg/kg), and control diet ad libitum consumption (AD, 35 mg/kg).
Both ID3 and FR rats grew less than AD and ID15 rats. At the end of 5.5 wk,
plasma retinol concentrations of the ID3 and FR rats were reduced >40% compared
to ID15 and AD rats [Kruskal-Wallis test (K-W), P < 0.0042)]. Paradoxically, the 
hepatic VA concentration was greater in FR rats, with accumulation of more
retinyl esters and retinol compared to the other dietary groups. Concentrations
of hepatic retinyl esters and retinol did not differ among the other groups, but 
the molar ratio of hepatic retinyl esters to retinol was greater in ID3 rats
(20.1 +/- 1.4) compared to ID15 rats (13.8 +/- 1.6, P = 0.02), AD (11.3 +/- 2.1, 
P < 0.0042) and FR (9.5 +/- 1.1, P < 0.0042). Iron deficiency may cause changes
in liver and plasma VA that are refractory to VA intake, and thus a benefit may
be derived from combining iron and VA supplements during nutrition interventions.

PMID: 10356091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. EMBO J. 1999 May 17;18(10):2793-802.

Disruption of alpha beta but not of gamma delta T cell development by
overexpression of the helix-loop-helix protein Id3 in committed T cell
progenitors.

Blom B(1), Heemskerk MH, Verschuren MC, van Dongen JJ, Stegmann AP, Bakker AQ,
Couwenberg F, Res PC, Spits H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Huis, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Enforced expression of Id3, which has the capacity to inhibit many basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, in human CD34(+) hematopoietic
progenitor cells that have not undergone T cell receptor (TCR) gene
rearrangements inhibits development of the transduced cells into TCRalpha beta
and gamma delta cells in a fetal thymic organ culture (FTOC). Here we document
that overexpression of Id3, in progenitors that have initiated TCR gene
rearrangements (pre-T cells), inhibits development into TCRalpha beta but not
into TCRgamma delta T cells. Furthermore, Id3 impedes expression of recombination
activating genes and downregulates pre-Talpha mRNA. These observations suggest
possible mechanisms by which Id3 overexpression can differentially affect
development of pre-T cells into TCRalpha beta and gamma delta cells. We also
observed that cell surface CD4(-)CD8(-)CD3(-) cells with rearranged TCR genes
developed from Id3-transduced but not from control-transduced pre-T cells in an
FTOC. These cells had properties of both natural killer (NK) and pre-T cells.
These findings suggest that bHLH factors are required to control T cell
development after the T/NK developmental checkpoint.

PMCID: PMC1171360
PMID: 10329625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Apr 1;27(7):1740-6.

Identification of a novel transcriptional activity of mammalian Id proteins.

Bounpheng MA(1), Melnikova IN, Dimas JJ, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, Institute of Biotechnology,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78245-3207, USA.

The Id proteins are a family of related mammalian helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins
which can interact with other HLH proteins but lack a basic region and are thus
not thought to bind to DNA. Instead, they are hypothesized to act as dominant
negative regulators of DNA-binding basic HLH (bHLH) proteins, by forming inactive
heterodimers with these proteins. All four Id family proteins possess related HLH
dimerization domains and can interact with similar bHLH proteins, although with
differing affinities. The functions of the largely unrelated N- and C-terminal
regions of the proteins are unknown. In this study, we have identified a novel
transcriptional activity of the mammalian Id proteins. We show that when fused to
the heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain, all four of the mammalian Id proteins
can activate GAL4-dependent transcription. The HLH domain is necessary for the
transactivation activity observed, suggesting that interaction with a cellular
HLH protein is required. Co-transfection with exogenous Class A bHLH proteins
(E-proteins) greatly potentiates the transactivation, which is abolished upon
co-transfection with Class B bHLH proteins. These results are consistent with the
idea that the Id proteins have a transcriptional activity when present in a
DNA-binding complex.

PMCID: PMC148378
PMID: 10076006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Mar 15;247(2):347-55.

Id4 expression induces apoptosis in astrocytic cultures and is down-regulated by 
activation of the cAMP-dependent signal transduction pathway.

Andres-Barquin PJ(1), Hernandez MC, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, 94143, USA.

The Id family of helix-loop-helix transcription factors has been implicated in
the regulation of cellular differentiation in several different lineages. We have
explored the potential regulatory role of the cyclic AMP-dependent signaling
pathway on Id gene expression in astroglial primary cultures. We found that
primary cultures of mouse forebrain astrocytes constitutively expressed the four 
known members of the Id gene family, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. During culture in
presence of serum for 4 weeks, the expression of Id4 was up-regulated. In these
same cultures, treatment with dibutyryl-cyclic AMP, a cyclic AMP analogue known
to promote astrocyte differentiation, dramatically and selectively decreased Id4 
gene expression. This effect was detectable after short-term treatment and was
maintained during long-term treatment. Forskolin and pentoxifylline, two other
agents known to elevate intracellular cyclic AMP through different mechanisms,
also potently decreased Id4 gene expression. Furthermore, overexpression of Id4
in an astrocyte-derived cell line induced cells to round up and die by apoptosis.
These results indicate that the cyclic AMP pathway acts as an inhibitor of Id4
gene expression in astrocytes, identify a new function for Id4, and suggest that 
Id4 is strategically positioned in the chain of molecular events regulating
astrocyte differentiation and apoptosis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10066362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Feb 25;247(1):94-104.

Differential biological activities of mammalian Id proteins in muscle cells.

Melnikova IN(1), Bounpheng M, Schatteman GC, Gilliam D, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas, 78245-3207, USA.

Id proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors that lack
DNA-binding domains. These proteins form inactive heterodimers with basic HLH
(bHLH) factors, inhibiting their DNA-binding and transcriptional activities.
Consistent with a proposed role for Id proteins as inhibitors of terminal
differentiation, Id1 and Id3 have been shown to negatively regulate myogenesis in
cultured muscle cells. Here we have investigated the possibility that Id2 and/or 
Id4 can act in a similar manner. Surprisingly, while overexpression of Id2
resulted in inhibition of differentiation of Sol 8 myoblast cells, overexpression
of Id4 did not. Sol 8 cells stably transfected with Id4 showed no apparent
changes in expression of muscle-specific genes upon differentiation. DNA-binding 
activities present at the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) enhancer E-box and
transcription of the MCK enhancer were not altered in Id4-overexpressing cells,
compared with vector-transfected cells. Id2 is also a more potent inhibitor of
protein/DNA complex formation at the MCK-R enhancer E-box than Identified in
vitro. Therefore, our data support the notion that members of the Id family might
be involved in the regulation of distinct developmental pathways.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10047451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. EMBO J. 1999 Feb 15;18(4):968-76.

Id helix-loop-helix proteins inhibit nucleoprotein complex formation by the TCF
ETS-domain transcription factors.

Yates PR(1), Atherton GT, Deed RW, Norton JD, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, University of
Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH.

The Id subfamily of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins plays a fundamental role in
the regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation. Id proteins are
thought to inhibit differentiation mainly through interaction with other HLH
proteins and by blocking their DNA-binding activity. Members of the ternary
complex factor (TCF) subfamily of ETS-domain proteins have key functions in
regulating immediate-early gene expression in response to mitogenic stimulation. 
TCFs form DNA-bound complexes with the serum response factor (SRF) and are direct
targets of MAP kinase (MAPK) signal transduction cascades. In this study we
demonstrate functional interactions between Id proteins and TCFs. Ids bind to the
ETS DNA-binding domain and disrupt the formation of DNA-bound complexes between
TCFs and SRF on the c-fos serum response element (SRE). Inhibition occurs by
disrupting protein-DNA interactions with the TCF component of this complex. In
vivo, the Id proteins cause down-regulation of the transcriptional activity
mediated by the TCFs and thereby block MAPK signalling to SREs. Therefore, our
results demonstrate a novel facet of Id function in the coordination of mitogenic
signalling and cell cycle entry.

PMCID: PMC1171189
PMID: 10022839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Acta Ophthalmol Scand Suppl. 1998;(227):32-4.

Ultrabiomicroscopic study of the effects of brimonidine, apraclonidine,
latanoprost and ibopamine on the chamber angle and ciliary body.

Lo Presti L(1), Morgese A, Ravot M, Brogliatti B, Boles Carenini B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Oculistics, University of Turin.

The authors used the Zeiss Humphrey (Mod840, 50 MHz) ultrabiomicroscope to
evaluate the changes that Brimonidine, Apraclonidine, Latanoprost and Ibopamine
cause in the anterior chamber and on the ciliary body of healthy subjects. The
eyes of 60 volunteers, separated into 4 groups according to drug instilled, were 
studied and the parameters analyzed were: anterior chamber depth (ACD), pupillary
diameter (PD), angle opening at 500 microns from the scleral spur (AOD500),
trabecular iris angle (TIA) and iris thicknesses (ID1 and ID3). The study showed 
the miotic effect of Brimonidine (S) that was accompanied by an angle opening
(S). Apraclonidine and Latanoprost caused no statistically significant changes in
the angle or in the ciliary body. Ibopamine caused mydriasis (S). The UBM,
therefore, showed itself to be useful also in the study of the mechanism of
action of drugs on the angular structures and on the ciliary body.

PMID: 9972336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Proc AMIA Symp. 1998:513-7.

Assessing an AI knowledge-base for asymptomatic liver diseases.

Babic A(1), Mathiesen U, Hedin K, Bodemar G, Wigertz O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Linkoping University, Sweden.

Discovering not yet seen knowledge from clinical data is of importance in the
field of asymptomatic liver diseases. Avoidance of liver biopsy which is used as 
the ultimate confirmation of diagnosis by making the decision based on relevant
laboratory findings only, would be considered an essential support. The system
based on Quinlan's ID3 algorithm was simple and efficient in extracting the
sought knowledge. Basic principles of applying the AI systems are therefore
described and complemented with medical evaluation. Some of the diagnostic rules 
were found to be useful as decision algorithms i.e. they could be directly
applied in clinical work and made a part of the knowledge-base of the Liver
Guide, an automated decision support system.

PMCID: PMC2232391
PMID: 9929272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Neuroreport. 1998 Dec 21;9(18):4075-80.

Injury selectively down-regulates the gene encoding for the Id4 transcription
factor in primary cultures of forebrain astrocytes.

Andres-Barquin PJ(1), Hernandez MC, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurological Surgery, School of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, 94143, USA.

Astrogliosis is an important component of the response to injury of the central
nervous system (CNS). The Id family of helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription
factors has been implicated in the regulation of cellular differentiation in
several different lineages and may contribute to the regulation of astrogliosis. 
We examined the expression of Id genes in primary cultures of mouse forebrain
astrocytes under experimental conditions in which astrogliosis was elicited by
mechanical injury. Astrocyte cultures expressed the four known members of the Id 
gene family, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. After injury, at a time when astrocytes
developed the characteristic phenotypic changes of astrogliosis, Id4 expression
decreased dramatically. Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA levels did not change. These
results identify Id4 as a candidate marker of astroglial activation in culture
and suggest that Id4 expression plays a role in the process of astrogliosis.

PMID: 9926850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Dec;9(12):1015-24.

Stage- and subcellular-specific expression of Id proteins in male germ and
Sertoli cells implicates distinctive regulatory roles for Id proteins during
meiosis, spermatogenesis, and Sertoli cell function.

Sablitzky F(1), Moore A, Bromley M, Deed RW, Newton JS, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Windeyer Institute of Medical Sciences, University
College London, United Kingdom. f.sablitzky@ucl.ac.uk

Immunohistological detection of each of the four Id proteins (Id1-Id4) in
sections of mouse testis revealed a unique temporal and spatial expression
pattern for each Id protein during spermatogenesis. Furthermore, each Id protein 
displayed a distinctive, dynamic pattern of subcellular distribution. Id1 was
uniquely expressed in MI/MII spermatocytes undergoing meiotic division. Id4
protein was detectable in the cytoplasm of type A1 spermatogonia, as well as in
late pachytene and in diplotene spermatocytes. Id2 protein, which was most
abundant in Sertoli cell nuclei, was also detectable in pachytene and diplotene
spermatocytes, but as with Id4, it was absent from MI/MII cells. In postmeiotic
spermatids, Id1, Id2, and Id4 proteins were expressed in a stage- and
subcellular-specific manner. Expression of Id3 was restricted to Sertoli cell
cytoplasm. In malignant seminoma cells, all four Id proteins were abundantly
expressed with accompanying changes in their subcellular distribution. The
observed expression of Id proteins in postproliferative Sertoli cells and
spermatids and during specific stages of meiosis implies novel functional roles
for this class of transcriptional regulator during spermatogenesis.

PMID: 9869302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. FEBS Lett. 1998 Oct 30;438(1-2):85-90.

The helix-loop-helix transcription factors Id1 and Id3 have a functional role in 
control of cell division in human normal and neoplastic chondrocytes.

Asp J(1), Thornemo M, Inerot S, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Clinical
Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg,
Sweden.

The expression and localization of the helix-loop-helix transcription factors Id1
and Id3, as well as localization of the E12-protein, were studied in cells
isolated from human articular cartilage and chondrosarcoma. Serum withdrawal
down-regulated Id1 and Id3 expression in chondrocytes but not the Id1 expression 
in chondrosarcoma cells. Antisense oligonucleotides directed against Id1 and Id3 
decreased BrdU labeling in both cell types. E12 was localized to the nucleus in
chondrocytes and non-confluent tumor cells and in confluent tumor cells, E12 had 
a cytoplasmic localization. This study suggests a functional role for Id1 and Id3
in the control of proliferation and differentiation of cartilage.

PMID: 9821964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Glia. 1998 Dec;24(4):372-81.

Id1, Id2, and Id3 gene expression in neural cells during development.

Tzeng SF(1), de Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Mental Retardation Research Center,
Neuropsychiatric Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California,
USA.

Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA are expressed mainly in the proliferating ependymal cell
zone of the mouse brain during embryogenesis. In this study, the expression
pattern and cell phenotypes of the Id family mRNA were examined in postnatal and 
adult rat brain. The expression of Idl and Id3 mRNA in rat brain was observed in 
the cortex layer 1, corpus callosum, ventricular/subventricular zone (VZ/ SVZ),
and the CA1-4 layers of the hippocampus at postnatal day 1 (P1) through P14,
whereby it declined at 2 months. In general, the developmental pattern of Idl
mRNA coincided with the pattern observed for Id3 mRNA. Similar to Id1 and Id3,
Id2 mRNA was highly expressed in the corpus callosum, VZ/SVZ, and the
hippocampus. Examination of Id2 mRNA revealed high levels in the cortex and
caudate putamen at P1 through P14, whereas a decline was observed in its
expression in the adult cortex. In P5 rat cerebellum, all Id mRNA examined were
found in the internal granular cell layers; however, at this time point, only Id2
mRNA expression was detected in the differentiating zone of the external granular
cell layers, preferentially localizing to adult Purkinje cells. Furthermore, only
Id2 mRNA expression in brain was observed in NF+ neurons at P5. Examination of
S100alpha+ and GFAP+ astrocytes, revealed the presence of all three mRNAs,
whereas the expression of Id2 and Id3 mRNA was absent in 04+ immature
oligodendrocytes. These data suggest that the spatial and temporal kinetic
patterns during development, as well as cellular specificity, of the Id gene
family may play a critical role in neural precursor cell proliferation and cell
divergence.

PMID: 9814817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5435-44.

Id2 promotes apoptosis by a novel mechanism independent of dimerization to basic 
helix-loop-helix factors.

Florio M(1), Hernandez MC, Yang H, Shu HK, Cleveland JL, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Preuss Laboratory for Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Brain Tumor Research Center,
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0520, USA.

Members of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of Id proteins have demonstrated
roles in the regulation of differentiation and cell proliferation. Id proteins
inhibit differentiation by HLH-mediated heterodimerization with basic HLH
transcription factors. This blocks their sequence-specific binding to DNA and
activation of target genes that are often expressed in a tissue-specific manner. 
Id proteins can also act as positive regulators of cell proliferation. The
different mechanisms proposed for Id-mediated promotion of entry into S phase
also involve HLH-mediated interactions affecting regulators of the G1/S
transition. We have found that Id2 augments apoptosis in both interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent 32D.3 myeloid progenitors and U2OS osteosarcoma cells. We could 
not detect a similar activity for Id3. In contrast to the effects of Id2 on
differentiation and cell proliferation, Id2-mediated apoptosis is independent of 
HLH-mediated dimerization. The ability of Id2 to promote cell death resides in
its N-terminal region and is associated with the enhanced expression of a known
component of the programmed cell death pathway, the proapoptotic gene BAX.

PMCID: PMC109128
PMID: 9710627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cytopathology. 1998 Jun;9(3):178-87.

Evaluation of a statistically derived decision tree for the cytodiagnosis of fine
needle aspirates of the breast (FNAB).

Cross SS(1), Dubé AK, Johnson JS, McCulloch TA, Quincey C, Harrison RF, Ma Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Sheffield Medical School, UK.

A decision tree for the diagnosis of FNAB was derived from defined human
observations using a rule induction method, C4.5 (a derivative of the ID3
algorithm). This algorithm is an implementation of the top-down induction method 
where the tree is determined iteratively by adding those nodes and branches which
maximize the information gain at each step. The tree was derived from a training 
set of 200 FNAB with known outcome using 10 defined features (from one observer) 
and patient age. The tree contained a total of seven nodes (six observable
features and patient age) with eight endpoints (four benign, four malignant). The
tree was applied to a test set of 400 further FNAB with observations from the
training observer and produced a sensitivity of 95%, specificity of 93% and a
positive predictive value (PPV) of a malignant result of 89%. Four trainee
pathologists were given a training session on the observable features and then
used the tree to determine outcome in a further 50 FNAB. The observers were blind
to clinical details apart from age and the endpoints were coded with letters and 
not labelled benign or malignant. The results from these observers produced
ranges of sensitivity 80-96%, specificity 64-92%, PPV 73-92% and kappa statistics
(with known outcome) 0.6-0.8. Reported difficulties in using the tree included
estimation of nuclear size. These results were worse than the performance of the 
observers on a further 50 cases without using the decision tree (sensitivity
80-100%, specificity 72-100%, PPV 78-100%, kappa 0.72-0.92). The original 50 case
test set was rerandomized and the four trainee observers made all 10 defined
observations on each specimen without using the decision tree; these observations
were then used to derive decisions from the tree. The performance from this
method was similar to that using selected features from the tree, suggesting that
observation of all features together does not improve the reliability of each
specific observation. The poor performance of this tree suggests that this
methodology may be unsuitable for producing decision support aids for diagnostic 
or training purposes in this domain.

PMID: 9638379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 3;273(14):8278-86.

Lymphoid-specific expression of the Id3 gene in hematopoietic cells. Selective
antagonism of E2A basic helix-loop-helix protein associated with Id3-induced
differentiation of erythroleukemia cells.

Deed RW(1), Jasiok M, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 9BX, United Kingdom.

Accumulating evidence implicates functions of the Id family of helix-loop-helix
proteins in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation in metazoa. Within 
the mammalian hematopoietic organ, expression of the Id3 gene is restricted to
the lymphoid cell compartment. We show here that in non-lymphoid hematopoietic
cells, repression of transcription is correlated with hypermethylation of
sequences in the vicinity of the upstream regulatory region of the Id3 gene,
suggestive of a strict developmental control of expression of this gene in
lymphoid versus non-lymphoid hematopoietic cells. Enforced ectopic expression of 
Id3 in K562 erythroid progenitor cells promotes erythroid differentiation and is 
correlated with a quantitative/qualitative shift in the profile of interacting
TAL1 and E protein heterodimers that bind to a consensus E box sequence in in
vitro band shift assays, consistent with selective targeting of E2A E protein(s) 
by Id3 and suggesting a possible mechanism involving TAL1-mediated
differentiation. By using a Gal 4-VP16 two-hybrid competition assay and an E
box-dependent reporter assay, we demonstrate directly that the E2A protein E47
preferentially associates with Id3 in vivo. These observations provide a paradigm
for understanding how overlapping but distinct specificities of individual Id
proteins may constitute a developmentally regulated program underlying cell
determination in diverse lineages.

PMID: 9525934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2371-81.

Coupling of cell growth control and apoptosis functions of Id proteins.

Norton JD(1), Atherton GT.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. grgjdn@picr.cr.man.ac.uk

The Id family of helix-loop-helix proteins function as negative regulators of
cell differentiation and as positive regulators of G1 cell cycle control. We
report here that enforced overexpression of the Id3 gene suppresses the
colony-forming efficiency of primary rat embryo fibroblasts. Cotransfection with 
the antiapoptotic Bcl2 or BclXL gene alleviates this suppression and leads to
cell immortalization. Consistent with this, enforced expression of Id genes in
isolation was found to be a strong inducer of apoptosis in serum-deprived
fibroblast cells. Id3-induced apoptosis was mediated at least in part through
p53-independent mechanisms and could be efficiently rescued by Bcl2, BclXL, and
the basic helix-loop-helix protein E47, which is known to oppose the functions of
Id3 in vivo through the formation of stable heterodimers. Enforced overexpression
of Id proteins has previously been shown to promote the cell cycle S phase in
serum-deprived embryo fibroblasts (R. W. Deed, E. Hara, G. Atherton, G. Peters,
and J. D. Norton, Mol. Cell. Biol. 17:6815-6821, 1997). The extent of apoptosis
induced by loss- and gain-of-function Id3 mutants and by wild-type Id3 either
alone or in combination with the Bcl2, BClXL, and E47 genes was invariably
correlated with the relative magnitude of cell cycle S phase promotion. In
addition, Id3-transfected cell populations displaying apoptosis and those in S
phase were largely coincident in different experiments. These findings highlight 
the close coupling between the G1 progression and apoptosis functions of Id
proteins and hint at a common mechanism for this family of transcriptional
regulators in cell determination.

PMCID: PMC121494
PMID: 9528806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Eur J Cancer. 1997 Oct;33(12):1957-61.

Molecular analysis of the region of distal 1p commonly deleted in neuroblastoma.

White PS(1), Maris JM, Sulman EP, Jensen SJ, Kyemba SM, Beltinger CP, Allen C,
Kramer DL, Biegel JA, Brodeur GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-4318, USA.

Cellular, cytogenetic, and molecular evidence indicates that chromosome band 1p36
is often deleted in neuroblastoma cell lines and tumours, suggesting the presence
of one or more tumour suppressor genes in this region. We used a multifaceted
approach to analyse the commonly deleted region, 28 distal 1p-specific
polymorphic loci were used to detect loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in a panel of
primary neuroblastoma tumours. Thirty-two of 122 tumours (26%) demonstrated LOH
at three or more loci. In addition, a patient with a constitutional deletion of
1p36.2-.3 and two neuroblastoma cell lines with 1p36 abnormalities were
characterised by FISH. When combined with the LOH data, a single consensus region
of deletion was defined proximally by PLOD and distally by D1S80, a region
spanning approximately five megabases. Several proposed candidate tumour
suppressor genes, including ID3, CDC2L1, DAN, PAX7, E2F2, TNFR2 and TCEB3, map
outside of this region; however, the transcription factor HKR3 cannot be
excluded. LOH for 1p is correlated with adverse clinical and biological features 
and a poor prognosis, but 1p LOH is not an independent predictor of overall
survival. To identify additional candidate genes, an integrated physical map of
1p35-36 is being constructed. The current map includes 445 polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-formatted markers and 608 YACs. This map will help identify
region-specific transcripts by direct selection and sequencing.

PMID: 9516832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):6815-21.

Regulation of Id3 cell cycle function by Cdk-2-dependent phosphorylation.

Deed RW(1), Hara E, Atherton GT, Peters G, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.

The functions of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in
activating differentiation-linked gene expression and in inducing G1 cell cycle
arrest are negatively regulated by members of the Id family of HLH proteins.
These bHLH antagonists are induced during a mitogenic signalling response, and
they function by sequestering their bHLH targets in inactive heterodimers that
are unable to bind to specific gene regulatory (E box) sequences. Recently,
cyclin E-Cdk2- and cyclin A-Cdk2-dependent phosphorylation of a single conserved 
serine residue (Ser5) in Id2 has been shown to occur during late G1-to-S phase
transition of the cell cycle, and this neutralizes the function of Id2 in
abrogating E-box-dependent bHLH homo- or heterodimer complex formation in vitro
(E. Hara, M. Hall, and G. Peters, EMBO J. 16:332-342, 1997). We now show that an 
analogous cell-cycle-regulated phosphorylation of Id3 alters the specificity of
Id3 for abrogating both E-box-dependent bHLH homo- or heterodimer complex
formation in vitro and E-box-dependent reporter gene function in vivo.
Furthermore, compared with wild-type Id3, an Id3 Asp5 mutant (mimicking
phosphorylation) is unable to promote cell cycle S phase entry in transfected
fibroblasts, whereas an Id3 Ala5 mutant (ablating phosphorylation) displays an
activity significantly greater than that of wild-type Id3 protein. Cdk2-dependent
phosphorylation therefore provides a switch during late G1-to-S phase that both
nullifies an early G1 cell cycle regulatory function of Id3 and modulates its
target bHLH specificity. These data also demonstrate that the ability of Id3 to
promote cell cycle S phase entry is not simply a function of its ability to
modulate bHLH heterodimer-dependent gene expression and establish a biologically 
important mechanism through which Cdk2 and Id-bHLH functions are integrated in
the coordination of cell proliferation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC232537
PMID: 9372912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Exp Med. 1997 Nov 3;186(9):1597-602.

Inhibition of T cell and promotion of natural killer cell development by the
dominant negative helix loop helix factor Id3.

Heemskerk MH(1), Blom B, Nolan G, Stegmann AP, Bakker AQ, Weijer K, Res PC, Spits
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121,
1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Bipotential T/natural killer (NK) progenitor cells are present in the human
thymus. Despite their bipotential capacity, these progenitors develop
predominantly to T cells in the thymus. The mechanisms controlling this
developmental choice are unknown. Here we present evidence that a member(s) of
the family of basic helix loop helix (bHLH) transcription factors determines
lineage specification of NK/T cell progenitors. The natural dominant negative HLH
factor Id3, which blocks transcriptional activity of a number of known bHLH
factors, was expressed in CD34+ progenitor cells by retrovirus-mediated gene
transfer. Constitutive expression of Id3 completely blocks development of CD34+
cells into T cells in a fetal thymic organ culture (FTOC). In contrast,
development into NK cells in an FTOC is enhanced. Thus, the activity of a bHLH
transcription factor is necessary for T lineage differentiation of bipotential
precursors, in the absence of which a default pathway leading to NK cell
development is chosen. Our results identify a molecular switch for lineage
specification in early lymphoid precursors of humans.

PMCID: PMC2199115
PMID: 9348318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19785-93.

Differential interactions of Id proteins with basic-helix-loop-helix
transcription factors.

Langlands K(1), Yin X, Anand G, Prochownik EV.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, The,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Dimerization of three Id proteins (Id1, Id2, and Id3) with the four class A E
proteins (E12, E47, E2-2, and HEB) and two groups of class B proteins, the
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs: MyoD, myogenin, Myf-5 and MRF4/Myf-6), and the
hematopoietic factors (Scl/Tal-1, Tal-2, and Lyl-1) were tested in a quantitative
yeast 2-hybrid assay. All three Ids bound with high affinity to E proteins, but a
much broader range of interactions was observed between Ids and the class B
factors. Id1 and Id2 interacted strongly with MyoD and Myf-5 and weakly with
myogenin and MRF4/Myf-6, whereas Id3 interacted weakly with all four MRFs.
Similar specificities were observed in co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian
2-hybrid analyses. No interactions were found between the Ids and any of the
hematopoietic factors. Each Id was able to disrupt the ability of E protein-MyoD 
complexes to transactivate from a muscle creatine kinase reporter construct in
vivo. Finally, mutagenesis experiments showed that the differences between Id1
and Id3 binding map to three amino acids in the first helix and to a small
cluster of upstream residues. The Id proteins thus display a signature range of
interactions with all of their potential dimerization partners and may play a
role in myogenesis which is distinct from that in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9242638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Aug 1;247(3):870-6.

Identification in a fish species of two Id (inhibitor of DNA
binding/differentiation)-related helix-loop-helix factors expressed in the slow
oxidative muscle fibers.

Rescan PY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie des Poissons, INRA, Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes,
France. rescan@beaulieu.rennes.inra.fr

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins related to the inhibitor of DNA
binding/differentiation (Id) serve as general antagonists of cell
differentiation. They lack a basic DNA-binding domain and are thought to function
in a dominant negative manner by sequestering basic HLH (bHLH) transcription
factors that are involved in cell determination and differentiation. Four
Id-encoding genes have been shown in mammals, they have a distinct pattern of
expression suggesting different functions for each member in different cell
lineage. In this study we describe the identification and cloning of two trout
cDNAs which encode helix-loop-helix proteins showing a high degree of similarity 
with mammalian Id family members. One cDNA encodes a trout putative Id1 protein
(TId1) that is 63% identical to the human Id1 protein over the entire length and 
78% identical within the HLH region. The other cDNA encodes a trout putative Id2 
protein (TId2) that shows 82% identity to the human Id2 protein and only one
change that is conservative over the HLH region. In the 3' untranslated region,
TId2 mRNA exhibits 16 nucleotides upstream from the AATAAA site, a palindromic
sequence similar to the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE) which is also
present in Id2 and Id3 mRNAs from mammals and in XIdx/XIdI mRNA from Xenopus. In 
the fish, TId1 and TId2 are expressed in a tissue-specific manner, with slightly 
different patterns. During myogenesis, TId1 and TId2 are highly expressed in the 
myotomal musculature of fish embryos and of early alevins but are down-regulated 
in that of late alevins. In muscle from juveniles and adults, TId1 and TId2
transcripts are abundant in the slow oxidative fibers while they are absent in
the fast glycolytic fibers. This expression pattern suggests that Id genes play a
role in the regulation of muscle fiber phenotype in addition to controlling early
myogenesis. On the whole, the identification of two HLH-Id encoding genes in a
major taxonomic group like teleosts, suggests an early divergence of Id genes in 
vertebrate evolution. The observation that Id transcripts are present selectively
in the slow muscle reveals that their expression is more complicated than
previously appreciated.

PMID: 9288909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Neuroreport. 1997 Jul 7;8(9-10):2091-5.

The DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacytidine specifically alters the
expression of helix-loop-helix proteins Id1, Id2 and Id3 during neuronal
differentiation.

Persengiev SP(1), Kilpatrick DL.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Group, Worcester Foundation for Biomedical Research, Shrewsbury, 
MA 01545, USA.

In mammals, cytosine methylation is important for the regulation of gene
expression and chromatin structure. Recently, we have found evidence indicating
that the maintained DNA methyltransferase activity is critical for neuronal cell 
differentiation. In the present study, we have investigated the effect of the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacytidine on gene regulation during nerve growth 
factor (NGF)-induced neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells. Expression of the
helix-loop-helix proteins Id1, Id2 and Id3 was specifically reduced by NGF and
this effect was blocked in 5-azacytidine-treated cells, concomitant with the
inhibition of NGF-induced neuronal differentiation. Nuclear run-on and Id2
promoter analyses further demonstrated that the decreased transcription of Id
proteins is at least in part dependent on the DNA methyltransferase activity.
These findings indicate that Id proteins are downstream targets of the NGF
transduction pathway. Moreover, these results suggest that therapeutic strategies
using 5-azacytidine against certain types of tumors should be reconsidered
because of the possible deleterious effects on neuronal cell function.

PMID: 9243590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1997 Jun;46(1-2):136-42.

Expression and functional role of the Id HLH family in cultured astrocytes.

Tzeng SF(1), de Vellis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Mental Retardation Research Center and Brain
Research Institute, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1759, USA.

The Id family of helix-loop-helix factors (Id1, Id2, and Id3) expressed in many
types of cells has been reported to negatively regulate myoblast differentiation 
and is required for G1/S progression of arrested fibroblasts. Our previous
studies have indicated that Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA expression appear in the
subventricular zone of 1-day-old rat brains. At later ages, Id3 mRNA was only
expressed in astrocytes. We now report that Id1 and Id3 mRNA expression increased
in astrocytes during the first hour of serum stimulation. Subsequently, the Id1
and Id3 mRNA levels gradually declined to basal level as observed in cultures
without serum stimulation. However, there was no significant difference in Id2
mRNA expression between serum-treated and control astrocyte cultures within 1 h
of serum induction. In addition, a strong nuclear immunostaining for Id2 and Id3 
proteins was observed 24 h after serum stimulation. This observation is
consistent with our results that show an increase in Id2 and Id3 protein levels
following 24 h serum induction. Furthermore, DNA synthesis in FCS-stimulated
astrocytes was blocked by antisense oligonucleotides against Id3 mRNA. The
addition of Id3 antisense oligonucleotides caused approximately 50% reduction in 
Id3 mRNA and protein levels when compared to that in sense-treated cultures. The 
results indicate that the inhibition of DNA synthesis in FCS-stimulated
astrocytes is due to a decrease in Id3 levels by the antisense. These
observations suggest that Id3 may play an important role in the regulation of
astrocyte proliferation.

PMID: 9191087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 16;272(20):13426-31.

The polymyositis-scleroderma autoantigen interacts with the helix-loop-helix
proteins E12 and E47.

Kho CJ(1), Huggins GS, Endege WO, Patterson C, Jain MK, Lee ME, Haber E.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors E12 and E47 regulate
cellular differentiation and proliferation in diverse cell types. While looking
for proteins that bind to E12 and E47 by the yeast interaction trap, we isolated 
the rat (r) homologue of the human (h) polymyositis-scleroderma autoantigen
(PM-Scl), which has been localized to the granular layer of the nucleolus and to 
distinct nucleocytoplasmic foci. The rPM-Scl and hPM-Scl homologues are 96%
similar and 91% identical. We found that rPM-Scl mRNA expression was regulated by
growth factor stimulation in cultured rat aortic smooth muscle cells. rPM-Scl
bound to E12 and E47 but not to Id3, Gax, Myb, OCT-1, or Max. The C terminus of
rPM-Scl (amino acids 283-353) interacted specifically with a 54-amino acid domain
in E12 that is distinct from the bHLH domain. Finally, cotransfection of rPM-Scl 
and E47 specifically increased the promoter activity of a luciferase reporter
construct containing an E box and did not affect the basal activity of the
reporter construct. rPM-Scl appears to be a novel non-HLH-interacting partner of 
E12/E47 that regulates E2A protein transcription.

PMID: 9148967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):1796-804.

Id3 prevents differentiation of preadipose cells.

Moldes M(1), Lasnier F, Fève B, Pairault J, Djian P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 282, Hormones et Différenciation Cellulaire, Hôpital Henri Mondor,
Créteil, France.

We have studied the expression of the Id1, Id2, and Id3 genes during adipose
differentiation of 3T3-F442A cells. All three Id mRNAs are present in preadipose 
cells, but the mRNA for Id3 is the most abundant. All three Id mRNAs sharply
decline in the course of adipose differentiation, and their virtual disappearance
precedes differentiation. The decrease in Id2 and Id3 is associated with adipose 
differentiation rather than with growth arrest since it is not observed in 3T3-C2
cells, a fibroblast line with a very low susceptibility to adipose conversion.
The decline in Id2 and Id3 mRNAs is associated with a reduced transcription rate 
of the two genes. Id1 mRNA is reduced in amount during adipose conversion of
3T3-F442A cells, but the decrease is also observed in resting 3T3-C2 cells and is
associated with very little decrease in transcription of the gene. Addition of
fresh serum reactivates Id3 gene expression in quiescent 3T3-C2 cells but not in 
adipose 3T3-F442A cells. Stably transformed preadipose cells expressing an Id3
cDNA under the control of a viral promoter are virtually unable to differentiate.
We postulate that the Id3 protein is a negative regulator of fat cell formation
and presumably acts by preventing an as yet unidentified basic helix-loop-helix
protein from activating the program of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC232026
PMID: 9121427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nature. 1997 Mar 27;386(6623):417-20.

Trans-activation of group II intron splicing by nuclear U5 snRNA.

Hetzer M(1), Wurzer G, Schweyen RJ, Mueller MW.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, University of
Vienna, Austria. hetzer@gem.univie.ac.at

Similarities between RNA splicing during autocatalytic excision of group II
introns and pre-mRNA processing led to the hypothesis that group II introns might
be the evolutionary predecessors of spliceosomal small nuclear RNAs. The ID3
subdomain stem-loop structure of group II introns, the proposed analogue of the
spliceosomal U5 snRNA, is thought to be essential for 5' splice site recognition 
and anchoring of the free 5' exon. Using the group II intron bI1 we have analysed
the role of ID3 in splicing. In the absence of ID3 the 5' splice site was
recognized accurately and efficiently, but exon anchoring was greatly reduced.
This step was restored in the presence of RNA fragments consisting of either the 
terminal stem-loop structure of ID3 or spliceosomal U5 snRNA. This suggests that 
the predominant role of both RNAs is to anchor the 5' exon during exon ligation. 
Furthermore, as U5 complements for the loss of ID3, a similar network of
structural RNAs may form the catalytic core of both group II introns and
spliceosomes.

PMID: 9121561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 24;272(4):2459-63.

Physical and functional interactions between the transcriptional inhibitors Id3
and ITF-2b. Evidence toward a novel mechanism regulating muscle-specific gene
expression.

Chen B(1), Lim RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Missouri, School of Medicine,
Columbia, Missouri 65212, USA.

We have used an interaction cloning strategy to identify an inhibitory isoform of
the ITF-2 transcription factor, ITF-2b, that interacts with the transcriptional
inhibitor Id3/HLH462. The interaction was confirmed in vitro, and inside intact
myogenic C2C12 cells. As expected, overexpression of either Id3/HLH462 or ITF-2b 
effectively inhibited the activation of the muscle-specific creatine kinase
promoter by the myogenic transcription factor MyoD. However, when overexpressed
simultaneously, ITF-2b and Id3/HLH462 counteracted each other's inhibitory effect
to produce a reduced overall inhibition. Moreover, while ITF-2b inhibited the
creatine kinase promoter, it acted as a weak transactivator on an artificial
promoter consisting of three tandem copies of the consensus myogenic factor DNA
binding site. Further investigation indicated that the ITF-2b/MyoD heterodimer
bound to its specific DNA binding site in vitro, and the DNA binding was
effectively blocked by Id3/HLH462. Additional analysis revealed the presence of
transcripts for both the activating (ITF-2a) and inhibitory (ITF-2b) isoforms in 
differentiating C2C12 cultures, suggesting that both isoforms might participate
in regulating the differentiation process. Taken together, this study reveals a
more complex pattern of regulatory interactions involving the helix-loop-helix
proteins than was previously anticipated.

PMID: 8999959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jan 15;25(2):423-30.

Inhibition of muscle-specific gene expression by Id3: requirement of the
C-terminal region of the protein for stable expression and function.

Chen B(1), Han BH, Sun XH, Lim RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

We have examined the role of an Id-like protein, Id3 (also known as HLH462), in
the regulation of muscle-specific gene expression. Id proteins are believed to
block expression of muscle-specific genes by preventing the dimerization between 
ubiquitous bHLH proteins (E proteins) and myogenic bHLH proteins such as MyoD.
Consistent with its putative role as an inhibitor of differentiation, Id3 mRNA
was detected in proliferating skeletal muscle cells, was further induced by basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and was down-regulated in differentiated muscle
cultures. Overexpression of Id3 efficiently inhibited the MyoD-mediated
activation of the muscle-specific creatine kinase (MCK) reporter gene. Deletion
analysis indicated that the C-terminal 15 amino acids of Id3 are critical for the
full inhibitory activity while deleting up to 42 residues from the C-terminus of 
the related protein, Id2, did not affect its ability to inhibit the MCK reporter 
gene. Chimeric protein containing the N-terminal region of Id3 and the C-terminus
of Id2 was also non-functional in transfected cells. In contrast, wild-type Id3, 
the C-terminal mutants, and the Id3/Id2 chimera could all interact with the
E-protein E47in vitro. Additional studies indicated that truncation of the Id3
C-terminus might have adversely affected the expression level of the mutant
proteins but the Id3/Id2 chimera was stably expressed. Taken together, our
results revealed a more complex requirement for the expression and proper
function of the Id family proteins than was hitherto expected.

PMCID: PMC146444
PMID: 9016574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Dyn. 1997 Jan;208(1):92-106.

Each member of the Id gene family exhibits a unique expression pattern in mouse
gastrulation and neurogenesis.

Jen Y(1), Manova K, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

We have performed a detailed comparative in situ hybridization analysis to
examine the patterns of expression of all the members of the Id gene family
(Id1-4) during murine gastrulation and neurogenesis. During gastrulation, both
Id1 and Id3 are expressed in the tissues derived from the inner cell mass from
5.5 dpc onward, whereas Id2 is expressed in tissues derived from trophoblasts.
Id4 expression is absent during this period of development. Embryonic Id1
messages are detected during gastrulation on the proximal side of the embryonic
ectoderm, which is the border between the embryo proper and the extraembryonic
tissues, and the expression of Id3 is found throughout the entire embryo proper. 
This unique pattern of expression of the different members of the Id family
suggests a nonredundant role for these genes in antagonizing the activity of bHLH
transcription factors during very early mouse development. During neurogenesis,
the expression of each member of the Id family is present in an unique pattern
along the dorsal-ventral axis of the neural tube: In the early stages of spinal
cord development, both Id1 and Id2 are expressed in the roof plate, whereas Id3
is expressed both in the roof and the floor plates. As development progresses,
the expression of both Id1 and Id3 is detected in the dividing neuroblasts,
whereas Id2 and 4 are expressed in presumptive neurons which are undergoing
maturation. The expression patterns of all the members of the Id gene family
persist throughout the entire CNS, both in the spinal cord and in the brain. In
addition, the characteristic expression of Id2 and Id4 in more mature neurons is 
reiterated both in the PNS and in the neurons of some of the sensory organs.
These data suggest that the expression of different subgroups of the Id gene
family may have different physiological consequences and thereby contributes in
unique ways to specify the differentiation state of neuronal cells during
development.

PMID: 8989524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Comput Appl Biosci. 1996 Dec;12(6):491-5.

Rule-based system for the fast identification of species of Indian Anopheline
mosquitoes.

Murty US(1), Jamil K, Krishna D, Reddy PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Division, IICT, Hyberabad, India.

In a developing country like India, classification and identification of the
species of Anopheline mosquitoes in control operations of mosquito-borne diseases
is of paramount importance. The WHO monograph, which describes the taxonomic data
in the form of a pictorial key is generally difficult to understand by a
non-taxonomist. Utilizing the principles of ID3 algorithm, a novel rule-based
system, for the fast identification of unknown species of Indian Anopheline
mosquitoes, is developed. The rule-based system is user-friendly, menu-driven and
even a novice can make use of it in the identification of the unknown species
with little practice. The above software is available on floppy disk and can be
obtained with a minimum cost. This program can be ported on 5 1/4" or 3 1/2"
floppy disk.

PMID: 9021267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Dyn. 1996 Nov;207(3):235-52.

Expression patterns of Id1, Id2, and Id3 are highly related but distinct from
that of Id4 during mouse embryogenesis.

Jen Y(1), Manova K, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The murine dominant negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH) proteins inhibit the
activities of bHLH transcription factors in diverse cell lineages (Benezra et al.
[1990] Cell 61:49-59; Christy et al [1991] Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
88:1815-1819; Sun et al [1991] Mol. Cell Biol. 11: 5603-5611; Riechmann et al.
[1994] Nucleic Acids Res. 22:749-755). Currently, there are four members in the
dnHLH family, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. In this report, we have performed a
detailed comparative in situ hybridization analysis to examine their expression
pattern during post-gastrulational mouse development. Id1, 2, and 3 are expressed
in multiple tissues, whereas Id4 expression can only be detected in neuronal
tissues and in the ventral portion of the epithelium of the developing stomach.
The regions where Id1-3 genes are expressed, such as gut, lung, kidney, tooth,
whisker, and several glandular structures, are undergoing active morphogenetic
activities. The expression patterns of Id1, 2, and 3 overlap in many organs,
except in the tissue derived from primitive gut. In the latter, Id1 and Id3
signals are detected in the mesenchyme surrounding the epithelium, whereas Id2 is
expressed within the epithelium. The difference in the patterns of expressions of
Id2-3 and Id4 suggest that the dominant negative transcriptional activity of
these two subclasses of the Id family may have different physiological
consequences.

PMID: 8922523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 27;271(39):23603-6.

Nuclear localization and regulation of Id protein through an E protein-mediated
chaperone mechanism.

Deed RW(1), Armitage S, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Campaign Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for
Cancer Research, Christie Hospital National Health Service Trust, Wilmslow Road, 
Manchester M20 9BX, United Kingdom.

Members of the Id family of helix-loop-helix proteins function as negative
regulators of DNA binding, E protein, helix-loop-helix transcription factors in
the control of cell growth, differentiation, and development. By using transient 
transfection analysis of COS cells, we show that in the absence of its E protein 
target, the Id3 protein is localized exclusively to the cytoplasm/perinuclear
region. Co-transfection with E protein (E47) results in nuclear translocation of 
the Id3 protein, a process requiring both a functional Id helix-loop-helix
dimerization domain and an E protein nuclear localization signal. Id3 that is
associated with E protein displays an extended half-life, while the E protein
itself is more rapidly turned over. These observations demonstrate that E
protein, by nuclear chaperoning Id, can regulate the available cellular pool of
its own inhibitory partner.

PMID: 8798572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. FEBS Lett. 1996 Sep 9;393(1):113-6.

Attenuated function of a variant form of the helix-loop-helix protein, Id-3,
generated by an alternative splicing mechanism.

Deed RW(1), Jasiok M, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, UK. grgrwd@picr.cr.man.ac.uk

The Id family of helix-loop-helix proteins function as negative regulators of DNA
binding, basic helix-loop-helix proteins in the regulation of cell growth and
differentiation. We report here on the identification of a 17 kDa variant of the 
14 kDa Id-3 protein termed Id-3L (long version) which possesses a unique 60 amino
acid carboxy-terminus generated by read through of a 'coding intron' and
alternative splicing. Northern analysis revealed expression of a minor 1.1 kb
Id-3L transcript together with the predominant 0.95 kb Id-3 transcript in the
majority of adult human tissues analysed. The variant Id-3L protein is
functionally distinguishable from conventional Id-3 since in in vitro DNA
mobility shift assays, it was greatly impaired in its ability to abrogate binding
of the basic helix-loop-helix protein, E47, to an E box recognition sequence.

PMID: 8804437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Aug;7(8):1067-79.

Muscle cell differentiation is inhibited by the helix-loop-helix protein Id3.

Melnikova IN(1), Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of Texas
Health Science Center, San Antonio 78245-3207, USA.

Id3 (originally named HLH462) belongs to the Id family of the helix-loop-helix
transcription factors. Members of the Id family do not contain basic DNA binding 
regions adjacent to the helix-loop-helix dimerization domain and are, therefore, 
hypothesized to act as negative regulators of other helix-loop-helix proteins by 
preventing the formation of functional dimers. We have investigated the potential
role of Id3 in the control of muscle cell differentiation. Id3 mRNA is expressed 
at a high level in proliferating myoblasts and is down-regulated following
induction of differentiation. We show that stable overexpression of Id3 mRNA
inhibits differentiation of the Sol 8 muscle cell line. Both the HLH and
COOH-terminal domains of Id3 are necessary and sufficient for its
dominant-negative activity in muscle cells. DNA-binding activity present in
nuclear extracts prepared from Id3-overexpressing cells was significantly reduced
when compared to the wild-type or vector-transfected cells. Finally, we show by
in situ hybridization that the Id3 mRNA is co-expressed with the myogenic
regulatory factor myogenin in somites and developing muscle during embryogenesis,
although unlike the myogenic regulatory factors, Id3 is also expressed in many
other locations in the embryo. These data support a model in which Id3 negatively
regulates muscle differentiation by inhibiting the DNA-binding activities of the 
myogenic regulatory factors.

PMID: 8853903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Aug;7(8):1059-66.

Regulation of cell differentiation in C2C12 myoblasts by the Id3 helix-loop-helix
protein.

Atherton GT(1), Travers H, Deed R, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital National Health Service Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom.

To investigate the biological functions of the helix-loop-helix Id3 protein, we
have examined the effects of ectopic modulation of Id3 expression on in vitro
induced differentiation of mouse C2C12 myoblast cells. Transient and stable C2C12
transfectants expressing either inducible or constitutive levels of exogenous Id3
were impaired in their ability to differentiate in response to removal of
mitogenic serum growth factors. Stable Id3 transfectants displayed an enhanced
proliferative capacity associated with a delay in exit from the cell cycle in
response to differentiation induction. Antisense blockade of Id3 potentiated
differentiation and exit from S phase of the cell cycle. These observations
suggest that Id3 functions as a negative regulator of differentiation by
integrating mitogenic growth factor signaling into the gene regulatory program
maintaining cell cycle progression.

PMID: 8853902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Physiol. 1996 Aug;271(2 Pt 2):H498-506.

Electrophysiological characteristics of cloned skeletal and cardiac muscle sodium
channels.

Chahine M(1), Deschene I, Chen LQ, Kallen RG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Laval Hospital, St. Foy, Quebec, Canada.
MOHAMED.CHAHINE@PHC.ULAVAL.CA

The alpha-subunit encoding for voltage-gated sodium channels rSkM1 (rat skeletal 
muscle subtype 1) and hH1 (human heart subtype 1) has been cloned and expressed
by various groups under various conditions in Xenopus oocytes and the tsA201 (HEK
293) mammalian cell line derived from human embryonic kidney cells. In this
study, we have expressed hH1 and rSkM1 in tsA201 cells for comparison under the
same conditions using patch-clamp methods. Our results show significant
differences in the current-voltage (I-V) relationship, kinetics of current decay,
voltage dependence of steady-state inactivation, and the time constant for
recovery from inactivation. We studied several rSkM1/hH1 chimeric sodium channels
to identify the structural regions responsible for the different biophysical
behavior of the two channel subtypes. Exchanging the interdomain (ID3-4) loops,
thought to contain the inactivation particle, between rSkM1 and hH1 had no effect
on the electrophysiological behaviors, including inactivation, indicating that
the differences in channel subtype characteristics are determined by parts of the
channel other than the ID3-4 segment. The data on a chimeric channel in which D1 
and D4 are derived from hH1 while D2 and D3 and the ID1-2, ID2-3, and ID3-4 loops
are from rSkM1 show that D1 and/or D4 seem to be responsible for the slower
kinetics of inactivation of hH1 while D2 and/or D3 appear to contain the
determinants for the differences in the I-V relationship, steady-state
inactivation (h infinity) curve, and the kinetics of the recovery from
inactivation.

PMID: 8770089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 15;24(14):2813-20.

E2A basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors are negatively regulated by
serum growth factors and by the Id3 protein.

Loveys DA(1), Streiff MB, Kato GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Id3, a member of the Id multigene family of dominant negative helix-loop-helix
transcription factors, is induced sharply in murine fibroblasts by serum growth
factors. To identify relevant targets of Id3 activity, the yeast two-hybrid
system was used to identify proteins that dimerize with Id3. Four murine cDNAs
were identified in the screen, all of which encode helix-loop-helix proteins:
E12, E47, ALF1 and Id4. Co-immunoprecipitation assays confirm that Id3 interacts 
with E12, E47 and two alternative splice products of ALF1 in vitro. Id3 disrupts 
DNA binding by these proteins in vitro and blocks transcriptional activation by
these factors in cultured murine cells. Additionally, Id3 shows evidence of
interacting with the related proteins E2-2 and MyoD, but not c-Myc. These results
suggest that Id3 can function as a general negative regulator of the
basic-helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors exemplified by the 'E'
proteins and MyoD. Although it was previously suspected that E2A is
constitutively expressed, our data indicate that E2A is induced in quiescent
fibroblasts, by growth factor withdrawal but not by contact inhibition of cell
proliferation. These observations extend the role of Id3 in the functional
antagonism of E2A-class transcription factors, and suggest that E2A proteins may 
mediate growth inhibition.

PMCID: PMC145994
PMID: 8759016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Blood. 1996 Jun 15;87(12):5225-31.

Id2 expression increases with differentiation of human myeloid cells.

Ishiguro A(1), Spirin KS, Shiohara M, Tobler A, Gombart AF, Israel MA, Norton JD,
Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Id proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional factors that lack the
basic DNA binding domain. The Id proteins have been reported generally to
function as inhibitors of cell differentiation, and their gene expression is
often downregulated during cell differentiation. We examined the expression of
human Id mRNAs by Northern hybridization in 11 human myeloid cell lines, several 
myeloid cell lines induced to differentiate, fresh myeloid leukemia samples, and 
normal human myeloid cells. Id2 mRNA was expressed in myelomonoblastic and
monoblastic leukemic cells (PLB-985, THP-1, and U-937) but was weakly expressed
in myeloblastic leukemic cells (KG-1 and HL-60). Id2 mRNA levels markedly
increased with induction of differentiation of myeloid blasts (HL-60, PLB-985,
THP-1, and U-937) toward either granulocytes or macrophages. Examination of fresh
acute myeloid leukemic samples from 22 individuals also showed prominent Id2 mRNA
expression in those samples having more differentiated blasts. Using the
French-American-British classification, only 2 of 8 M0/M1 samples expressed Id2
mRNA; however, 10 of 13 M2/M3/M4 samples expressed it. In normal human myeloid
cells, Id2 mRNA was expressed in cultured macrophages from bone marrow and in
mature granulocytes and monocytes from peripheral blood. The half-life of Id2
mRNA was short (1 hour), and its expression was inducible by cessation of protein
synthesis. Id3 mRNA was moderately expressed in monoblastic cell lines (THP-1 and
U-937), and levels decreased with their differentiation. Almost no Id3 expression
was detectable in either other myeloid leukemia lines, fresh leukemic samples, or
normal human myeloid cells by Northern analyses. Id1 mRNA was not detected by
polymerase chain reaction in either leukemic or normal myeloid cells except in
K562 myeloid/erythroid cells. These results showed that Id2 mRNA was
constitutively expressed in more mature myeloid blast cells and level markedly
increased with terminal myeloid differentiation, suggesting that Id2 protein may 
inhibit an HLH transcriptional complex that normally represses myeloid
differentiation.

PMID: 8652837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jun 8;785:337-9.

Expression of the ID1 and ID3 genes during chondrocyte differentiation.

Thornemo M(1), Jansson ES, Lindahl A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Endocrinology and Metabolism, Institute of Laboratory
Medicine, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

PMID: 8702173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Comput Biomed Res. 1996 Jun;29(3):153-61.

Artificial intelligence in pediatrics: important clinical signs in newborn
syndromes.

Braaten O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

New methods are warranted in the field of syndromology. This study is an
exploration into whether an artificial intelligence method (ID3) could provide a 
new angle for approaching syndromes. Diagnosing syndromes in the newborn is
difficult. The accepted approach is to look for individual clinical signs that
add up to a syndrome diagnosis. Of all possible clinical signs, one would want to
extract the signs with the strongest predictive power. I used the ID3 algorithm
to extract predictive clinical signs from a catalogue of syndromes (Birth Defects
Encyclopedia Online; BDEO). Using information from BDEO, files of randomly
generated "patients" were created. The signs consistently high in the
identification tree were long philtrum, short palpebral fissures, low-set ears,
and hepatosplenomegaly. The program used featured a crude "expert system" based
on the ID3 algorithm. When using one-half of the data set as a training set and
the other half as a testbed, a correct classification rate of 92.1-98.1% was
attained. When the ID3 expert system was tested against cases from a clinical
database (Pictures of Standard Syndromes and Undiagnosed Malformations), the
correct classification rate was less than 20%. This may not necessarily reflect
faults with the ID3 approach, but possibly biases in the clinical database. In
syndromology no "criterion standards" exist that can confirm a diagnosis. The
statistical method of cluster analysis does not require prior knowledge of
diagnoses and will make a tree of syndromes based upon clinical signs. A cluster 
analysis was performed as a validity check to provide a tree for comparison with 
the ID3 tree. There was a reasonable degree of agreement between the two.
Applying artificial intelligence methods to this field highlights problems with
basic assumptions and philosophical aspects of syndrome diagnosis.

PMID: 8812067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2570-8.

Id2 specifically alters regulation of the cell cycle by tumor suppressor
proteins.

Lasorella A(1), Iavarone A, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Preuss Laboratory for Molecular Neuro-oncology, Department of Neurological
Surgery 94143, USA.

Cells which are highly proliferative typically lack expression of differentiated,
lineage-specific characteristics. Id2, a member of the helix-loop-helix (HLH)
protein family known to inhibit cell differentiation, binds to the retinoblastoma
protein (pRb) and abolishes its growth-suppressing activity. We found that Id2
but not Id1 or Id3 was able to bind in vitro not only pRb but also the related
proteins p107 and p130. Also, an association between Id2 and p107 or p130 was
observed in vivo in transiently transfected Saos-2 cells. In agreement with these
results, expression of Id1 or Id3 did not affect the block of cell cycle
progression mediated by pRb. Conversely, expression of Id2 specifically reversed 
the cell cycle arrest induced by each of the three members of the pRb family.
Furthermore, the growth-suppressive activities of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors p16 and p21 were efficiently antagonized by high levels of Id2 but not
by Id1 Id3. Consistent with the role of p16 as a selective inhibitor of pRb and
pRb-related protein kinase activity, p16-imposed cell cycle arrest was completely
abolished by Id2. Only a partial reversal of p21-induced growth suppression was
observed, which correlated with the presence of a functional pRb. We also
documented decreased levels of cyclin D1 protein and mRNA and the loss of cyclin 
D1-cdk4 complexes in cells constitutively expressing Id2. These data provide
evidence for important Id2-mediated alterations in cell cycle components normally
involved in the regulatory events of cell cycle progression, and they highlight a
specific role for Id2 as an antagonist of multiple tumor suppressor proteins.

PMCID: PMC231247
PMID: 8649364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 May 23;1294(2):138-46.

A homology model of the Id-3 helix-loop-helix domain as a basis for
structure-function predictions.

Wibley J(1), Deed R, Jasiok M, Douglas K, Norton J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Manchester, UK.

The function of the dominant negative Id (inhibitor of differentiation)
helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins is to dimerize with, and prevent the DNA binding 
of basic HLH (bHLH) transcription factors. A three-dimensional homology model was
constructed for the HLH domain of human Id3 based on the X-ray crystal structures
of the E47, MyoD, and Max bHLH proteins. The model showed that, in contrast to
bHLH proteins, Id proteins appear able to dimerize without DNA stabilization
because of better packing of the hydrophobic core, and the absence of
destabilizing polar loop residues and of repulsive positive charges in the
monomer interface at the base of the four alpha-helix bundle. This prediction was
tested by in vitro protein-binding experiments, which showed that Id3 did indeed 
self-associate. It also showed that the inability of Id proteins to bind DNA
arises from the non-basic, poorly defined, random coil structure of the region
corresponding to that responsible for bHLH DNA-binding. A model of the Id1
protein was constructed and revealed a potential site of charge-charge repulsion 
in the hypothetical homodimer interface that may explain its observed inability
to form homodimers.

PMID: 8645731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genomics. 1996 Feb 15;32(1):155-8.

Cloning and characterization of CpG islands of the human chromosome 1p36 region.

Ellmeier W(1), Barnas C, Kobrna A, Kleiner E, Kurzbauer R, Weith A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

CpG islands were identified and localized to chromosome 1p36 by means of
pulsed-field gel blot hybridization with 1p36-specific microclone probes. Five
CpG islands, designated CpG17, CpG28, CpG60, CpG112a, and CpG112b, were
molecularly cloned from corresponding cosmids. All five islands are associated
with transcribed sequences, as shown by RNA blot hybridizations. Screening of
cDNA libraries with the island-specific genomic probes led to the isolation of
two cDNA clones to date. These encode the human transcription factor E2F-2 and
the dominant-negative helix-loop-helix gene ID3, respectively. Pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis analysis also revealed that these two genes are located next to
each other at a distance of about 25 kb.

PMID: 8786109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Artif Intell Med. 1996 Feb;8(1):23-36.

Evaluation of automatic knowledge acquisition techniques in the diagnosis of
acute abdominal pain. Acute Abdominal Pain Study Group.

Ohmann C(1), Moustakis V, Yang Q, Lang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Trauma Surgery, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany. ohmannch@uni-duesseldorf.de

Clinical diagnosis in acute abdominal pain is still a major problem.
Computer-aided diagnosis offers some help; however, existing systems still
produce high error rates. We therefore tested machine learning techniques in
order to improve standard statistical systems. The investigation was based on a
prospective clinical database with 1254 cases, 46 diagnostic parameters and 15
diagnoses. Independence Bayes and the automatic rule induction techniques ID3,
NewId, PRISM, CN2, C4.5 and ITRULE were trained with 839 cases and separately
tested on 415 cases. No major differences in overall accuracy were observed
(43-48%), except for NewId, which was below the average. Between the different
techniques some similarities were found, but also considerable differences with
respect to specific diagnoses. Machine learning techniques did not improve the
results of the standard model Independence Bayes. Problem dimensionality, sample 
size and model complexity are major factors influencing diagnostic accuracy in
computer-aided diagnosis of acute abdominal pain.

PMID: 8963379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem Soc Trans. 1996 Feb;24(1):5S.

Regulation of Id-HLH transcription factor function in third messenger signalling.

Deed RW(1), Armitage S, Brown M, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, UK.

PMID: 8674722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem Soc Trans. 1996 Feb;24(1):4S.

Early response gene expression in Ras oncoprotein signalling.

Travers H(1), Atherton GT, Deed RW, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester.

PMID: 8674709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Circ Res. 1996 Feb;78(2):244-52.

Multiple domains contribute to the distinct inactivation properties of human
heart and skeletal muscle Na+ channels.

Makita N(1), Bennett PB Jr, George AL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tenn, USA.

Voltage-gated Na+ channels are essential for the normal electrical excitability
of neuronal and striated muscle membranes. Distinct isoforms of the Na+ channel
alpha-subunit have been identified by molecular cloning, and their functional
attributes have been defined by heterologous expression coupled with
electrophysiological recording. Two closely related Na+ channel alpha-subunit
isoforms, hH1 (human heart) and hSkM1 (human skeletal muscle), exhibit
differences in their inactivation properties and in their response to the
coexpressed beta 1-subunit. To localize regions that contribute to inactivation
and to beta 1-subunit response, we have exploited these functional differences by
studying chimeric channels composed of segments from both hH1 and hSkM1. Chimeras
in which one or more of the cytoplasmic interdomain regions (ID1-2, ID2-3, and
ID3-4) were exchanged between hH1 and hSkM1 exhibit inactivation properties
identical with the background channel isoform, suggesting that these regions are 
not sufficient to cause gating differences. In contrast, inactivation properties 
of chimeras composed of approximately equal halves of the two channel isoforms
were intermediate between hH1 and hSkM1. Furthermore, the response to the
coexpressed beta 1-subunit was dependent on structures located in the
carboxy-terminal half of the alpha-subunit, although domains D3, D4, and the
carboxy terminal are not singularly responsible for this effect. These data
indicate that inactivation differences between hH1 and hSkM1 are determined by
multiple alpha-subunit domains.

PMID: 8575068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. 1996;26(4):660-5.

An extended procedure of constructing neural networks for supervised dichotomy.

Lee SJ(1), Jone MT.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Electr. Eng., Nat. Sun Yat-Sen Univ., Kaohsiung.

K.J. Clos and N. Liu (1992) proposed a neural network generation procedure for
supervised two-class discretization based on a continuous ID3 algorithm. The
method constructs neural networks consisting of neurons with linear activation
functions. We extend the procedure to allow decision boundaries to be any
arbitrary function. The advantage of the extension is revealed by the decrease in
size of the generated neural networks.

PMID: 18263066  [PubMed]


99. Leuk Res. 1995 Dec;19(12):989-96.

Expression of Id2 and Id3 mRNA in human lymphocytes.

Ishiguro A(1), Spirin K, Shiohara M, Tobler A, Norton JD, Rigolet M, Shimbo T,
Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of Medicine
90048, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are involved in cellular growth and 
differentiation. The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding and differentiation) HLH
proteins, in a dominantly negative fashion, regulate transcriptional activities
of basic HLH proteins. We examined by northern hybridization the expression of
Id2 and Id3 mRNA in human leukemia/lymphoma lines and patient samples, as well as
resting and activated normal human lymphocytes from peripheral blood (PBL). The
Id2 mRNA was abundantly expressed in 5/12 T-cell and 3/4 B-cell lines, and Id3
mRNA was detected in 4/12 T-cell and 3/4 B-cell lines. Interestingly, Id2, but
not Id3, mRNA was strongly expressed in 4/5 T-cell lines infected with human
T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) (ATL-1k, MT-2, S-LB1) and type II (Mo).
Another unexpected finding was that T-cell leukemias and T-cell lines often
expressed either Id2 or Id3 mRNA. In addition, resting PBL constitutively
expressed prominent levels of Id2 mRNA, but not Id3 mRNA. Upon PHA-stimulation,
Id2 expression decreased and Id3 levels increased with biphasic kinetics. Taken
together, our studies revealed three unexpected findings which require further
analysis: (1) expression of Id2 mRNA is often associated with lymphocytic
transformation by HTLV-I or -II; (2) T-cells usually express either Id2 or Id3
mRNA, but B-cells often express both simultaneously; (3) non-dividing, normal PBL
express high levels of Id2 and no Id3 mRNA; and with the onset of cellular
proliferation, levels of Id2 mRNA decrease while levels of Id3 mRNA increase,
suggesting that regulation of expression of these closely related genes is
disparate.

PMID: 8632670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genomics. 1995 Nov 20;30(2):385-7.

Chromosomal assignment of human ID1 and ID2 genes.

Mathew S(1), Chen W, Murty VV, Benezra R, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) proteins regulate transcription during
development by interacting with transcription factors. Three human genes, ID1,
ID2, and ID3, have been identified that belong to this family of transcription
regulators. We show, by somatic cell hybridization and fluorescence in situ
hybridization experiments, that ID1 and ID2 are localized at 20q11 and 2p25,
respectively.

PMID: 8586447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Investig Med. 1995 Oct;43(5):468-76.

A comparison of performance of mathematical predictive methods for medical
diagnosis: identifying acute cardiac ischemia among emergency department
patients.

Selker HP(1), Griffith JL, Patil S, Long WJ, D'Agostino RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New England Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

BACKGROUND: There is increasing interest in mathematical methods for the
prediction of medical outcomes. Three methods have attracted particular
attention: logistic regression, classification trees (such as ID3 and CART), and 
neural networks. To compare their relative performance, we used a large clinical 
database to develop and compare models using these methods.
METHODS: Each modeling method was used to generate predictive instruments for
acute cardiac ischemia (which includes acute myocardial infarction and unstable
angina pectoris), using prospectivel-collected clinical data on 5773 patients,
who presented over a two year period to six hospitals' emergency departments with
chest pain or symptoms suggesting acute ischemia. This data set was then split
into training (n = 3453) and test (n = 2320) sets. Of 200 available variables,
modeling was restricted to those available within the first 10 minutes of
emergency department care (history, physical exam, and electrocardiogram).
RESULTS: When the number of variables was limited to eight, representing a
practical number for input in the real-time clinical setting, the logistic
regression's receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve area, as a measure of 
diagnostic performance, was 0.887; the classification tree model's ROC curve area
was 0.858, and the neural network's ROC curve area was 0.902. When the number of 
variables used by a model was not limited, the logistic regression's ROC area was
0.905, the classification tree model's 0.861, and the neural network's 0.923.
Among these models the neural networks had noticeably poorer calibration. When
the outputs from each of these unrestricted models were presented to each of the 
other methods as an additional independent variable, the ROC areas of the new
"hybrid" models were not significantly better than the original unlimited models 
(ROC areas 0.858 to 0.920).
CONCLUSIONS: Logistic regression, classification tree, and neural network models 
all can provide excellent predictive performance of medical outcomes for clinical
decision aids and policy models. Their ultimate limitations seem due to the
availability of the information in data (a "data barrier") rather than their
respective intrinsic properties. Choices between these methods would seem to be
most appropriately based on the needs of the specific application, rather than on
the premise that any one of these methods is intrinsically more powerful.

PMID: 8528758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Jul;6(7):837-43.

Mutually exclusive expression of two dominant-negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH)
genes, Id4 and Id3, in the developing brain of the mouse suggests distinct
regulatory roles of these dnHLH proteins during cellular proliferation and
differentiation of the nervous system.

Riechmann V(1), Sablitzky F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Laboratorium, Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Cologne, Germany.

The dominant-negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH) proteins Id1 and Id2 have been
implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation in
myogenesis, neurogenesis, and/or hematopoiesis. To further investigate the
functional role of dnHLH proteins, we have performed in situ hybridization
analysis on serial sections of mouse embryos from days 9.5 to 17.5 postcoitus to 
establish the spatial and temporal expression patterns of Id3 (HLH462) and Id4, a
recently isolated fourth member of the mammalian dnHLH gene family. Id3
transcripts are present throughout embryogenesis and are found in neural cells as
well as in cartilage primordia and in epithelial cells lining a variety of
organs. The spatial expression pattern of Id3 overlaps considerably with the
previously determined pattern of Id1. Id4 expression, which is up-regulated
during embryogenesis, is restricted to specific cells of the central and
peripheral nervous system. Within the detection limits of in situ hybridization, 
Id4 and Id3 expression is mutually exclusive in neural precursor cells of the
developing brain, suggesting distinct regulatory functions for these dnHLH
proteins during neurogenesis.

PMID: 7547505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5520-4.

A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within human chromosome
1p36.2-36.3.

White PS(1), Maris JM, Beltinger C, Sulman E, Marshall HN, Fujimori M, Kaufman
BA, Biegel JA, Allen C, Hilliard C, Valentine MB, Look AT, Enomoto H, Sakiyama S,
Brodeur GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Deletion of the short arm of human chromosome 1 is the most common cytogenetic
abnormality observed in neuroblastoma. To characterize the region of consistent
deletion, we performed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) studies on 122 neuroblastoma 
tumor samples with 30 distal chromosome 1p polymorphisms. LOH was detected in 32 
of the 122 tumors (26%). A single region of LOH, marked distally by D1Z2 and
proximally by D1S228, was detected in all tumors demonstrating loss. Also, cells 
from a patient with a constitutional deletion of 1p36, and from a neuroblastoma
cell line with a small 1p36 deletion, were analyzed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Cells from both sources had interstitial deletions of 1p36.2-36.3 
which overlapped the consensus region of LOH defined by the tumors. Interstitial 
deletion in the constitutional case was confirmed by allelic loss studies using
the panel of polymorphic markers. Four proposed candidate genes--DAN, ID3
(heir-1), CDC2L1 (p58), and TNFR2--were shown to lie outside of the consensus
region of allelic loss, as defined by the above deletions. These results more
precisely define the location of a neuroblastoma suppressor gene within
1p36.2-36.3, eliminating 33 centimorgans of proximal 1p36 from consideration.
Furthermore, a consensus region of loss, which excludes the four leading
candidate genes, was found in all tumors with 1p36 LOH.

PMCID: PMC41727
PMID: 7777541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Dyn. 1995 Jun;203(2):163-73.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix gene Id3 during murine embryonic development.

Ellmeier W(1), Weith A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

The family of dominant-negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH) transcriptional
modulators consists of four mammalian genes known to date: Id1, Id2, Id3 (Id3 was
formerly designated HLH462 or HEIR1 or HLH1R21), and Id4. We have performed a
detailed study of Id3 expression in mouse embryos in order to gain insight into
the possible developmental control functions of this gene and to compare its
expression to that of other mammalian dnHLH genes. Employing RNA in situ
hybridization on sectioned mouse embryos of gestational stages E9.5-17.5 and
neonatal head, we generally detected a high abundance of transcripts at early
stages that gradually declined at most sites toward E15.5. Expression of Id3 in
embryos was detected in brain, spinal cord, olfactory system, branchial arches,
limbs, sclerotome, endocardiac cushions, the outer lining of the gut, lung,
retina, the collecting system of the kidney, and in tooth anlagen. Although the
abundance of mRNA decreased toward later stages in most tissues, it remained high
in teeth and kidney. This expression pattern suggests that Id3 functions both in 
undifferentiated tissues and in organs which are in the process of
differentiation. When compared to the expression of other dnHLH genes, it becomes
obvious that the pattern of Id3 mainly coincides with that of Id1. This may
reflect a partial redundancy in gene function. Furthermore, previous experiments 
suggested a mutually exclusive expression of the proto-oncogene N-myc an Id3. The
results of the present study confirm these data.

PMID: 7655079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Jun;25(6):1770-7.

Repression of the immunoglobulin heavy chain 3' enhancer by helix-loop-helix
protein Id3 via a functionally important E47/E12 binding site: implications for
developmental control of enhancer function.

Meyer KB(1), Skogberg M, Margenfeld C, Ireland J, Pettersson S.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biology, University of
Cambridge, GB.

The activity of the immunoglobulin 3' enhancer is restricted to the late stages
of B lymphoid development. Here we further examine the molecular basis for the
temporally restricted activity of the B-lymphoid IgH 3' enhancer. We demonstrate 
that a binding site (E5 site) for the E47 and/or E12 proteins is functionally
important for enhancer activity. The multimerized E5 site acts as a B
cell-specific enhancer and, when assayed in COS cells, can be transactivated by
E47/E12 proteins. This transactivation in COS cells, as well as the activity of
the full length 3' enhancer in plasma cells, can be repressed by overexpression
of the dominant negative nuclear regulator Id3. When examining the tissue
distribution of Id3 in murine cell lines, we find that Id3 is expressed
throughout the pre-B and B cell stages, but is down-regulated at the plasma cell 
stage. Thus, Id3 may contribute to the temporal regulation of the IgH 3'
enhancer.

PMID: 7615006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Eur J Immunol. 1995 Jun;25(6):1601-8.

A syngeneic idiotype is immunogenic when borne by IgM but tolerogenic when joined
to IgG.

Reitan SK(1), Hannestad K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Tromsø School of Medicine, Norway.

Some syngeneic monoclonal antibodies (mAb) elicit immune responses like
conventional T-dependent antigens. To find out whether the heavy chain class
(isotype) plays a role for the immunogenicity of an idiotype (Id), we isolated
rare subclones of an IgM mAb (termed Id3) in which the variable region of the
heavy chain (VH) is associated with a new constant region (CH). The VH-Id3 gene
is a member of the murine 36-60 family and probably has three replacement
mutations. The light chain V gene is germ-line V lambda 2. IgM, IgG1, IgG2a and
IgG2b variants of Id3 were purified from protein-free medium and injected without
adjuvant into BALB/c mice. The parental 19S IgM mAb given subcutaneously (s.c.)
elicited a vigorous humoral response against Id3; in comparison, monomeric 8S IgM
was a much weaker immunogen. Unlike IgM, multiple challenges with the IgG switch 
variants failed to induce anti-Id3 Ab. IgG variants gained immunogenicity if they
were purified from medium containing fetal calf serum, mixed with complete
Freund's adjuvant or injected into mice primed with IgM-Id3. Pretreatment with
100 micrograms s.c. + 50 micrograms of the IgG2a variant extinguished the Ab
response to parental IgM, but the response to adjuvant-free bovine serum albumin 
was intact. Therefore, the tolerance induced by the IgG2a switch variant is
antigen-specific and not due to toxicity. Significant inhibition of the Ab
response to parental IgM was observed after treatment with 4 micrograms of the
IgG2a switch variant. Administration of the IgG1 and IgG2b switch variants also
inhibited this response significantly. Thus, the outcome of an encounter with Id3
is strongly influenced by the CH isotype to which the Id is joined. This suggests
novel ways to minimize unwanted Ab responses against Id of human therapeutic mAb.
In the context of the theory of Id networks, we suggest that dominant B cell
clones can preempt anti-Id Ab responses against themselves by early switching
from IgM to IgG secretion, before immunogenic IgM Ab have had time to activate
anti-Id B cells.

PMID: 7614988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Brain. 1995 Apr;118 ( Pt 2):547-63.

The skeletal muscle sodium and chloride channel diseases.

Hudson AJ(1), Ebers GC, Bulman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, University Hospital, London,
Ontario, Canada.

The cause of several familial muscular diseases have recently been linked to
mutations within skeletal muscle sodium and chloride channel genes. Thomsen's and
Becker's diseases are autosomal dominant and recessive, respectively, and are
caused by at least seven different mutations in the CLCN1 (ClC-1) skeletal muscle
chloride channel gene on chromosome 7q35. Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis,
paramyotonia congenita and a small heterogeneous group of related 'pure'
myotonias are autosomal dominant disorders and are due to at least 16 different
mutations in the SCN4A (SkM1) adult skeletal muscle sodium channel gene on
chromosome 17q23-25. There is generally little correlation between the position
of a mutation in the channel and the phenotype. Indeed, identical sodium channel 
mutations in unrelated subjects and sometimes in different members of the same
family can have different clinical expressions. It seems, however, that mutations
of the inactivation gate (ID3-4 loop) of the sodium channel tend to produce
paramyotonia or pure, sometimes severe, myotonia and respond most favourably to
the same medications (tocainide and mexiletine). The structure and polarity of
substituted amino acids at a mutation site, especially in highly evolutionally
conserved regions of the gene, are undoubtedly important to the expression of a
channel disease and may partly explain phenotypic variability. In addition,
genetic polymorphisms elsewhere, either in the gene or other channel-related
loci, and the net effect of other types of muscle ion channels on the electrical 
potential of the plasma membrane probably contribute to disease expression.

PMID: 7735894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mech Dev. 1995 Apr;50(2-3):119-30.

Id gene activity during Xenopus embryogenesis.

Zhang H(1), Reynaud S, Kloc M, Etkin LD, Spohr G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Genève, Switzerland.

The activity of bHLH transcription factors that are involved in cell
determination and differentiation is inhibited by Ids, HLH proteins lacking the
basic amino acid sequence element. In order to determine the role of Id during
development, we have isolated and characterized the Id genes expressed in Xenopus
embryos. Three cDNAs were characterized: XIdIa and XIdIb, which are transcribed
from one gene but differentially spliced in the 3' untranslated part, and XIdII
which is transcribed from a second copy of the gene. One of the two forms of the 
differentially spliced mRNAs exhibits, 30 nucleotides upstream from the AATAAA
site, a sequence box homologous to the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element (CPE) 
which is present also in Id2 and Id3 mRNAs from higher vertebrates. This raises
the question of whether this CPE-like element may link Id mRNA polyadenylation
and translation to the cell cycle metabolism. The Xenopus Id gene is transcribed 
at low level in oocytes and at high level in embryos, after midblastula
transition, in a large number of tissues, including the notochord, neural tube,
eye, ear, neural crest cells, presomitic mesoderm, myotomes, tailbud and dorsal
fin. In myotomes, expression is high in the areas of proliferating myoblasts and 
decreases as terminal differentiation proceeds, consistent with a function in
cell determination and differentiation and possibly also in cell cycle
regulation.

PMID: 7619724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Feb 27;207(3):916-26.

Phosphorylation of helix-loop-helix proteins ID1, ID2 and ID3.

Nagata Y(1), Shoji W, Obinata M, Todokoro K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

Id is a helix-loop-helix protein which forms heterodimer with ubiquitous and/or
tissue-specific basic helix-loop-helix proteins and inhibits their DNA binding.
It has been noted that putative phosphorylation sites for various protein kinases
exist in rat Id1, Id2 and Id3. We show here that Id1 and Id2 can be
phosphorylated in vitro by cAMP-dependent protein kinase, Id2 and Id3 by cdc2
kinase, and all three Ids by protein kinase C. The phosphorylated Id1 was
actually immunoprecipitated in nerve-growth-factor-stimulated PC12 cells. Gel
mobility shift assays, however, demonstrated that neither phosphorylation of Id
proteins by cAMP-dependent protein kinase nor phosphorylation of E47 by protein
kinase C affected the inhibition of E47 homodimer formation and its DNA binding. 
Taken together with other observations, phosphorylation of Id proteins may play a
role in regulation of cell differentiation but not directly in the dimerization
and DNA binding.

PMID: 7864897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Medinfo. 1995;8 Pt 1:809-13.

Machine learning to support diagnostics in the domain of asymptomatic liver
disease.

Babic A(1), Bodemar G, Mathiesen U, Ahlfeldt H, Franzen L, Wigertz O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Linkoping University, Sweden.

Machine learning procedures, in unsupervised and supervised manner, can enable
their users to achieve knowledge hardly comprehensible by even the best experts. 
This is true also if the clinical knowledge has been carefully assembled in a
prospective way. A data set including 165 patients with elevated routine
laboratory tests was extensively studied according to clinical history,
laboratory profile and liver biopsy. Unsupervised learning by Kohonen feature map
disclosed 4 groups of patients: the largest one with no or slight
histopathological changes (116) and three smaller, more homogenous, with more
diseased patients. Standardized histopathological scorings of the liver specimens
defined patients into two groups. Fifty-eight of them were, according to the
analysis, recommended for a liver biopsy, due to more severe degrees of
inflammation and fibrosis. One-hundred and seven of the patients, in whom liver
biopsy was retrospectively considered unnecessary, had only minor degrees of
inflammation, fibrosis and/or steatosis. Supervised learning, using the inductive
systems based on Quinlan's ID3 and CART algorithms, extracted knowledge in the
form of decision trees. This approach could define a need for biopsy either with 
a very few significant findings or by pathways containing quotients and
multiplications of the different basic items. These procedures were analyzed and 
compared for their theoretical and applicative performances. The cluster and
Fischerian discriminant analyses were performed in order to compare the
classification performance. The medical appropriateness of the obtained results
is satisfying, therefore decision support systems, outlined in this study, should
be evaluated in wider clinical practice. To achieve this goal, an example of a
Medical Logical Module (MLM), based on the Arden Syntax, is given.

PMID: 8591335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Gene. 1994 Dec 30;151(1-2):309-14.

Structural organisation and chromosomal mapping of the human Id-3 gene.

Deed RW(1), Hirose T, Mitchell EL, Santibanez-Koref MF, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Department of Gene Regulation, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, UK.

The helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of transcription factors plays a central role
in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation and tumourigenesis. Members of 
the Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) class of these nuclear proteins are able to
heterodimerise with and thereby antagonise the functions of other transcription
factors of this family. We report here on the genomic organisation of the human
Id3 (HLH 1R21/heir1) gene. Comparison with the two other mammalian Id genes, Id1 
and Id2, reveals a highly conserved protein coding gene organisation consistent
with evolution from a common, ancestral Id-like gene. In addition, by using a
yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone of Id3, we have fine-scale mapped the
gene to chromosome band 1p36.1 by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) and, 
using the same FISH technique, we have detected heterogeneity in
tumour-associated 1p36 chromosome translocations.

PMID: 7828896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 24;91(11):4985-8.

Id proteins control growth induction in mammalian cells.

Barone MV(1), Pepperkok R, Peverali FA, Philipson L.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

Id1, Id2, and Id3 (HLH462) dimerize with members of the basic helix-loop-helix
protein family, but due to the absence of the basic region, the resulting
heterodimers cannot bind DNA. Therefore Id-type proteins negatively regulate DNA 
binding of the basic helix-loop-helix proteins. Here we report that Id1, Id2, and
Id3 are induced shortly after serum stimulation in arrested NIH 3T3. Antisense
oligonucleotides against the Id mRNAs delay the reentry of arrested cells into
the cell cycle elicited by stimulation with serum or growth factors. Antisense
oligonucleotides against all three Id mRNAs are more effective than individual
ones. Combined, these results indicate that Id proteins are involved in the
control of growth induction.

PMCID: PMC43914
PMID: 8197168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Mar 30;199(3):1355-62.

Activation of helix-loop-helix proteins Id1, Id2 and Id3 during neural
differentiation.

Nagata Y(1), Todokoro K.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
RIKEN, Ibaraki, Japan.

Id is a nuclear factor containing a helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif. It has been
reported that Id functions as an inhibitor of cell differentiation and its gene
expression is down-regulated during cell differentiation. We have characterized
three Id-related cDNAs, Id1, Id2 and Id3, isolated from nerve growth factor
(NGF)-stimulated PC12 cells. Structural analysis revealed that all three Id's
contain putative phosphorylation sites for cyclic AMP-dependent kinase, casein
kinase II and protein kinase C near and inside the HLH motifs. In contradiction
to the previous reports, Northern blot analysis revealed that NGF induces rapid
and transient increase of all three Id gene transcriptions. Furthermore, in situ 
hybridization of rat embryo showed that all three Id genes are highly expressed
in neural precursors rather than differentiated neural cells. These results
indicate that Id family members may function as immediate-early gene products,
and that the expression of the Id family may play an important role in the early 
stage of neural differentiation.

PMID: 7908517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 11;22(5):749-55.

The expression pattern of Id4, a novel dominant negative helix-loop-helix
protein, is distinct from Id1, Id2 and Id3.

Riechmann V(1), van Crüchten I, Sablitzky F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Laboratorium in der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft Carl-von-Linné-Weg
10, Köln, Germany.

Molecular interaction between transcription factors containing an
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain is known to regulate differentiation in
several cellular systems including myogenesis, neurogenesis and haematopoiesis.
DNA-binding activity of the bHLH proteins is mediated via the basic region and is
dependent upon formation of homo- and/or heterodimers of these transcription
factors. Dominant negative (dn) HLH proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3 and emc) also contain
the HLH-dimerization domain but lack the DNA-binding basic region. Formation of
heterodimers between dnHLH and bHLH proteins abolishes the DNA-binding activity
of the latter. Concordantly, it was shown that the dnHLH protein Id1 inhibits
differentiation of muscle and myeloid cells in vitro. Therefore, it was
postulated that dnHLH proteins serve as general antagonists of cell
differentiation. We have isolated and characterized a novel mouse dnHLH gene,
designated Id4. The Id4 protein contains a HLH domain highly conserved among the 
dnHLH proteins from mouse and drosophila. Outside of the HLH domain, three
additional short regions of the dnHLH proteins show some degree of homology.
DNA-binding of E47 homo- as well as E47/MyoD heterodimers is inhibited by Id4.
Transcription of the Id4 gene results in three RNA molecules of 3.7, 2.0 and 1.7 
kb which are presumably a result of differential splicing and/or alternatively
used polyadenylation sites within the 3' untranslated region. During
embryogenesis, Id4 expression is up-regulated between day 9.5 and 13.5 of
gestation. The highest expression in adult tissues was detected in testis, brain 
and kidney. Comparison of the expression patterns of the four mouse dnHLH genes
revealed that Id4 expression differs from the more restricted expression of Id2
as well as from the widespread expression of Id1 and Id3.

PMCID: PMC307878
PMID: 8139914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1994;385:3-9.

Characterization of the region of consistent deletion within 1p36 in
neuroblastomas.

White PS(1), Fujimori M, Marshall HN, Kaufman BA, Brodeur GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110.

PMID: 7972224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Arch Virol. 1994;138(3-4):331-40.

Analogues of peptide 9-21 of glycoprotein D of herpes simplex virus and their
binding to group VII monoclonal antibodies.

Welling-Wester S(1), Feijlbrief M, Koedijk DG, Drijfhout JW, Weijer WJ, Scheffer 
AJ, Welling GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Medical Microbiology, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, The
Netherlands.

Several analogues of the amino acid sequence of peptide 9-21 of glycoprotein D of
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) were synthesized and investigated for
reactivity with different group VII monoclonal antibodies, Mabs LP14, ID3, 170,
HD4, A16, EII-24 and Ev-10, in a competition enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Replacement of Arg at position 16 by His resulted in a loss of binding
with the group VII Mabs. Substitution of Pro at residue 14 by Leu gave a reduced 
binding for a number of Mabs and loss of binding for Mab A16. Substitution of Lys
at position 10 by Glu gave reduced binding for three out of the seven Mabs. In
addition substitutions of Met at position 11 by norleucine and oxidized Met were 
studied. The boundaries of the epitope cluster were mapped by studying synthetic 
variants of peptide 9-21 which were shorter either at the C-terminus or at the
N-terminus, or both. Peptide 10-18 and peptide 9-17 were the shortest peptides,
which were still reactive with the group VII Mabs. Mab HD4 requires the
N-terminus of peptide 9-21 for effective binding, while for binding of other Mabs
contribution of the residues in the C-terminal part of this peptide is more
important.

PMID: 7527999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Biomed Tech (Berl). 1993 Apr;38(4):73-80.

Towards automated sleep classification in infants using symbolic and subsymbolic 
approaches.

Kubat M(1), Flotzinger D, Pfurtscheller G.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig-Boltzmann Institute of Medical Informatics and Neuroinformatics, Graz
University of Technology.

The paper addresses the problem of automatic sleep classification. A special
effort is made to find a method of extracting reasonable descriptions of the
individual sleep stages from sample measurements of EGG, EMG, EOG, etc., and from
a classification of these measurements provided by an expert. The method should
satisfy three requirements: classification accuracy, interpretability of the
results, and the ability to select the relevant and discard the irrelevant
variables. The solution suggested in this paper consists of a combination of the 
subsymbolic algorithm LVQ with the symbolic decision tree generator ID3. Results 
demonstrating the feasibility and utility of our approach are also presented.

PMID: 8507806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Comput Biomed Res. 1993 Feb;26(1):74-97.

A comparison of logistic regression to decision-tree induction in a medical
domain.

Long WJ(1), Griffith JL, Selker HP, D'Agostino RB.

Author information: 
(1)MIT Laboratory for Computer Science, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

This paper compares the performance of logistic regression to decision-tree
induction in classifying patients as having acute cardiac ischemia. This
comparison was performed using the database of 5773 patients originally used to
develop the logistic-regression tool and test it prospectively. Both the ability 
to classify cases and the ability to estimate the probability of ischemia were
compared on the default tree generated by the C4 version of ID3. They were also
compared on a tree optimized on the learning set by increased pruning of
overspecified branches, and on a tree incorporating clinical considerations. Both
the LR tool and the improved trees performed at a level fairly close to that of
the physicians, although the LR tool definitely performed better than the
decision tree. There were a number of differences in the performance of the two
methods, shedding light on their strengths and weaknesses.

PMID: 8444029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. EMBO J. 1992 Jul;11(7):2563-71.

Mutually exclusive expression of a helix-loop-helix gene and N-myc in human
neuroblastomas and in normal development.

Ellmeier W(1), Aguzzi A, Kleiner E, Kurzbauer R, Weith A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.

We have isolated a novel human gene encoding a helix-loop-helix (HLH) protein by 
molecularly cloning chromosome 1p36-specific CpG islands. The gene termed heir-1 
was localized to the neuroblastoma consensus deletion at 1p36.2-p36.12. Its
predicted protein is 95.8% identical to the mouse HLH462 protein and has clear
homology to the mouse Id and Drosophila emc proteins. Heir-1 does not encode a
basic DNA binding domain as found in basic HLH proteins. The gene is expressed
specifically at high abundance in adult lung, kidney and adrenal medulla, but not
in adult brain. Despite prominent heir-1 expression in adrenal medulla, which is 
a prime target for neuroblastomas, 10 out of 12 neuroblastoma-derived cell lines 
revealed very low levels of heir-1 mRNA. Low heir-1 expression was generally
found in tumor cell lines with N-myc overexpression, whereas the two cell lines
displaying high heir-1 levels did not overexpress N-myc. Mutually exclusive
expression of both genes was also found by in situ hybridization in developing
mouse tissues, particularly in the forebrain neuroectoderm. We conclude that
heir-1 expression is reduced specifically in the majority of neuroblastomas and
suggest an inverse correlation between heir-1 and N-myc expression in
neuroblastoma tumors and in embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC556731
PMID: 1628620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. IEEE Trans Neural Netw. 1992;3(2):280-91.

A machine learning method for generation of a neural network architecture: a
continuous ID3 algorithm.

Cios KJ(1), Liu N.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Electr. Eng., Toledo Univ., OH.

The relation between the decision trees generated by a machine learning algorithm
and the hidden layers of a neural network is described. A continuous ID3
algorithm is proposed that converts decision trees into hidden layers. The
algorithm allows self-generation of a feedforward neural network architecture. In
addition, it allows interpretation of the knowledge embedded in the generated
connections and weights. A fast simulated annealing strategy, known as Cauchy
training, is incorporated into the algorithm to escape from local minima. The
performance of the algorithm is analyzed on spiral data.

PMID: 18276429  [PubMed]


121. Int J Biomed Comput. 1992 Jan;30(1):57-67.

Inductive learning of thyroid functional states using the ID3 algorithm. The
effect of poor examples on the learning result.

Forsström J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Turku, Finland.

The ID3 algorithm for inductive learning was tested using preclassified material 
for patients suspected to have a thyroid illness. Classification followed a
rule-based expert system for the diagnosis of thyroid function. Thus, the
knowledge to be learned was limited to the rules existing in the knowledge base
of that expert system. The learning capability of the ID3 algorithm was tested
with an unselected learning material (with some inherent missing data) and with a
selected learning material (no missing data). The selected learning material was 
a subgroup which formed a part of the unselected learning material. When the
number of learning cases was increased, the accuracy of the program improved.
When the learning material was large enough, an increase in the learning material
did not improve the results further. A better learning result was achieved with
the selected learning material not including missing data as compared to
unselected learning material. With this material we demonstrate a weakness in the
ID3 algorithm: it can not find available information from good example cases if
we add poor examples to the data.

PMID: 1551737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Med Decis Making. 1991 Jul-Sep;11(3):171-5.

Using the ID3 algorithm to find discrepant diagnoses from laboratory databases of
thyroid patients.

Forsström J(1), Nuutila P, Irjala K.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Turku University Central Hospital, Finland.

Rare cases are a central problem when an expert system is constructed from
example cases with machine learning techniques. It is difficult to make a
decision support system (DSS) to cover all possible clinical cases. An inductive 
learning program can be used to construct an expert system for detecting cases
that differ from routine cases. The ID3 algorithm and the pessimistic pruning
algorithm were tested in this study: a DSS was built directly from the data of
patient records. A decision tree was generated, and the cases misclassified by
the decision tree as compared with the classifications of a clinician were listed
on a checklist, which formed the feedback to the clinician. In clinical
situations about 5-10% of functional thyroid disorders may be misclassified. At
this error level, the method found over 90% of the errors with a specificity of
95%. In simple medical classification tasks this dynamic self-learning system can
be used to create a DSS that can assist in the quality control of clinical
decision making.

PMID: 1881272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Behav Processes. 1991 Jan;22(3):197-212. doi: 10.1016/0376-6357(91)90094-G.

Rule induction from examples for expert systems in mouse behavior.

Meyer JA(1), Guillot A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de BioInformatique, URA 686 CNRS-ENS, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris,
France. (2)Groupe de BioInformatique, URA 686 CNRS-ENS, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230
Paris, France; Université Paris X, France.

Quinlan's ID3 algorithm has been used to induce, from behavioral sequences
observed on mice in day and night conditions, rules linking each activity to the 
three preceding ones in a given sequence. These rules were then input into two
expert systems so that they might be validated on other behavioral sequences. It 
is shown that the succession of various activities exhibited by the mouse is by
no means random, but rather displays a Markovian determinism of the first order
during the night and of the second order during the day. Among the seven
activities singled out in this study, the method applied here has proven very
effective in predicting the occurence of rest, locomotion, and grooming in the
nest. It is only moderately effective in the cases of feeding and nest-building
and fails with respect to drinking and to grooming out of the nest. These results
are discussed in the light of current knowledge about the physiological
determinants of these various activities. Lastly, the method employed here is
compared with other methods having similar uses.

Copyright © 1990. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24897180  [PubMed]


124. Virchows Arch A Pathol Anat Histopathol. 1989;415(5):447-57.

Interdigitating cell sarcoma (ICS). Evidence of interdigitating cell origin,
immunocytochemical studies with monoclonal anti-ICS antibodies.

Nakamura S(1), Suchi T, Suzuki R, Takagi N, Kitoh K, Osada H, Ueda R, Takahashi
T, Hiai H, Kato K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

Three independent mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) ID1 (IgG3), ID2 and ID3
(IgM) were raised against whole cells of a surgically resected human
interdigitating cell sarcoma (ICS). In immunoperoxidase staining, these mAbs
strongly stained the cytoplasm of ICS neoplastic cells as well as interdigitating
cells in normal lymphoid tissues. These mAbs also detected monocyte/macrophages
and dendritic cells, although their staining was highly variable depending on
tissue distribution of the cells. Additional immuno-histological and enzyme
histochemical study revealed that the neoplastic cells of ICS had cytoplasmic
acid phosphatase and membranous alkaline phosphatase activity, and also possessed
S100 beta protein, Ki-1 antigen. DAKO-macrophage antigen, and weak vimentin
activity. Neither rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy chain gene nor of T-cell 
receptor genes was detected in the DNA of ICS by Southern hybridization. These
observations provide further confirmation of our previous finding (Nakamura et
al. 1988, 1989) that the origin of ICS is interdigitating rather than lymphoid
cell, and indicate that our mAbs could be useful as a cellular differentiation
marker of interdigitating cells and for diagnosis of ICS.

PMID: 2508304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Comput Biomed Res. 1988 Apr;21(2):169-73.

An expert system on the diagnosis of ascites.

Kinney EL(1), Brafman D, Wright RJ 2nd.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, University of Miami School of Medicine, Florida 33101.

We constructed an expert system on the diagnosis of ascites, using a combination 
of case reports and unpublished patient data. Rule production was by induction
from examples, and the program operated on an algorithm which was a modification 
of Quinlan's ID3. The result was a small, but formally complete expert system.
When tested against a new data set of patients, our expert system predicted the
clinical diagnosis 82% of the time.

PMID: 3286103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Comput Biomed Res. 1987 Oct;20(5):467-76.

Comparison of the ID3 algorithm versus discriminant analysis for performing
feature selection.

Kinney EL(1), Murphy DD.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division, University of Miami School of Medicine, Florida.

Having obtained disappointing results in a small medical data set despite the
fact that our data seemed to be well suited for induction via ID3, we decided to 
compare the performance of ID3 to discriminant analysis. Performance was gauged
by the percentage of correct classification in a second, independent data set.
Examples were obtained from a cardiology project on the accuracy of auscultation.
There were 107 examples in the first data set and 67 cases in the second. We
found that ID3 and discriminant analysis performed equally poorly, with ID3
classifying only 60% of the second set correctly and discriminant analysis
classifying 66% of the second set correctly. Also, the ID3 probability statistic 
for estimating the accuracy of ID3 for classifying further cases was markedly
optimistic compared to our actual second data set results. Moreover, with an
increase in sample size, ID3 seemed to break down, producing a large, complex
decision tree of dubious generality, whereas discriminant analysis, with a larger
sample size, used more independent variables but maintained its first set
accuracy. These data suggest that there is a need for more sophisticated
algorithms than ID3, even at the risk of giving up some computational efficiency.

PMID: 3677628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Cell Biol. 1987 Apr;104(4):1059-67.

Tubulin-tyrosine ligase has a binding site on beta-tubulin: a two-domain
structure of the enzyme.

Wehland J, Weber K.

Tubulin-tyrosine ligase and alpha beta-tubulin form a tight complex which is
conveniently monitored by glycerol gradient centrifugation. Using two distinct
ligase monoclonal antibodies, several subunit-specific tubulin monoclonal
antibodies, and chemical cross-linking, a ligase-binding site was identified on
beta-tubulin. This site is retained when the carboxy-terminal domains of both
tubulin subunits are removed by subtilisin treatment. The ligase-tubulin complex 
is also formed when ligase is added to alpha beta-tubulin carrying the monoclonal
antibody YL 1/2 which binds only to the carboxyl end of tyrosinated
alpha-tubulin. The beta-tubulin-binding site described here explains the extreme 
substrate specificity of ligase, which does not act on other cellular proteins or
carboxy-terminal peptides derived from detyrosinated alpha-tubulin. Differential 
accessibility of this site in tubulin and in microtubules seems to explain why
ligase acts preferentially on unpolymerized tubulin. Ligase exposed to
V8-protease is converted to a nicked derivative. This is devoid of enzymatic
activity but still forms the complex with tubulin. Gel electrophoresis documents 
both 30- and a 14-kD domains, each which is immunologically and biochemically
distinct and seems to cover the entire molecule. The two domains interact tightly
under physiological conditions. The 30-kD domain carries the binding sites for
beta-tubulin and ATP. The 14-kD domain can possibly form an additional part of
the catalytic site as it harbors the epitope for the monoclonal antibody ID3
which inhibits enzymatic activity but not the formation of the ligase-tubulin
complex.

PMCID: PMC2114445
PMID: 3558478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Immunol. 1985 May;134(5):3411-9.

Monoclonal antibodies directed against gonococcal protein I vary in bactericidal 
activity.

Joiner KA, Warren KA, Tam M, Frank MM.

Monoclonal antibodies (Mab) with specificity for protein I (PI) from Neisseria
gonorrhoeae (GC) were examined for bactericidal activity. Mab 4G5 (gamma 3), ID3 
(gamma 2a), and 1G6 (gamma 2a) bound to surface-exposed epitopes on PI of GC
strain R11 (IA serotype) as assessed by co-agglutination and 125I protein A
uptake. Mab 2H1 (gamma 3) that were directed against IB serotype strains and Mab 
2E9 (gamma 2a) were negative in co-agglutination and protein A uptake assays and 
served as controls for some experiments. Only 4G5 and 1D3 were bactericidal for
R11 when presensitized organisms were incubated in 10% absorbed, pooled normal
human serum (PNHS) or 10% hypogammaglobulinemic serum (H gamma S) despite binding
of nearly equivalent numbers of 4G5, 1D3, and 1G6 to R11 during presensitization,
as assessed by 125I-protein A uptake. These Mab activated complement to a similar
extent on GC R11, leading to deposition of 56.4 X 10(3), 61.9 X 1093), and 47.1 X
10(3) molecules of C3/organism during incubation in 10% C8-deficient serum.
Deposition occurred almost exclusively via the classical complement pathway.
Measurement of complement component C9 binding to R11 during incubation in H
gamma S showed 35,700 molecules of C9/organism with 4G5, 32,600 C9/organism with 
1D3, and surprisingly, 29,600 C9/organism with 1G6. Eight thousand four hundred
molecules of C9/organism bound to 2E9-coated organisms, 6000 C9/organism to
2H1-coated bacteria, and 3600 C9/organism to nonpresensitized organisms. The
C5b-9 complex deposited by 4G5 had a different sedimentation profile by sucrose
density gradient analysis from the C5b-9 complex deposited by 1G6, consistent
with a different molecular configuration of the bound complex. Mab 1G6 and 1D3,
but not 2E9 or 2H1, were able to compete with 125I-4G5 for binding to GC R11. A
Mab (2E6) directed against protein III of GC competed weakly with 125I-4G5 for
binding to GC R11. Mab 1G6, but not 1D3, blocked 4G5-dependent killing in a
dose-related fashion. Both 4G5 and IG6 reacted weakly with native PI of GC R11 by
immunoblotting, but neither Mab recognized the 34,800 m.w. fragment of PI
generated by trypsin and chymotrypsin treatment of outer membranes. In contrast, 
2E9 reacted strongly by immunoblot with both native and cleaved PI of GC R11,
suggesting binding to buried determinants of PI. These experiments show that Mab 
directed against identical or closely associated, surface-exposed epitopes on
gonococcal PI differ markedly in bactericidal activity, despite leading to
deposition of nearly equivalent numbers of C3 and C9 molecules per organism.

PMID: 3920319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Immunol. 1983 Nov;131(5):2533-8.

Cell receptors for the mammalian reovirus. I. Syngeneic monoclonal anti-idiotypic
antibody identifies a cell surface receptor for reovirus.

Noseworthy JH, Fields BN, Dichter MA, Sobotka C, Pizer E, Perry LL, Nepom JT,
Greene MI.

We have prepared and characterized a syngeneic monoclonal anti-idiotype directed 
against the idiotype (Id3) of the anti-reovirus type 3 hemagglutinin B cell
hybridoma 9BG5. We have shown this monoclonal antibody to be anti-idiotypic in a 
series of inhibition studies with purified sigma 1 (hemagglutinin) protein and
with absorption studies on the idiotypic R1.1 cell line. That the idiotype Id 3
defined by the monoclonal anti-idiotype is distinct from H-2 was demonstrated by 
its presence on an idiotype-expressing H-2 negative cell line (R1.E). Binding of 
the anti-idiotype is relatively tunicamycin resistant and pronase/trypsin
sensitive, which suggests that the recognition site of the anti-idiotypic
receptor is poorly glycosylated. The presence of idiotype-like receptors on
reovirus type 3 susceptible neurons may have important implications for the
presence of related gene families between neural and lymphoid tissue. The
implications of recognition by neuronal cells of an anti-idiotypic monoclonal
antibody directed against the reovirus 3 attachment receptor for the pathogenesis
of viral-induced auto-immunity are discussed.

PMID: 6313805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Exp Med. 1982 Jan 1;155(1):155-67.

Identification of a hemagglutinin-specific idiotype associated with reovirus
recognition shared by lymphoid and neural cells.

Nepom JT, Weiner HL, Dichter MA, Tardieu M, Spriggs DR, Gramm CF, Powers ML,
Fields BN, Greene MI.

A xenogeneic antiserum raised to antireovirus immunoglobulin was used to define
an idiotypic determinant present on antibodies to reovirus type 3 hemagglutinin. 
The same idiotype was identified on nonimmune lymphoid cells and on neuronal
cells that specifically bind the hemagglutinin of type 3 reovirus. This idiotypic
determinant, called Id3, is shared by (a) a monoclonal antibody to the
neutralization site of hemagglutinin from type 3 reovirus; (b) BALB/c serum
antibodies to the hemagglutinin of reovirus type 3; (c) R1.1, a murine thymoma
cell line that binds reovirus type 3; (d) primary cultures of murine neuronal
cells. The presence of an idiotype shared by antihemagglutinin antibodies and by 
structures on nonlymphoid cells suggests a general relationship between disparate
receptors that recognize a common determinant. Furthermore, this suggests a novel
approach for the study of viral receptor interactions and for analysis of
mechanisms of autoimmune responses.

PMCID: PMC2186562
PMID: 6172539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


