
1. Dev Biol. 2016 Apr 1;412(1):71-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.02.003. Epub 2016
Feb 15.

Id4 functions downstream of Bmp signaling to restrict TCF function in endocardial
cells during atrioventricular valve development.

Ahuja S(1), Dogra D(1), Stainier DY(1), Reischauer S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung 
Research, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany. (2)Department of Developmental Genetics,
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.
Electronic address: sven.reischauer@mpi-bn.mpg.de.

The atrioventricular canal (AVC) connects the atrial and ventricular chambers of 
the heart and its formation is critical for the development of the cardiac
valves, chamber septation and formation of the cardiac conduction system.
Consequently, problems in AVC formation can lead to congenital defects ranging
from cardiac arrhythmia to incomplete cardiac septation. While our knowledge
about early heart tube formation is relatively comprehensive, much remains to be 
investigated about the genes that regulate AVC formation. Here we identify a new 
role for the basic helix-loop-helix factor Id4 in zebrafish AVC valve development
and function. id4 is first expressed in the AVC endocardium and later becomes
more highly expressed in the atrial chamber. TALEN induced inactivation of id4
causes retrograde blood flow at the AV canal under heat induced stress
conditions, indicating defects in AV valve function. At the molecular level, we
found that id4 inactivation causes misexpression of several genes important for
AVC and AV valve formation including bmp4 and spp1. We further show that id4
appears to control the number of endocardial cells that contribute to the AV
valves by regulating Wnt signaling in the developing AVC endocardium.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26892463  [PubMed - in process]


2. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 11;6:20841. doi: 10.1038/srep20841.

ITF2357 transactivates Id3 and regulate TGFß/BMP7 signaling pathways to attenuate
corneal fibrosis.

Lim RR(1,)(2), Tan A(3,)(4), Liu YC(3,)(5), Barathi VA(3,)(6,)(7), Mohan
RR(1,)(8,)(9), Mehta JS(3,)(4,)(5), Chaurasia SS(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Immunology and Angiogenesis Lab, Department of Veterinary Medicine
&Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA. (2)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
(3)Singapore Eye Research Institute, 20 College Road, 169856, Singapore.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, A*Star, Biopolis, Singapore.
(5)Singapore National Eye Centre, 11 Third Hospital Avenue, 168751, Singapore.
(6)Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Academic Clinical Program, Duke-NUS Graduate
Medical School, 8 College Rd, 169857, Singapore. (7)Department of Ophthalmology, 
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Harry S. Truman Memorial Veteran Hospital, Columbia, MO 65201, USA. (9)Mason
Eye Institute, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Corneal fibrosis is often seen in patients with ocular trauma and infection that 
compromises corneal transparency resulting in vision loss. Treatment strategies
including NSAIDs, steroids, MMC and corneal transplants have shown tremendous
success but with several side effects and cellular toxicity. Histone deacetylase 
inhibitors (HDACi) have been shown to inhibit corneal fibrosis via TGFß signaling
pathway. In this study, we investigated safety, efficacy and mechanism of action 
of a HDACi, ITF2357 in TGFß-stimulated in vitro primary human cornea stromal
fibroblasts (pHCSFs) and in vivo in a photorefractive keratectomy-treated rabbit 
model of corneal fibrosis. We found that in vivo ITF2357 decreased collagen I,
collagen IV, fibronectin, integrin aVß3 expression with a reduction in corneal
haze. In addition, ITF2357 reduced myofibroblast formation, suppressed
phosphorylation of Smad proteins in TGFß pathway and inhibited key responsive
protein, P4HA1 involved in pro-collagen synthesis. Treatment of pHCSFs with
ITF2357 activated BMP7 levels and expressed all the members of inhibitor of
differentiation proteins (Id1-Id4), however, it failed to rescue TGFß-driven
transdifferentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts in the presence of siRNA
specific to Id3. We conclude that ITF2357 is a potential anti-fibrotic drug that 
exerts its action via activation of Id3, a downstream target of TGFß/BMP7
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4750002
PMID: 26865052  [PubMed - in process]


3. Biophys J. 2016 Jan 19;110(2):372-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.11.3516.

Just a Flexible Linker? The Structural and Dynamic Properties of CBP-ID4 Revealed
by NMR Spectroscopy.

Piai A(1), Calçada EO(1), Tarenzi T(1), Grande AD(1), Varadi M(2), Tompa P(3),
Felli IC(4), Pierattelli R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Department
of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (2)VIB
Structural Biology Research Center, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie at Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, Belgium. (3)VIB Structural Biology Research
Center, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie at Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussel, Belgium; Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. (4)Magnetic Resonance
Center, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Department of Chemistry "Ugo
Schiff", University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Electronic address:
felli@cerm.unifi.it. (5)Magnetic Resonance Center, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy; Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence,
Florence, Italy. Electronic address: pierattelli@cerm.unifi.it.

Here, we present a structural and dynamic description of CBP-ID4 at atomic
resolution. ID4 is the fourth intrinsically disordered linker of CREB-binding
protein (CBP). In spite of the largely disordered nature of CBP-ID4, NMR chemical
shifts and relaxation measurements show a significant degree of a-helix sampling 
in the protein regions encompassing residues 2-25 and 101-128 (1852-1875 and
1951-1978 in full-length CBP). Proline residues are uniformly distributed along
the polypeptide, except for the two a-helical regions, indicating that they play 
an active role in modulating the structural features of this CBP fragment. The
two helical regions are lacking known functional motifs, suggesting that they
represent thus-far uncharacterized functional modules of CBP. This work provides 
insights into the functions of this protein linker that may exploit its
plasticity to modulate the relative orientations of neighboring folded domains of
CBP and fine-tune its interactions with a multitude of partners.

Copyright © 2016 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4724632 [Available on 2017-01-19]
PMID: 26789760  [PubMed - in process]


4. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan 12. doi: 10.1002/stem.2291. [Epub ahead of print]

Phosphorylation regulates Id2 degradation and mediates the proliferation of
neural precursor cells.

Sullivan JM(1,)(2), Havrda MC(1,)(3), Kettenbach AN(1,)(4), Paolella BR(1,)(5),
Zhang Z(1,)(3), Gerber SA(1,)(4,)(5), Israel MA(1,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, 
NH, 03756, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 03756, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics,
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 03756, USA. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 03756, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH,
03756, USA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding proteins (Id1-Id4) function to inhibit differentiation
and promote proliferation of many different cell types. Amongst the Id family
members, Id2 has been most extensively studied in the central nervous system
(CNS). Id2 contributes to cultured neural precursor cell (NPC) proliferation as
well as to the proliferation of CNS tumors such as glioblastoma that are likely
to arise from NPC-like cells. We identified three phosphorylation sites near the 
N-terminus of Id2 in NPCs. To interrogate the importance of Id2 phosphorylation, 
Id2(-/-) NPCs were modified to express wild type (WT) Id2 or an Id2 mutant
protein that could not be phosphorylated at the identified sites. We observed
that NPCs expressing this mutant lacking phosphorylation near the N-terminus had 
higher steady-state levels of Id2 when compared to NPCs expressing WT Id2. This
elevated level was the result of a longer half-life and reduced
proteasome-mediated degradation. Moreover, NPCs expressing constitutively
de-phosphorylated Id2 proliferated more rapidly than NPCs expressing WT Id2, a
finding consistent with the well-characterized function of Id2 in driving
proliferation. Observing that phosphorylation of Id2 modulates the degradation of
this important cell-cycle regulator, we sought to identify a phosphatase that
would stabilize Id2 enhancing its activity in NPCs and extended our analysis to
include human glioblastoma-derived stem cells (GSCs). We found that expression of
the phosphatase PP2A altered Id2 levels. Our findings suggest that inhibition of 
PP2A may be a novel strategy to regulate the proliferation of normal NPCs and
malignant GSCs by decreasing Id2 levels. This article is protected by copyright. 
All rights reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26756672  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Dec 19;146:145-153. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.12.003. [Epub
ahead of print]

Characterization of Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins in human cornea.

Mohan RR(1), Morgan BR(2), Anumanthan G(2), Sharma A(2), Chaurasia SS(3), Rieger 
FG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Harry S. Truman Memorial Veterans' Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of 
Ophthalmology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA; Mason Eye
Institute, School of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
Electronic address: MohanR@health.missouri.edu. (2)Harry S. Truman Memorial
Veterans' Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, College
of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA. (4)Harry S. Truman Memorial
Veterans' Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA; Mason Eye Institute, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins are DNA-binding transcription factors 
involved in cellular proliferation, migration, inflammation, angiogenesis and
fibrosis. However, their expression and role in the cornea is unknown. The
present study was undertaken to characterize the expression of Id proteins and
their interactions with the pro-fibrotic cytokine Transforming Growth Factor ß1
(TGFß1) and anti-fibrotic cytokine, bone morphogenic protein 7 (BMP7) in human
cornea. Human donor corneas procured from Eye Bank were used. Id proteins were
localized in human corneal sections using immunofluorescence. Primary cultures of
human corneal fibroblasts (HCF) were established and treated with either TGFß1
(5 ng/ml) or BMP7 (10 ng/ml) for 24 h in serum free medium. Expression of Id's in
response to TGFß1, BMP7 and TGFß1 + BMP7 was analyzed by quantitative real time
PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blot analysis. Id1 and Id2 proteins were ubiquitously
expressed in the epithelial cells and stromal keratocytes in human cornea. The
Id1 was localized to the basal epithelial cells as seen by immunohistochemistry. 
HCF expressed all known mammalian Id genes (Id1-Id4). In addition, Id1 and Id2
are selectively expressed in HCF. Treatment of human recombinant TGFß1 (5 ng/ml) 
to serum-starved HCF showed a significant increase in Id genes (Id1, Id2 and Id4)
at 2 h time point compared to BMP7 treatment, which showed time dependent
increase in the expression of Id1-Id3 at 24-48 h. Combined treatment with
TGFß1 + BMP7 to HCF showed a significant increase in Id1 transcript and an
increasing trend in Id3 and Id4 expression. The results of this study suggest
that Id family of genes (Id1-Id4) are localized in the human cornea and expressed
in the corneal fibroblasts. Also, Id's were differentially regulated with TGFß1
and/or BMP7 in a time dependent manner and might serve as a therapeutic target in
corneal fibrosis.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26712606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1269-74. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4640. Epub 2015 Dec 4.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 4 functions as a tumor suppressor and is targetable by
5-aza-2'-deoxycytosine with potential therapeutic significance in Burkitt's
lymphoma.

Gao XZ(1), Zhao WG(1), Wang GN(1), Cui MY(1), Zhang YR(1), Li WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, P.R. China.

Epigenetic gene silencing due to promoter methylation is observed in human
neoplasia, including lymphoma and certain cancer types. One important target for 
gene methylation analysis in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is inhibitor of DNA
binding 4 (ID4). The present study aimed to investigate the gene methylation
status of ID4, the expression of ID4 protein and the effect of demethylating
agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytosine (CdR) in the Raji human Burkitt's lymphoma cell line
in vitro. Following assessment of the inhibition of Raji cell growth by various
concentrations of CdR, the effects of CdR on the expression of ID4 protein were
assessed using the immunocytochemical streptavidin-peroxidase method and
semi-quantitative analysis, while apoptosis and cell cycle were determined by
flow cytometry. The ID4 gene methylation status of Raji cells was tested using
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction analysis. ID4 was methylated and
its protein expression was low in the control group, while ID4 was partly or
completely demethylated and its protein expression was upregulated in Raji cells 
treated with CdR. In addition, CdR induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in
Raji cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. These results demonstrated that 
ID4 is hypermethylated and its protein expression is low in Burkitt's lymphoma
cells, while CdR reversed the abnormal DNA methylation and induced re-expression 
of ID4 protein. Hypermethylation of ID4 promotes the proliferation of Burkitt's
lymphoma cells; ID4 may function as a tumor suppressor and can be targeted with
demethylating compounds such as CdR for the treatment of Burkitt's lymphoma.

PMID: 26648013  [PubMed - in process]


7. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 1;5:17594. doi: 10.1038/srep17594.

Id4 Marks Spermatogonial Stem Cells in the Mouse Testis.

Sun F, Xu Q, Zhao D, Degui Chen C.

Mammalian spermatogenesis is a classic adult stems cell-dependent process,
supported by the self-renewal and differentiation of spermatogonial stem cells
(SSCs). However, the identification of SSCs and elucidation of their behaviors in
undisturbed testis has long been a big challenge. Here, we generated a knock-in
mouse model, Id4-2A-CreERT2-2A-tdTomato, which allowed us to mark Id4-expressing 
(Id4(+)) cells at different time points in situ and track their behaviors across 
distinct developmental stages during steady-state and regenerating
spermatogenesis. We found that Id4(+) cells continue to produce spermatogonia,
spermatocytes and sperm in mouse testis, showing they are capable of self-renewal
and have differentiation potential. Consistent with these findings, ablation of
Id4(+) cells in mice results in a loss of spermatogenesis. Furthermore,
developmental fate mapping reveals that Id4(+) SSCs originate from neonate Id4(+)
gonocytes. Therefore, our results indicate that Id4 marks spermatogonial stem
cells in the mouse testis.

PMCID: PMC4665196
PMID: 26621350  [PubMed - in process]


8. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Jan;155(1):13-23. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3648-0.
Epub 2015 Nov 27.

Epigenetic regulation of ID4 in the determination of the BRCAness phenotype in
breast cancer.

Branham MT(1), Campoy E(2), Laurito S(2), Branham R(3), Urrutia G(2), Orozco
J(4), Gago F(4), Urrutia R(5), Roqué M(2).

Author information: 
(1)IHEM-CCT-CONICET Mendoza and National University of Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina. 
mbranham@fcm.uncu.edu.ar. (2)IHEM-CCT-CONICET Mendoza and National University of 
Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina. (3)IANIGLA-CCT-CONICET Mendoza, Mendoza, Argentina.
(4)Gineco-Mamario Institute of Mendoza, Mendoza, Argentina. (5)GI Research Unit, 
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Epigenomics Translational Program,
Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, USA.

BRCAness breast tumors represent a group of sporadic tumors characterized by a
reduction in BRCA1 gene expression. As BRCA1 is involved in double-strand breaks 
(DSBs) repair, dysfunctional BRCA pathway could make a tumor sensitive to DNA
damaging drugs (e.g., platinum agents). Thus, accurately identifying BRCAness
could contribute to therapeutic decision making in patients harboring these
tumors. The purpose of this study was to identify if BRCAness tumors present a
characteristic methylation profile and/or were related to specific
clinico-pathological features. BRCAness was measured by MLPA in 63 breast tumors;
methylation status of 98 CpG sites within 84 cancer-related genes was analyzed by
MS-MLPA. Protein and mRNA expressions of the selected genes were measured by
quantitative real-time PCR and Western Blot. BRCAness was associated with younger
age, higher nuclear pleomorfism, and triple-negative (TN) status. Epigenetically,
we found that the strongest predictors for BRCAness tumors were the methylations 
of MLH1 and PAX5 plus the unmethylations of CCND2 and ID4. We determined that ID4
unmethylation correlated with the expression levels of both its mRNA and protein.
We observed an inverse relation between the expressions of ID4 and BRCA1. To the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first report suggesting an epigenetic
regulation of ID4 in BRCAness tumors. Our findings give new information of
BRCAness etiology and encourage future studies on potential drug targets for
BRCAness breast tumors.

PMID: 26610810  [PubMed - in process]


9. Genes Dev. 2015 Nov 1;29(21):2312-24. doi: 10.1101/gad.261925.115.

Transcription and imprinting dynamics in developing postnatal male germline stem 
cells.

Hammoud SS(1), Low DH(2), Yi C(3), Lee CL(2), Oatley JM(4), Payne CJ(5), Carrell 
DT(6), Guccione E(7), Cairns BR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA; Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA; Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112,
USA; Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA; (2)Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology (IMCB), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology, and
Research), Singapore 138673, Singapore; (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA;
Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA; Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School 
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA; (4)Center for Reproductive Biology,
School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington
99164, USA; (5)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA; Human Molecular Genetics Program, Ann and Robert H. Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA; (6)Department of
Surgery (Urology), University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah
84112, USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Utah School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA; Department of Human Genetics,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA;
(7)Division of Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics, Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology (IMCB), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology, and Research), Singapore 
138673, Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597, Singapore.

Postnatal spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) progress through proliferative and
developmental stages to populate the testicular niche prior to productive
spermatogenesis. To better understand, we conducted extensive genomic profiling
at multiple postnatal stages on subpopulations enriched for particular markers
(THY1, KIT, OCT4, ID4, or GFRa1). Overall, our profiles suggest three broad
populations of spermatogonia in juveniles: (1) epithelial-like spermatogonia
(THY1(+); high OCT4, ID4, and GFRa1), (2) more abundant mesenchymal-like
spermatogonia (THY1(+); moderate OCT4 and ID4; high mesenchymal markers), and (3)
(in older juveniles) abundant spermatogonia committing to gametogenesis (high
KIT(+)). Epithelial-like spermatogonia displayed the expected imprinting
patterns, but, surprisingly, mesenchymal-like spermatogonia lacked imprinting
specifically at paternally imprinted loci but fully restored imprinting prior to 
puberty. Furthermore, mesenchymal-like spermatogonia also displayed
developmentally linked DNA demethylation at meiotic genes and also at certain
monoallelic neural genes (e.g., protocadherins and olfactory receptors). We also 
reveal novel candidate receptor-ligand networks involving SSCs and the developing
niche. Taken together, neonates/juveniles contain heterogeneous epithelial-like
or mesenchymal-like spermatogonial populations, with the latter displaying
extensive DNA methylation/chromatin dynamics. We speculate that this plasticity
helps SSCs proliferate and migrate within the developing seminiferous tubule,
with proper niche interaction and membrane attachment reverting mesenchymal-like 
spermatogonial subtype cells back to an epithelial-like state with normal
imprinting profiles.

© 2015 Hammoud et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4647563 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26545815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. IUBMB Life. 2015 Nov;67(11):880-7. doi: 10.1002/iub.1443. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Epigenetic role of CCAAT box-binding transcription factor NF-Y on ID gene family 
in human embryonic carcinoma cells.

Moeinvaziri F(1,)(2), Shahhoseini M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan
Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of
Developmental Biology, University of Science and Culture, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

Nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) is a histone substitute protein that specifically binds
to the CCAAT box of the target genes and thereby promotes their regulation. NF-Y 
transcription factor, with defined CCAAT element-binding activities, target a
gene family that encodes a group of basic helix-loop-helix ID factors (ID1-ID4), 
with or without CCAAT box at their promoter region. In this study, the
expressions of NF-Y in mRNA and protein level were evaluated in a human embryonic
carcinoma cell line, named NTera2, before and after 7 days induction of
differentiation. We also looked into expression levels of ID genes in NTera2
cells during differentiation because of their critical role in development. By
using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with real-time polymerase chain
reaction, NF-Y incorporation and acetylation/dimethylation of histone H3 at
lysine 9 (H3K9ac/me2) was quantitatively evaluated on the regulatory regions of
considered genes to monitor the changes in epigenetic markers at ID gene
promoters throughout differentiation. The results demonstrated a marked
down-regulation of ID1, ID2, and ID3 genes, parallel to a loss of NF-Y binding to
the promoters of these genes. The data show that although the genes encoding NF-Y
complex remained expressed at mRNA level, NF-YC is lost at the protein level
onset of differentiation. Additionally, the epigenetic marks of H3K9ac and
H3K9me2 at the target gene promoters decreased and increased, respectively, after
1 day of differentiation. It is suggested that, in the absence of NF-Y binding,
the corresponding regions adopt a heterochromatic nature, whereas when NF-Y comes
back after 7 days of differentiation, the ID1-3 promoters become again converted 
into active chromatin. The ID4 gene, lacking a CCAAT box, behaves differently and
does not show any incorporation. This experiment implies for the first time that 
the presence of NF-Y transcription factor plays a pivotal role in transcriptional
regulation of ID genes in development. © 2015 IUBMB Life, 67(11):880-887, 2015.

© 2015 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26509926  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Aug 1;8(8):9500-5. eCollection 2015.

Hypomethylation of DNA-binding inhibitor 4 serves as a potential biomarker in
distinguishing acquired tamoxifen-refractory breast cancer.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang B(2), Fang J(2), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical
Research Center for Cancer Tianjin, China ; Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention
and Therapy Tianjin, China ; Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin Medical University, Ministry of Education Tianjin 300060, China 
; Department of Oncologic Surgery, Weinan Center Hospital Weinan 714000, Shaanxi,
China. (2)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer Tianjin, China ; Key Laboratory of Cancer
Prevention and Therapy Tianjin, China ; Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer
Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin Medical University, Ministry of Education Tianjin
300060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the methylation status of DNA-binding inhibitor 4 (ID4) in 
tamoxifen-refractory (TR) breast cancer.
METHODS: From January 2012 to December 2014, breast cancer patients managed by
radical mastectomy previously and receiving tamoxifen treatment for at least 12
months were enrolled. According to the response to tamoxifen, patients were
divided into TR group and tamoxifen-sensitive (TS) group. Genomic DNA was
isolated from fasting venous blood, and methylight technique was applied to
determine the methylation status of ID4.
RESULTS: 43 patients with TS breast cancer and 31 patients with TR breast cancer 
were enrolled. No significant difference between groups was observed in term of
patients' characteristics, such as age (P=0.693), progesterone receptor
(P=0.970), menopausal status (P=0.784) and histological type (P=0.537), while the
stage of cancer in TR group was significantly higher than TS group (P<0.001).
Compared to TS group, PMR of ID4 was significantly higher in TR group (P=0.002). 
ROC curve analysis indicated that ID4 yielded an AUC of 0.716 with 77.4%
sensitivity and 62.79% specificity in distinguishing TR breast cancer at the cut 
point of 3.8%. The PMR cut point of ID4 was set at 6.8% in survival analysis,
log-rank test indicated the risk of disease progression was comparable between
patients with ID4 hypermethylation or hypomethylation (P=0.287).
CONCLUSION: ID4 hypomethylation is present in TR breast cancer, and it may serve 
as a potential biomarker in distinguishing TR breast cancer. However, the results
need further validation in larger studies.

PMCID: PMC4583943
PMID: 26464711  [PubMed - in process]


12. Histopathology. 2016 Apr;68(5):702-12. doi: 10.1111/his.12801. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Increased ID4 expression, accompanied by mutant p53 accumulation and loss of
BRCA1/2 proteins in triple-negative breast cancer, adversely affects survival.

Thike AA(1), Tan PH(1), Ikeda M(1), Iqbal J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital, Academia, Singapore,
Singapore.

AIMS: Breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) expression is down-regulated in a significant
proportion of non-hereditary breast cancers, in the absence of any mutation. This
phenomenon is more pronounced in oestrogen (ER)-negative tumours. Recent studies 
have suggested that inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4), as well as p53, participate
in the transcriptional regulation of BRCA1.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical expression of ID4, BRCA1, BRCA2 and p53 in 699 women
with triple-negative breast cancer was investigated using tissue microarrays. The
prognostic role of these biomarkers was also evaluated. Survival outcomes were
estimated with the Kaplan-Meier method and compared between groups with log-rank 
statistics.
RESULTS: Loss of BRCA1 and BRCA2 expression and overexpression of ID4 and p53 was
observed in 75%, 90%, 95% and 66% of tumours, respectively. ID4 expression was
increased in higher tumour grade (P < 0.001) and was associated significantly
with basal-like subtype (P < 0.001), BRCA2 down-regulation (P = 0.037) and p53
accumulation (P < 0.001). Patients with strong ID4 expression displayed worse
disease-free survival in both triple-negative breast cancers (P = 0.041) and
basal-like triple-negative breast cancers (P = 0.026).
CONCLUSION: There is frequent ID4 expression and concomitant loss of BRCA
proteins in triple-negative breast cancer. We hypothesize that strong ID4
expression could be useful as a prognostic marker in triple-negative breast
cancer, predicting early tumour recurrence.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26259780  [PubMed - in process]


13. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2015 Dec;41(6):1545-56. doi: 10.1007/s10695-015-0106-1.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Spermatogonial stem cells specific marker identification in channel catfish,
Ictalurus punctatus and blue catfish, I. furcatus.

Shang M(1,)(2), Su B(3,)(4), Lipke EA(5), Perera DA(3,)(6), Li C(3,)(7), Qin
Z(3), Li Y(3), Dunn DA(5,)(8), Cek S(3,)(9), Peatman E(3), Dunham RA(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. mzs0040@tigermail.auburn.edu. (2)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Aquatic Biotechnology and Genetic Breeding, Heilongjiang Fisheries
Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Ministry of Agriculture,
Harbin, 150070, China. mzs0040@tigermail.auburn.edu. (3)School of Fisheries,
Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(4)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Aquatic Biotechnology and Genetic Breeding,
Heilongjiang Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Ministry of Agriculture, Harbin, 150070, China. (5)Department of Chemical
Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. (6)Gus R. Douglass
Land-Grant Institute, West Virginia State University, Institute, WV, 25112, USA. 
(7)Marine Science and Engineering College, Qingdao Agricultural University,
Qingdao, 266109, China. (8)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of
New York at Oswego, Oswego, NY, 13126-3599, USA. (9)Faculty of Marine Science and
Technology, Mustafa Kemal University, 31200, Iskenderun, Hatay, Turkey.
(10)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. dunhara@auburn.edu.

Testicular germ cells of channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus, and blue catfish, 
I. furcatus were separated into four layers with Percoll density gradient
centrifugation, containing different cell types (40% in the first layer were
spermatogonial stem cells, SSCs). Expression of seventeen genes was analyzed for 
cells from different layers by real-time quantitative PCR. Pfkfb4, Urod, Plzf,
Integrin6, IntegrinV, Thy1 and Cdh1 genes showed the same expression change
pattern in both channel and blue catfish as these genes were down-regulated in
the spermatocytes and even more so in spermatids. Plzf and Integrin6 had
especially high expression in SSCs and can be used as SSCs specific markers. Sox2
gene was up-regulated in spermatocytes and even more highly up-regulated in
spermatids, which indicated it could be a spermatid marker. In contrast to
channel catfish, Id4, Smad5 and Prdm14 gene expressions were strongly
down-regulated in spermatocyte cells, but up-regulated in spermatid cells in blue
catfish. Smad5 gene was down-regulated in spermatocytes, but up-regulated in both
spermatogonia and spermatids, allowing identification as a marker for
spermatocytes in blue catfish. Oct4, Id4, Gfra2, Pum2 and Prdm14 genes showed
different expression patterns in the testicular germ cells of channel and blue
catfish. This may be a partial explanation to the differing responses of channel 
catfish and blue catfish to induced spawning technologies. The SSCs specific
markers can be used for further SSCs labeling, which can increase the SSCs
sorting efficiency and be applied in various studies involving SSCs and other
germ cells.

PMID: 26251285  [PubMed - in process]


14. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Aug 5;128(15):2019-25. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.161351.

Quantitative Detection of ID4 Gene Aberrant Methylation in the Differentiation of
Myelodysplastic Syndrome from Aplastic Anemia.

Li MY, Xu YY, Kang HY, Wang XR, Gao L, Cen J, Wang W, Wang N, Li YH, Wang LL, Yu 
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), especially
hypoplastic MDS, and MDS with low blast counts or normal karyotype may be
problematic. This study characterized ID4 gene methylation in patients with MDS
and aplastic anemia (AA).
METHODS: The methylation status of ID4 was analyzed by bisulfite sequencing
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and quantitative real-time methylation-specific
PCR (MethyLight PCR) in 100 patients with MDS and 31 patients with AA.
RESULTS: The MDS group had a higher ID4 gene methylation positivity rate (22.22%)
and higher methylation levels (0.21 [0-3.79]) than the AA group (P < 0.05).
Furthermore, there were significant differences between the hypoplastic MDS and
AA groups, the MDS with low blast count and the AA groups, and the MDS with
normal karyotype and the AA groups. The combination of genetic and epigenetic
markers was used in much more patients with MDS (62.5% [35/56]) than the use of
genetic markers only (51.79% [29/56]).
CONCLUSIONS: These results showed that the detection of ID4 methylation
positivity rates and levels could be a useful biomarker for MDS diagnosis.

PMID: 26228212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Gene Expr Patterns. 2015 Sep-Nov;19(1-2):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.05.004.
Epub 2015 Jun 21.

Differential expression of id genes and their potential regulator znf238 in
zebrafish adult neural progenitor cells and neurons suggests distinct functions
in adult neurogenesis.

Diotel N(1), Beil T(2), Strähle U(2), Rastegar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus Nord, Institute of Toxicology and
Genetics, Karlsruhe, Germany; Inserm, UMR 1188 Diabète athérothrombose Thérapies 
Réunion Océan Indien (DéTROI), Plateforme CYROI, Sainte-Clotilde, F-97490,
France; Université de La Réunion, UMR 1188, Sainte-Clotilde, F-97490, France.
Electronic address: nicolas.diotel@univ-reunion.fr. (2)Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology, Campus Nord, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe,
Germany. (3)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus Nord, Institute of
Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe, Germany. Electronic address:
Sepand.Rastegar@kit.edu.

Teleost fish display a remarkable ability to generate new neurons and to repair
brain lesions during adulthood. They are, therefore, a very popular model to
investigate the molecular mechanisms of constitutive and induced neurogenesis in 
adult vertebrates. In this study, we investigated the expression patterns of
inhibitor of DNA binding (id) genes and of their potential transcriptional
repressor, znf238, in the whole brain of adult zebrafish. We show that while id1 
is exclusively expressed in ventricular cells in the whole brain, id2a, id3 and
id4 genes are expressed in broader areas. Interestingly, znf238 was also detected
in these regions, its expression overlapping with id2a, id3 and id4 expression.
Further detailed characterization of the id-expressing cells demonstrated that
(a) id1 is expressed in type 1 and type 2 neural progenitors as previously
published, (b) id2a in type 1, 2 and 3 neural progenitors, (c) id3 in type 3
neural progenitors and (d) id4 in postmitotic neurons. Our data provide a
detailed map of id and znf238 expression in the brain of adult zebrafish,
supplying a framework for studies of id genes function during adult neurogenesis 
and brain regeneration in the zebrafish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26107416  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Med Genet. 2015 Jul;52(7):476-83. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103108. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

Microdeletions on 6p22.3 are associated with mesomelic dysplasia Savarirayan
type.

Flöttmann R(1), Wagner J(1), Kobus K(2), Curry CJ(3), Savarirayan R(4), Nishimura
G(5), Yasui N(6), Spranger J(7), Van Esch H(8), Lyons MJ(9), DuPont BR(9),
Dwivedi A(9), Klopocki E(10), Horn D(1), Mundlos S(11), Spielmann M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (2)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 
Germany. (3)Institute for Clinical Genetics, UCFS Fresno, California, USA.
(4)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia. (5)Department of Pediatric Imaging, Tokyo Metropolitan
Children's Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Tokushima University Hospital,
Tokushima, Japan. (7)Children's Hospital, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(8)Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina, USA. (10)Institute for
Human Genetics, Biozentrum, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(11)Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany Berlin-Brandenburg School for Regenerative Therapies
(BSRT), Berlin, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Mesomelic dysplasias are a group of skeletal disorders
characterised by shortness of the middle limb segments (mesomelia). They are
divided into 11 different categories. Among those without known molecular basis
is mesomelic dysplasia Savarirayan type, characterised by severe shortness of the
middle segment of the lower limb.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the molecular cause of mesomelic dysplasia Savarirayan
type.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed array comparative genomic hybridisation in
three unrelated patients with mesomelic dysplasia Savarirayan type and identified
2 Mb overlapping de novo microdeletions on chromosome 6p22.3. The deletions
encompass four known genes: MBOAT1, E2F3, CDKAL1 and SOX4. All patients showed
mesomelia of the lower limbs with hypoplastic tibiae and fibulae. We identified a
fourth patient with intellectual disability and an overlapping slightly larger do
novo deletion also encompassing the flanking gene ID4. Given the fact that the
fourth patient had no skeletal abnormalities and none of the genes in the deleted
interval are known to be associated with abnormalities in skeletal development,
other mutational mechanisms than loss of function of the deleted genes have to be
considered. Analysis of the genomic region showed that the deletion removes two
regulatory boundaries and brings several potential limb enhancers into close
proximity of ID4. Thus, the deletion could result in the aberrant activation and 
misexpression of ID4 in the limb bud, thereby causing the mesomelic dysplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that the distinct deletion 6p22.3 is associated
with mesomelic dysplasia Savarirayan type featuring hypoplastic,
triangular-shaped tibiae and abnormally shaped or hypoplastic fibulae.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26032025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Clin Microbiol. 2015 Aug;53(8):2701-2. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00941-15. Epub 2015 May
20.

Evaluation of New bioMérieux Chromogenic CPS Media for Detection of Urinary Tract
Pathogens.

Rigaill J(1), Verhoeven PO(2), Mahinc C(1), Jeraiby M(1), Grattard F(2), Fonsale 
N(1), Pozzetto B(3), Carricajo A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Agents and Hygiene, University Hospital of
Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France. (2)Laboratory of Infectious Agents and
Hygiene, University Hospital of Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France GIMAP EA
3064 (Groupe Immunité des Muqueuses et Agents Pathogènes), Faculty of Medicine of
Saint-Etienne, University of Lyon, Saint-Etienne, France. (3)Laboratory of
Infectious Agents and Hygiene, University Hospital of Saint-Etienne,
Saint-Etienne, France GIMAP EA 3064 (Groupe Immunité des Muqueuses et Agents
Pathogènes), Faculty of Medicine of Saint-Etienne, University of Lyon,
Saint-Etienne, France bruno.pozzetto@univ-st-etienne.fr.

Four chromogenic media were compared for their ability to detect urinary tract
pathogens in 299 urine specimens, of which 175 were found positive, allowing the 
growth of 279 microorganisms. After 18 to 24 h of incubation, the CPS ID4, CPSE, 
CPSO (bioMérieux), and UriSelect4 (Bio-Rad) media showed sensitivities of 97.1%, 
99.3%, 99.6%, and 99.6%, respectively.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4508399
PMID: 25994162  [PubMed - in process]


18. Diabet Med. 2015 Nov;32(11):1500-3. doi: 10.1111/dme.12802. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

The duodenal glucose load impacts the oral disposition index in healthy subjects.

Marathe CS(1,)(2), Feinle-Bisset C(1,)(2), Pilichiewicz A(1), Lange K(1,)(2),
Jones KL(1,)(2), Rayner CK(1,)(2), Kahn SE(3), Horowitz M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Royal Adelaide Hospital,
Australia. (2)Centre of Research Excellence (CRE) in Translating Nutritional
Science to Good Health, University of Adelaide, Australia. (3)Division of
Metabolism, Endocrinology and Nutrition, VA Puget Sound Health Care System and
University of Washington, Seattle, USA.

AIM: In healthy subjects, the oral disposition index (ratio of insulin response
to insulin sensitivity) is predictive of the development of Type 2 diabetes.
Gastric emptying, which exhibits a substantial interindividual variation, is a
major determinant of postprandial glycaemia in health and diabetes. We sought to 
determine whether the rate of intraduodenal glucose delivery affects the
disposition index in people without diabetes.
METHODS: Nineteen Caucasian males received glucose infusions via an intraduodenal
catheter at either 2 kcal/min (ID2) or 4 kcal/min (ID4) for 120 min, on two
separate days with measurements of blood glucose (G) and plasma insulin (I) at
frequent intervals. The insulin response was estimated by the ratio of the change
in insulin to that of change in glucose at 30 min (<U+2206>I(0-30)/<U+2206>G(0-30)) and 60 min 
(<U+2206>I(0-60)/<U+2206>G(0-60)). Insulin sensitivity was estimated as 1/fasting insulin. The 
oral disposition index (DI) was calculated as <U+2206>I(0-30)/<U+2206>G(0-30) × 1/fasting
insulin and <U+2206>I(0-60)/<U+2206>G(0-60) × 1/fasting insulin.
RESULTS: The overall glycaemic response was comparable on both days, but the
insulin response was much greater at ID4 when calculated at either 30 or 60 min
(P < 0.05). DI was also greater (P < 0.05) in response to ID4 than ID2.
CONCLUSIONS: The rate of duodenal glucose delivery has a major impact on insulin 
release and, thereby, DI. This suggests that the rate of gastric emptying, which 
determines duodenal glucose delivery, is a determinant of DI.

© 2015 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2015 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 25981372  [PubMed - in process]


19. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Apr;23(2):455-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.02.031.

[Clinical Significance of ID4 Gene Mehtylation in Demethylation-Treated MDS Cell 
Line and 2 MDS Patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Kang HY(1,)(2), Wang XR(1), Gao L(1), Wang W(1), Li MY(2), Wang LL(1), Wang
CB(2), Yu L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology; Chinese PLA's General Hospital, Beijing 100853,
China. (2)Department of Clinical Examination, Chinese PLA's General Hospital,
Beijing 100853, China. (3)Department of Hematology; Chinese PLA's General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. E-mail: chunhuiliyu@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate significance of ID4 gene mehtylation in demethylating
myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS) cell Line MUTZ1 and 2 patients with MDS.
METHODS: The methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and reverse transcription-PCR
(RT-PCR) were applied to identify the methylation status and gene expression of
ID4 gene in MDS cell line MUTZ1, a patient with aplastic anemia(AA) and a donor
with normal bone marrow (NBM). RT-PCR was applied to detect the ID4 gene
expression status in MUTZ1 cell line treated with decitabine at 3 different
concentrations. Then bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP) was applied to detect ID4
gene methylation status in 2 MDS parients treated with decitabine.
RESULTS: The MDS cell line MUTZ-1 displayed a complete methylation of ID4 gene
promoter with little mRNA expression. Inversely, bone marrow of an AA patient and
NBM showed complete unmethylation of this gene with intensity mRNA expression.
With the increase of decitabine concentration, ID4 gene mRNA expression was more 
and more increased. After decitabine treatment, ID4 gene methylation-positive
frequencies of both the 2 MDS patients were much more decreased than that of the 
first treatment. So, ID4 gene mRNA expression inhibited by promoter
hypemethylation could be recovered by using demethylation medicine.
CONCLUSION: ID4 as a new potential anti-oncogene suggests that its methylation
may become a marker for selection and assessment of therapeutic schedules in
patients with MDS.

PMID: 25948204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Chin J Integr Med. 2015 Apr 29. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of heteroplasmic mutations in the mitochondrial genome and the ID4 gene
promoter methylation region in the pathogenesis of chronic aplastic anemia in
patients suffering from Kidney yin deficiency.

Cui X(1), Wang JY, Liu K, Cui SY, Zhang J, Luo YQ, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, 250011, China, cdz45@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze changes in gene amplififi cation in the mitochondrial
genome and in the ID4 gene promoter methylation region in patients with chronic
aplastic anemia (CAA) suffering from Kidney (Shen) yin defifi ciency or Kidney
yang defificiency.
METHODS: Bone marrow and oral epithelium samples were collected from CAA patients
with Kidney yin deficiency or Kidney yang deficiency (20 cases). Bone marrow
samples were collected from 20 healthy volunteers. The mitochondrial genome was
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and PCR products were used for
sequencing and analysis.
RESULTS: Higher mutational rates were observed in the ND1-2, ND4-6, and CYTB
genes in CAA patients suffering from Kidney yin defifi ciency. Moreover, the ID4 
gene was unmethylated in bone marrow samples from healthy individuals, but was
methylated in some CAA patients suffering from Kidney yin deficiency (positive
rate, 60%) and Kidney yang deficiency (positive rate, 55%).
CONCLUSIONS: These data supported that gene mutations can alter the expression of
respiratory chain enzyme complexes in CAA patients, resulting in energy
metabolism impairment and promoting the physiological and pathological processes 
of hematopoietic failure. Functional impairment of the mitochondrial respiration 
chain induced by gene mutation may be an important reason for hematopoietic
failure in patients with CAA. This change is closely related to maternal
inheritance and Kidney yin defifi ciency. Finally, these data supported the
assertion that it is easy to treat disease in patients suffering from yang defifi
ciency and diffifi cult to treat disease in patients suffering from yin
defificiency.

PMID: 25920536  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Eur J Med Res. 2015 Feb 20;20:16. doi: 10.1186/s40001-015-0092-x.

Clinical implications of the quantitative detection of ID4 gene methylation in
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Kang H(1,)(2), Wang X(3), Gao L(4), Cen J(5), Li M(6), Wang W(7), Wang N(8), Li
Y(9), Wang L(10), Yu L(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road,
Beijing, 100853, China. lifehope666@126.com. (2)Department of Clinical Tests,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
lifehope666@126.com. (3)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China. wongxr@163.com. (4)Department of
Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
13911864393@163.com. (5)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China. cenj@yeah.net. (6)Department of Clinical 
Tests, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
limianyang301@163.com. (7)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China. wwpku2000@hotmail.com. (8)Department of
Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
wangnan2000200005@163.com. (9)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China. yonghuililab@yahoo.com.cn.
(10)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road,
Beijing, 100853, China. liliwang7644@126.com. (11)Department of Hematology,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing, 100853, China.
ylmedsci@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) eventually transforms into acute
leukemia (AL) in about 30% of patients. Hypermethylation of the inhibitor of DNA 
binding 4 (ID4) gene may play an important role in the initiation and development
of MDS and AL. The aim of this study was to quantitatively assess ID4 gene
methylation in MDS and to establish if it could be an effective method of
evaluating MDS disease progression.
METHODS: We examined 142 bone marrow samples from MDS patients, healthy donors
and MDS-AL patients using bisulfite sequencing PCR and quantitative real-time
methylation-specific PCR. The ID4 methylation rates and levels were assessed.
RESULTS: ID4 methylation occurred in 27 patients (27/100). ID4 gene methylation
was more frequent and at higher levels in patients with advanced disease stages
and in high-risk subgroups according to WHO (P < 0.001, P < 0.001, respectively) 
and International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) (P = 0.002, P = 0.007,
respectively) classifications. ID4 methylation levels changed during disease
progression. Both methylation rates and methylation levels were significantly
different between healthy donor, MDS patients and patients with MDS-AL (P <
0.001, P < 0.001, respectively). Multivariate analysis indicated that the level
of ID4 methylation was an independent factor influencing overall survival.
Patients with MDS showed decreased survival time with increased ID4 methylation
levels (P = 0.011, hazard ratio (HR)<U+2009>= 2.371). Patients with ID4 methylation had 
shorter survival time than those without ID4 methylation (P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that ID4 gene methylation might be a new
biomarker for MDS monitoring and the detection of minimal residual disease.

PMCID: PMC4336702
PMID: 25889027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 27;6:6548. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7548.

ID4 controls mammary stem cells and marks breast cancers with a stem cell-like
phenotype.

Junankar S(1), Baker LA(1), Roden DL(1), Nair R(1), Elsworth B(1), Gallego-Ortega
D(1), Lacaze P(2), Cazet A(1), Nikolic I(1), Teo WS(3), Yang J(3), McFarland
A(3), Harvey K(3), Naylor MJ(4), Lakhani SR(5), Simpson PT(6), Raghavendra A(7), 
Saunus J(7), Madore J(7), Kaplan W(3), Ormandy C(1), Millar EK(8), O'Toole S(9), 
Yun K(10), Swarbrick A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Kinghorn Cancer Centre &Cancer Research Division, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia [2] St Vincent's 
Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW, Kensington, New South Wales 2033,
Australia. (2)Millennium Science Pty Ltd, 4 Miles Street, Mulgrave, Victoria
3170, Australia. (3)The Kinghorn Cancer Centre &Cancer Research Division, Garvan 
Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia.
(4)1] The Kinghorn Cancer Centre &Cancer Research Division, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia [2] St Vincent's 
Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, UNSW, Kensington, New South Wales 2033,
Australia [3] Discipline of Physiology and Bosch Institute, School of Medical
Sciences, University of Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales 2006, Australia.
(5)1] UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia [2] School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia [3] Pathology Queensland, The Royal Brisbane
and Women's Hospital, Herston, Queensland 4029, Australia [4] QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland 4029, Australia. (6)1] UQ Centre 
for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072,
Australia [2] School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia [3] QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
Herston, Queensland 4029, Australia. (7)1] UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia [2] QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland 4029, Australia. (8)1] The
Kinghorn Cancer Centre &Cancer Research Division, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia [2] Department of
Anatomical Pathology, South Eastern Area Laboratory Service, St George Hospital, 
Kogarah, New South Wales 2217, Australia [3] School of Medical Sciences, UNSW,
Kensington, New South Wales 2033, Australia [4] Faculty of Medicine &Health
Sciences, University of Western Sydney, Campbelltown, New South Wales 2560,
Australia. (9)1] The Kinghorn Cancer Centre &Cancer Research Division, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia [2] 
Department of Anatomical Pathology, Sydpath, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
New South Wales 2010, Australia [3] Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, 
Camperdown, New South Wales 2006, Australia. (10)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar
Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) is a heterogeneous disease with poor prognosis;
however, its cellular origins and aetiology are poorly understood. In this study,
we show that inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) is a key regulator of mammary
stem cell self-renewal and marks a subset of BLBC with a putative mammary basal
cell of origin. Using an ID4GFP knock-in reporter mouse and single-cell
transcriptomics, we show that ID4 marks a stem cell-enriched subset of the
mammary basal cell population. ID4 maintains the mammary stem cell pool by
suppressing key factors required for luminal differentiation. Furthermore, ID4 is
specifically expressed by a subset of human BLBC that possess a very poor
prognosis and a transcriptional signature similar to a mammary stem cell. These
studies identify ID4 as a mammary stem cell regulator, deconvolute the
heterogeneity of BLBC and link a subset of mammary stem cells to the aetiology of
BLBC.

PMID: 25813983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochimie. 2015 May;112:139-50. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2015.03.006. Epub 2015 Mar 
13.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) acts as an inhibitor of ID-1, -2 and -3 and 
promotes basic helix loop helix (bHLH) E47 DNA binding and transcriptional
activity.

Sharma P(1), Chinaranagari S(1), Chaudhary J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta
University, 223 James P. Brawley Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA, 30314, USA. (2)Center for
Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta University, 223 James 
P. Brawley Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA, 30314, USA. Electronic address:
jchaudhary@cau.edu.

The four known ID proteins (ID1-4, Inhibitor of Differentiation) share a
homologous helix loop helix (HLH) domain and act as dominant negative regulators 
of basic-HLH transcription factors. ID proteins also interact with many non-bHLH 
proteins in complex networks. The expression of ID proteins is increasingly
observed in many cancers. Whereas ID-1, ID-2 and ID-3, are generally considered
as tumor promoters, ID4 on the contrary has emerged as a tumor suppressor. In
this study we demonstrate that ID4 heterodimerizes with ID-1, -2 and -3 and
promote bHLH DNA binding, essentially acting as an inhibitor of inhibitors of
differentiation proteins. Interaction of ID4 was observed with ID1, ID2 and ID3
that was dependent on intact HLH domain of ID4. Interaction with bHLH protein E47
required almost 3 fold higher concentration of ID4 as compared to ID1.
Furthermore, inhibition of E47 DNA binding by ID1 was restored by ID4 in an EMSA 
binding assay. ID4 and ID1 were also colocalized in prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP. The alpha helix forming alanine stretch N-terminal, unique to HLH ID4
domain was required for optimum interaction. Ectopic expression of ID4 in DU145
prostate cancer line promoted E47 dependent expression of CDKNI p21. Thus
counteracting the biological activities of ID-1, -2 and -3 by forming inactive
heterodimers appears to be a novel mechanism of action of ID4. These results
could have far reaching consequences in developing strategies to target ID
proteins for cancer therapy and understanding biologically relevant
ID-interactions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Société Française de Biochimie et Biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4402281 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25778840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Med. 2015 Jun;4(6):914-24. doi: 10.1002/cam4.427. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

Id3 induces an Elk-1-caspase-8-dependent apoptotic pathway in squamous carcinoma 
cells.

Chen YS(1), Aubee J(1), DiVito KA(1), Zhou H(1), Zhang W(1), Chou FP(2),
Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Rosenthal DS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University, Washington, District of Columbia, 20057. (2)Institute of Biochemistry
and Biotechnology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, 402, Taiwan.
(3)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington,
District of Columbia, 20057.

Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA-binding (Id) proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors. The Id protein family (Id1-Id4) mediates tissue
homeostasis by regulating cellular processes including differentiation,
proliferation, and apoptosis. Ids typically function as dominant negative HLH
proteins, which bind other HLH proteins and sequester them away from DNA promoter
regions. Previously, we have found that Id3 induced apoptosis in immortalized
human keratinocytes upon UVB exposure, consistent with its role as a tumor
suppressor. To investigate the role of Id3 in malignant squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) cells (A431), a tetracycline-regulated inducible system was used to induce 
Id3 in cell culture and mouse xenograft models. We found that upon Id3 induction,
there was a decrease in cell number under low serum conditions, as well as in
soft agar. Microarray, RT-PCR, immunoblot, siRNA, and inhibitor studies revealed 
that Id3 induced expression of Elk-1, an E-twenty-six (ETS)-domain transcription 
factor, inducing procaspase-8 expression and activation. Id3 deletion mutants
revealed that 80 C-terminal amino acids, including the HLH, are important for
Id3-induced apoptosis. In a mouse xenograft model, Id3 induction decreased tumor 
size by 30%. Using immunofluorescent analysis, we determined that the tumor size 
decrease was also mediated through apoptosis. Furthermore, we show that Id3
synergizes with 5-FU and cisplatin therapies for nonmelanoma skin cancer cells.
Our studies have shown a molecular mechanism by which Id3 induces apoptosis in
SCC, and this information can potentially be used to develop new treatments for
SCC patients.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4472214
PMID: 25693514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(2):541-9.

Increased hypermethylation of glutathione S-transferase P1, DNA-binding protein
inhibitor, death associated protein kinase and paired box protein-5 genes in
triple-negative breast cancer Saudi females.

Hafez MM(1), Al-Shabanah OA, Al-Rejaie SS, Al-Harbi NO, Hassan ZK, Alsheikh A, Al
Theyab AI, Aldelemy ML, Sayed-Ahmed MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia E-mail : sayedahmedmm@hotmail.com.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer
(BC) with higher metastatic rate and both local and systemic recurrence compared 
to non-TNBC. The generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) secondary to
oxidative stress is associated with DNA damage, chromosomal degradation and
alterations of both hypermethylation and hypomethylation of DNA. This study
concerns differential methylation of promoter regions in specific groups of genes
in TNBC and non-TNBC Saudi females in an effort to understand whether epigenetic 
events might be involved in breast carcinogenesis, and whether they might be used
as markers for Saudi BCs. Methylation of glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1),
T-cadherin (CDH13), Paired box protein 5 (PAX5), death associated protein kinase 
(DAPK), twist-related protein (TWIST), DNA-binding protein inhibitor (ID4), High 
In Normal-1 (HIN-1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (p16), cyclin D2 and
retinoic acid receptor-ß (RARß1) genes was analyzed by methylation specific
polymerase chain reaction (MSP) in 200 archival formalin- fixed paraffin embedded
BC tissues divided into 3 groups; benign breast tissues (20), TNBC (80) and
non-TNBC (100). The relationships between methylation status, and clinical and
pathological characteristics of patients and tumors were assessed. Higher
frequencies of GSTP1, ID4, TWIST, DAPK, PAX5 and HIN-1 hypermethylation were
found in TNBC than in non-TNBC. Hypermethylation of GSTP1, CDH13, ID4, DAPK,
HIN-1 and PAX5 increased with tumor grade increasing. Other statistically
significant correlations were identified with studied genes. Data from this study
suggest that increased hypermethylation of GSTP1, ID4, TWIST, DAPK, PAX5 and
HIN-1 genes in TNBC than in non-TNBC can act as useful biomarker for BCs in the
Saudi population. The higher frequency of specific hypermethylated genes
paralleling tumor grade, size and lymph node involvement suggests contributions
to breast cancer initiation and progression.

PMID: 25684485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 2;10(2):e0116839. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116839.
eCollection 2015.

Inhibitor of DNA Binding 4 (ID4) is highly expressed in human melanoma tissues
and may function to restrict normal differentiation of melanoma cells.

Peretz Y(1), Wu H(1), Patel S(1), Bellacosa A(1), Katz RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Temple University Health System, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Melanoma tissues and cell lines are heterogeneous, and include cells with
invasive, proliferative, stem cell-like, and differentiated properties. Such
heterogeneity likely contributes to the aggressiveness of the disease and
resistance to therapy. One model suggests that heterogeneity arises from rare
cancer stem cells (CSCs) that produce distinct cancer cell lineages. Another
model suggests that heterogeneity arises through reversible cellular plasticity, 
or phenotype-switching. Recent work indicates that phenotype-switching may
include the ability of cancer cells to dedifferentiate to a stem cell-like state.
We set out to investigate the phenotype-switching capabilities of melanoma cells,
and used unbiased methods to identify genes that may control such switching. We
developed a system to reversibly synchronize melanoma cells between 2D-monolayer 
and 3D-stem cell-like growth states. Melanoma cells maintained in the stem
cell-like state showed a striking upregulation of a gene set related to
development and neural stem cell biology, which included SRY-box 2 (SOX2) and
Inhibitor of DNA Binding 4 (ID4). A gene set related to cancer cell motility and 
invasiveness was concomitantly downregulated. Intense and pervasive ID4 protein
expression was detected in human melanoma tissue samples, suggesting disease
relevance for this protein. SiRNA knockdown of ID4 inhibited switching from
monolayer to 3D-stem cell-like growth, and instead promoted switching to a highly
differentiated, neuronal-like morphology. We suggest that ID4 is upregulated in
melanoma as part of a stem cell-like program that facilitates further adaptive
plasticity. ID4 may contribute to disease by preventing stem cell-like melanoma
cells from progressing to a normal differentiated state. This interpretation is
guided by the known role of ID4 as a differentiation inhibitor during normal
development. The melanoma stem cell-like state may be protected by factors such
as ID4, thereby potentially identifying a new therapeutic vulnerability to drive 
differentiation to the normal cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4314081
PMID: 25642713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Med Assoc Thai. 2014 Oct;97(10):1004-8.

ID4 gene polymorphism and osteoporosis in Thai menopausal women.

Chupeerach C, Kulanuwat S, Chuenta W, Wannaiampikul S, Schuh VA, Preutthipan S,
Tungtrongchitr R.

BACKGROUND: The inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) protein regulates osteogenic and
adipogenic cell fate and lack of lD4 gene expression decreased osteoblast
differentiation. Variant in the ID4 gene polymorphism has not been reported with 
osteoporosis.
OBJECTIVE: To identify whether ID4 can be a marker gene for osteoporosis in Thai 
menopausal women.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The 3 'UTR of lD4 (rs3798339) single nucleotide polymorphism
was examined bypolymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
method (PCR-RFLP), together with lumbar spine bone mineral density (BAMD) in 160 
Thai menopausal women.
RESULTS: Lumbar spine 3 (L3) had a significantly lower BMD score in women with
the TT genotype, compared with the CT+CC genotypes (p = 0.037). This disappeared 
after the adjustment of various factors.
CONCLUSION: The polymorphism at 3'UTR of lD4 gene can alter ID4 mRNA stability,
and may be linked to the function of proteins. However, this needs confirmation
in larger populations. The present study is useful as an initial investigation
into ID4 gene polymorphism in osteoporosis.

PMID: 25632614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Neurosci. 2015 Jan 21;35(3):1274-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2568-14.2015.

Chronic oligodendrogenesis and remyelination after spinal cord injury in mice and
rats.

Hesp ZC(1), Goldstein EZ, Miranda CJ(2), Kaspar BK, McTigue DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Studies Program. (2)Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, Ohio 43205. (3)Center for Brain and Spinal Cord Repair, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, and Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio 43205. (4)Department of Neuroscience, and Center for Brain and Spinal Cord
Repair, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, and
dana.mctigue@osumc.edu.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2015 May 6;35(18):7313. Goldstein, Evan A [Corrected to Goldstein,
Evan Z] and Kaspar, Brain K [Corrected to Kaspar, Brian K].

Adult progenitor cells proliferate in the acutely injured spinal cord and their
progeny differentiate into new oligodendrocytes (OLs) that remyelinate spared
axons. Whether this endogenous repair continues beyond the first week postinjury 
(wpi), however, is unknown. Identifying the duration of this response is
essential for guiding therapies targeting improved recovery from spinal cord
injury (SCI) by enhancing OL survival and/or remyelination. Here, we used two
PDGFRa-reporter mouse lines and rats injected with a GFP-retrovirus to assess
progenitor fate through 80 d after injury. Surprisingly, new OLs were generated
as late as 3 months after injury and their processes ensheathed axons near and
distal to the lesion, colocalized with MBP, and abutted Caspr+ profiles,
suggesting newly formed myelin. Semithin sections confirmed stereotypical thin OL
remyelination and few bare axons at 10 wpi, indicating that demyelination is
relatively rare. Astrocytes in chronic tissue expressed the pro-OL
differentiation and survival factors CNTF and FGF-2. In addition, pSTAT3+ NG2
cells were present through at least 5 wpi, revealing active signaling of the
Jak/STAT pathway in these cells. The progenitor cell fate genes Sox11, Hes5, Id2,
Id4, BMP2, and BMP4 were dynamically regulated for at least 4 wpi. Collectively, 
these data verify that the chronically injured spinal cord is highly dynamic.
Endogenous repair, including oligodendrogenesis and remyelination, continues for 
several months after SCI, potentially in response to growth factors and/or
transcription factor changes. Identifying and understanding spontaneous repair
processes such as these is important so that beneficial plasticity is not
inadvertently interrupted and effort is not exerted to needlessly duplicate
ongoing spontaneous repair.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/351274-17$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4300327
PMID: 25609641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biol Reprod. 2015 Feb;92(2):54. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.125757. Epub 2015 Jan
7.

Transcriptional and translational heterogeneity among neonatal mouse
spermatogonia.

Hermann BP(1), Mutoji KN(2), Velte EK(3), Ko D(4), Oatley JM(5), Geyer CB(6),
McCarrey JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio,
Texas brian.hermann@utsa.edu. (2)Department of Biology, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas. (3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina.
(4)Department of Management Science and Statistics, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas. (5)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of
Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina East Carolina Diabetes and
Obesity Institute, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are a subset of undifferentiated spermatogonia
responsible for ongoing spermatogenesis in mammalian testes. Spermatogonial stem 
cells arise from morphologically homogeneous prospermatogonia, but growing
evidence suggests that only a subset of prospermatogonia develops into the
foundational SSC pool. This predicts that subtypes of undifferentiated
spermatogonia with discrete mRNA and protein signatures should be distinguishable
in neonatal testes. We used single-cell quantitative RT-PCR to examine mRNA
levels of 172 genes in individual spermatogonia from 6-day postnatal (P6) mouse
testes. Cells enriched from P6 testes using the StaPut or THY1(+) magnetic cell
sorting methods exhibited considerable heterogeneity in the abundance of specific
germ cell and stem cell mRNAs, segregating into one somatic and three distinct
spermatogonial clusters. However, P6 Id4-eGFP(+) transgenic spermatogonia, which 
are known to be enriched for SSCs, were more homogeneous in their mRNA levels,
exhibiting uniform levels for the majority of genes examined (122 of 172).
Interestingly, these cells displayed nonuniform (50 of 172) expression of a
smaller cohort of these genes, suggesting there is substantial heterogeneity even
within the Id4-eGFP(+) population. Further, although immunofluorescence staining 
largely demonstrated conformity between mRNA and protein levels, some proteins
were observed in patterns that were disparate from those detected for the
corresponding mRNAs in Id4-eGFP(+) spermatogonia (e.g., Kit, Sohlh2, Stra8),
suggesting additional heterogeneity is introduced at the posttranscriptional
level. Taken together, these data demonstrate the existence of multiple
spermatogonial subtypes in P6 mouse testes and raise the intriguing possibility
that these subpopulations may correlate with the development of functionally
distinct spermatogenic cell types.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4342790
PMID: 25568304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015 Mar 16;28(3):373-83. doi: 10.1021/tx500333q. Epub 2015 Jan
6.

Iron nanoparticles significantly affect the in vitro and in vivo expression of Id
genes.

Zou J(1), Wang X, Zhang L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University , Nanjing 210096,
China.

In recent DNA microarray studies, we found that the transcription of the Id3 gene
was significantly down-regulated in five cell lines (RAW264.7, Hepa1-6, THP-1,
HepG2, and HL7702) treated with two doses (50 and 100 µg/mL) of a DMSA-coated
magnetite nanoparticle. Given the regulatory roles of Id genes in the cell cycle,
growth, and differentiation, we wanted to do more investigations on the effect of
the nanoparticle upon the Id genes. This study detected the expression of Id
genes in six cell lines (the above cell lines plus HeLa) treated with the
nanoparticle at the same doses using quantitative PCR. The results revealed that 
the expression of Id genes was significantly affected by the nanoparticle in
these cell lines. Under each treatment, the Id3 gene was significantly (p < 0.01)
down-regulated in all cell lines, the Id1 gene was significantly down-regulated
in all cell lines except the RAW264.7 cells, and the Id2 gene was significantly
down-regulated in the HepG2, HL7702, and HeLa cells. Because the Id1, Id2, and
Id3 genes were significantly down-regulated in three liver-derived cell lines
(Hepa1-6, HepG2, and HL7702) in both microarray and PCR detections, this study
then detected the expression of Id genes in the liver tissues of mice that were
intravenously injected with the nanoparticle at two doses (2 and 5 mg/kg body
weight). The results revealed that the expression of Id1, Id2, and Id3 genes was 
also significantly down-regulated in the liver tissues under each treatment.
Another Id gene, Id4, was also significantly regulated in some cells or liver
tissues treated with the nanoparticle. These results reveal that the nanoparticle
exerts a significant effect on the in vitro and in vivo expression of Id genes.
This study thus provides new insights into the Id-related nanotoxicity of the
nanoparticle and the close relationship between the regulation of Id genes and
iron.

PMID: 25522732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1855(1):92-103. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.12.002. 
Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4): From development to cancer.

Patel D(1), Morton DJ(1), Carey J(2), Havrda MC(3), Chaudhary J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA. (2)Department of
Experimental Radiation Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Norris Cotton Cancer Center and Geisel Medical School at Dartmouth, Lebanon,
NH, USA. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Cancer Research and
Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA.
Electronic address: jchaudhary@cau.edu.

Highly conserved Inhibitors of DNA-Binding (ID1-ID4) genes encode
multi-functional proteins whose transcriptional activity is based on dominant
negative inhibition of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors.
Initial animal models indicated a degree of compensatory overlap between ID genes
such that deletion of multiple ID genes was required to generate easily
recognizable phenotypes. More recently, new model systems have revealed
alterations in mice harboring deletions in single ID genes suggesting complex
gene and tissue specific functions for members of the ID gene family. Because ID 
genes are highly expressed during development and their function is associated
with a primitive, proliferative cellular phenotype there has been significant
interest in understanding their potential roles in neoplasia. Indeed, numerous
studies indicate an oncogenic function for ID1, ID2 and ID3. In contrast, the
inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) presents a paradigm shift in context of
well-established role of ID1, ID2 and ID3 in development and cancer. Apart from
some degree of functional redundancy such as HLH dependent interactions with bHLH
protein E2A, many of the functions of ID4 are distinct from ID1, ID2 and ID3: ID4
proteins a) regulate distinct developmental processes and tissue expression in
the adult, b) promote stem cell survival, differentiation and/or timing of
differentiation, c) epigenetic inactivation/loss of expression in several
advanced stage cancers and d) increased expression in some cancers such as those 
arising in the breast and ovary. Thus, in spite of sharing the conserved HLH
domain, ID4 defies the established model of ID protein function and expression.
The underlying molecular mechanism responsible for the unique role of ID4 as
compared to other ID proteins still remains largely un-explored. This review will
focus on the current understanding of ID4 in context of development and cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4312723
PMID: 25512197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Apr;11(4):2477-85. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.3084. Epub 2014 Dec
11.

Changes in the expression of DNA-binding/differentiation protein inhibitors in
neurons and glial cells of the gerbil hippocampus following transient global
cerebral ischemia.

Lee JC(1), Chen BH(2), Cho JH(1), Kim IH(1), Ahn JH(1), Park JH(1), Tae HJ(3),
Cho GS(4), Yan BC(5), Kim DW(6), Hwang IK(7), Park J(3), Lee YL(2), Choi SY(3),
Won MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, School of Medicine, Kangwon National University,
Chuncheon, Gangwon 200-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Physiology,
Institute of Neurodegeneration and Neuroregeneration, College of Medicine, Hallym
University, Chuncheon, Gangwon 200-702, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Biomedical Science, Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Hallym
University, Chuncheon, Gangwon 200-702, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul 136-705, Republic of
Korea. (5)Institute of Integrative Traditional and Western Medicine, Medical
College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225001, P.R. China. (6)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Research Institute of Oral Sciences,
College of Dentistry, Kangnung-Wonju National University, Gangneung, Gangwon
210-702, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Research Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

Inhibitors of DNA-binding/differentiation (ID) proteins bind to basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, including those that regulate
differentiation and cell-cycle progression during development, and regulate gene 
transcription. However, little is known about the role of ID proteins in the
brain under transient cerebral ischemic conditions. In the present study, we
examined the effects of ischemia-reperfusion (I-R) injury on the immunoreactivity
and protein levels of IDs 1-4 in the gerbil hippocampus proper Cornu Ammonis
regions CA1-3 following 5 min of transient cerebral ischemia. Strong ID1
immunoreactivity was detected in the nuclei of pyramidal neurons in the
hippocampal CA1-3 regions; immunoreactivity was significantly changed following
I-R in the CA1 region, but not in the CA2/3 region. Five days following I-R, ID1 
immunoreactivity was not detected in the CA1 pyramidal neurons. ID1
immunoreactivity was detected only in GABAergic interneurons in the ischemic CA1 
region. Weak ID4 immunoreactivity was detected in non-pyramidal cells, and
immunoreactivity was again only changed in the ischemic CA1 region. Five days
following I-R, strong ID4 immunoreactivity was detected in non-pyramidal cells,
which were identified as microglia, and not astrocytes, in the ischemic CA1
region. Furthermore, changes in the protein levels of ID1 and ID4 in the ischemic
CA1 region studied by western blot were consistent with patterns of
immunoreactivity. In summary, these results indicate that immunoreactivity and
protein levels of ID1 and ID4 are distinctively altered following transient
cerebral ischemia only in the CA1 region, and that the changes in ID1 and ID4
expression may relate to the ischemia-induced delayed neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC4337738
PMID: 25503067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Feb;24(2):101-7. doi: 10.1111/exd.12582.

Inhibitor of differentiation-4 (Id4) stimulates pigmentation in melanoma leading 
to histiocyte infiltration.

DiVito KA(1), Trabosh VA, Chen YS, Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Georgetown University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA.

TGF-ß and the inhibitors of differentiation (Id) are linked. Smad7 and other
TGF-ß inhibitors can potently suppress melanomagenesis; however, little work
examining Ids has been reported in melanoma, particularly for Id4. Here, we
report that Id4, but not Id2 or Id3 expression, surprisingly, activated robust
melanin production in xenografts of previously amelanotic (lacking pigment)
1205Lu/Smad7 (S7) cells. Fontana-Masson stain and de-novo expression of MART-1
and tyrosinase proteins confirmed melanin production. Additionally, pigment-laden
CD163+ mouse histiocytes with areas of extensive necrosis were found throughout
S7/Id4 tumors, but not in parental 1205Lu, S7/Id2 or S7Id3-derived tumors.
Mechanistic investigation revealed increased nuclear M-microphthalmia-associated 
transcription factor (MITF) and MART-1 promoter activation following Id4
expression in 1205Lu and WM852 melanoma cells, suggesting broader implications
for Id4 in melanin synthesis. In human tumors, melanin colocalized with Id4
expression establishing a correlation. Current chemotherapeutics for melanoma are
only marginally effective. Immunotherapy provides the most promise, yet the role 
of innate immunity is poorly understood. Here, TGF-ß suppression followed by Id4 
expression results in extensive melanin synthesis and robust histiocyte
recruitment following tumorigenesis, a novel role for Id4. Our results suggest
that TGF-ß suppression coupled with pigment overproduction triggers an innate
immune response resulting in tumor necrosis.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25363621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Mol Biol Lett. 2014 Dec;19(4):611-22. doi: 10.2478/s11658-014-0216-2. Epub
2014 Oct 29.

Gene expression patterns in bone following lipopolysaccharide stimulation.

Yang J(1), Su N, Du X, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Center of Bone
Metabolism and Repair, Trauma Center, Institute of Surgery Research, Daping
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Bone displays suppressed osteogenesis in inflammatory diseases such as sepsis and
rheumatoid arthritis. However, the underlying mechanisms have not yet been
clearly explained. To identify the gene expression patterns in the bone, we
performed Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array with RNA isolated from mouse
femurs 4 h after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration. The gene expressions
were confirmed with real-time PCR. The serum concentration of the N-terminal
propeptide of type I collagen (PINP), a bone-formation marker, was determined
using ELISA. A total of 1003 transcripts were upregulated and 159 transcripts
were downregulated (more than twofold upregulation or downregulation). Increased 
expression levels of the inflammation-related genes interleukin-6 (IL-6),
interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) and tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a) were confirmed from in
the period 4 h to 72 h after LPS administration using real-time PCR. Gene
ontogene analysis found four bone-related categories involved in four biological 
processes: system development, osteoclast differentiation, ossification and bone 
development. These processes involved 25 upregulated genes. In the KEGG database,
we further analyzed the transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) pathway, which is
strongly related to osteogenesis. The upregulated bone morphogenetic protein 2
(BMP2) and downregulated inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (Id4) expressions were
further confirmed by real-time PCR after LPS stimulation. The osteoblast function
was determined through examination of the expression levels of core binding
factor 1 (Cbfa1) and osteocalcin (OC) in bone tissues and serum PINP from 4 h to 
72 h after LPS administration. The expressions of OC and Cbfa1 decreased 6 h
after administration (p < 0.05). Significantly suppressed PINP levels were
observed in the later stage (from 8 h to 72 h, p < 0.05) but not in the early
stage (4 h or 6 h, p > 0.05) of LPS stimulation. The results of this study
suggest that LPS induces elevated expressions of skeletal system development- and
osteoclast differentiation-related genes and inflammation genes at an early stage
in the bone. The perturbed functions of these two groups of genes may lead to a
faint change in osteogenesis at an early stage of LPS stimulation. Suppressed
bone formation was found at later stages in response to LPS stimulation.

PMID: 25355239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:189-216. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00005-1.

Id proteins: small molecules, mighty regulators.

Ling F(1), Kang B(1), Sun XH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (2)Immunobiology Cancer Research Program, Oklahoma 
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. Electronic address:
sunx@omrf.org.

The family of inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins is a group of
evolutionarily conserved molecules, which play important regulatory roles in
organisms ranging from Drosophila to humans. Id proteins are small polypeptides
harboring a helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif, which are best known to mediate
dimerization with other basic HLH proteins, primarily E proteins. Because Id
proteins do not possess the basic amino acids adjacent to the HLH motif necessary
for DNA binding, Id proteins inhibit the function of E protein homodimers, as
well as heterodimers between E proteins and tissue-specific bHLH proteins.
However, Id proteins have also been shown to have E protein-independent
functions. The Id genes are broadly but differentially expressed in a variety of 
cell types. Transcription of the Id genes is controlled by transcription factors 
such as C/EBPß and Egr as well as by signaling pathways triggered by different
stimuli, which include bone morphogenic proteins, cytokines, and ligands of T
cell receptors. In general, Id proteins are capable of inhibiting the
differentiation of progenitors of different cell types, promoting cell-cycle
progression, delaying cellular senescence, and facilitating cell migration. These
properties of Id proteins enable them to play significant roles in stem cell
maintenance, vasculogenesis, tumorigenesis and metastasis, the development of the
immune system, and energy metabolism. In this review, we intend to highlight the 
current understanding of the function of Id proteins and discuss gaps in our
knowledge about the mechanisms whereby Id proteins exert their diverse effects in
multiple cellular processes.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):410-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu457. Epub 2014 Sep
4.

DNA methylation analysis of human myoblasts during in vitro myogenic
differentiation: de novo methylation of promoters of muscle-related genes and its
involvement in transcriptional down-regulation.

Miyata K(1), Miyata T(2), Nakabayashi K(3), Okamura K(4), Naito M(5), Kawai T(6),
Takada S(4), Kato K(7), Miyamoto S(8), Hata K(6), Asahara H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems BioMedicine and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.
(2)Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. 
(3)Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan nakabaya-k@ncchd.go.jp asahara.syst@tmd.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Systems BioMedicine and. (5)Department of Systems BioMedicine,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan and. (6)Maternal-Fetal Biology, National
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (8)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan.
(9)Department of Systems BioMedicine and Department of Systems BioMedicine,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan and Department of Molecular and Experimental
Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
nakabaya-k@ncchd.go.jp asahara.syst@tmd.ac.jp.

Although DNA methylation is considered to play an important role during myogenic 
differentiation, chronological alterations in DNA methylation and gene expression
patterns in this process have been poorly understood. Using the Infinium
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip array, we obtained a chronological profile of the
genome-wide DNA methylation status in a human myoblast differentiation model,
where myoblasts were cultured in low-serum medium to stimulate myogenic
differentiation. As the differentiation of the myoblasts proceeded, their global 
DNA methylation level increased and their methylation patterns became more
distinct from those of mesenchymal stem cells. Gene ontology analysis revealed
that genes whose promoter region was hypermethylated upon myoblast
differentiation were highly significantly enriched with muscle-related terms such
as 'muscle contraction' and 'muscle system process'. Sequence motif analysis
identified 8-bp motifs somewhat similar to the binding motifs of ID4 and ZNF238
to be most significantly enriched in hypermethylated promoter regions. ID4 and
ZNF238 have been shown to be critical transcriptional regulators of
muscle-related genes during myogenic differentiation. An integrated analysis of
DNA methylation and gene expression profiles revealed that de novo DNA
methylation of non-CpG island (CGI) promoters was more often associated with
transcriptional down-regulation than that of CGI promoters. These results
strongly suggest the existence of an epigenetic mechanism in which DNA
methylation modulates the functions of key transcriptional factors to
coordinately regulate muscle-related genes during myogenic differentiation.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4275072
PMID: 25190712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):7172-82.

EZH2 dependent H3K27me3 is involved in epigenetic silencing of ID4 in prostate
cancer.

Chinaranagari S(1), Sharma P(1), Chaudhary J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta
University, Atlanta, GA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation protein 4 (ID4) is dominant negative
helix loop helix transcriptional regulator is epigenetically silenced due to
promoter hyper-methylation in many cancers including prostate. However, the
underlying mechanism involved in epigenetic silencing of ID4 is not known. Here, 
we demonstrate that ID4 promoter methylation is initiated by EZH2 dependent
tri-methylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3). ID4 expressing (LNCaP) and 
non-expressing (DU145 and C81) prostate cancer cell lines were used to
investigate EZH2, H3K27me3 and DNMT1 enrichment on ID4 promoter by Chromatin
immuno-precipitation (ChIP). Enrichment of EZH2, H3K27Me3 and DNMT1 in DU145 and 
C81 cell lines compared to ID4 expressing LNCaP cell line. Knockdown of EZH2 in
DU145 cell line led to re-expression of ID4 and decrease in enrichment of EZH2,
H3K27Me3 and DNMT1 demonstrating that ID4 is regulated in an EZH2 dependent
manner. ChIP data on prostate cancer tissue specimens and cell lines suggested
EZH2 occupancy and H3K27Me3 marks on the ID4 promoter. Collectively, our data
indicate a PRC2 dependent mechanism in ID4 promoter silencing in prostate cancer 
through recruitment of EZH2 and a corresponding increase in H3K27Me3. Increased
EZH2 but decreased ID4 expression in prostate cancer strongly supports this
model.

PMCID: PMC4196193
PMID: 25115397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3159-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.108498. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Dual roles for Id4 in the regulation of estrogen signaling in the mammary gland
and ovary.

Best SA(1), Hutt KJ(2), Fu NY(1), Vaillant F(1), Liew SH(3), Hartley L(4), Scott 
CL(5), Lindeman GJ(5), Visvader JE(6).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Ovarian Biology Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Monash Medical Center,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia Department of Anatomy and Developmental
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (3)Ovarian Biology
Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Monash Medical Center, Clayton, Victoria
3168, Australia. (4)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (5)ACRF Stem 
Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medicine, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia Department of Medical Oncology,
The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. (6)ACRF Stem
Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical Biology, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia visvader@wehi.edu.au.

The HLH transcriptional regulator Id4 exerts important roles in different organs,
including the neural compartment, where Id4 loss usually results in early
lethality. To explore the role of this basally restricted transcription factor in
the mammary gland, we generated a cre-inducible mouse model. MMTV- or
K14-cre-mediated deletion of Id4 led to a delay in ductal morphogenesis,
consistent with previous findings using a germ-line knockout mouse model. A
striking increase in the expression of ERa (Esr1), PR and FoxA1 was observed in
both the basal and luminal cellular subsets of Id4-deficient mammary glands.
Together with chromatin immunoprecipitation of Id4 on the Esr1 and Foxa1 promoter
regions, these data imply that Id4 is a negative regulator of the ERa signaling
axis. Unexpectedly, examination of the ovaries of targeted mice revealed
significantly increased numbers of secondary and antral follicles, and reduced
Id4 expression in the granulosa cells. Moreover, expression of the cascade of
enzymes that are crucial for estrogen biosynthesis in the ovary was decreased in 
Id4-deficient females and uterine weights were considerably lower, indicating
impaired estrogen production. Thus, compromised ovarian function and decreased
circulating estrogen likely contribute to the mammary ductal defects evident in
Id4-deficient mice. Collectively, these data identify Id4 as a novel regulator of
estrogen signaling, where Id4 restrains ERa expression in the basal and luminal
cellular compartments of the mammary gland and regulates estrogen biosynthesis in
the ovary.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25038044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Jun;22(3):675-80. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.03.019.

[Clinical significance of ID4 methylation detection by quantitative
methylation-specific PCR in acute leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y(1), Zhong WW(2), Kang HY(3), Wang LL(4), Lu XC(1), Yu L(5), Zhu HL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China. (2)Department of Geriatric Endocrinology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (3)Clinical Laboratory, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (4)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (5)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. E-mail: chunhuiliyu@yahoo.com. (6)Department of 
Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.
E-mail: bjzhl202_cn@sina.com.

The advances of treatment improved the prognosis of the patients with acute
leukemia (AL) in the last decade, but the lack of general biomarker for
predicting relapse in AL, which is one of the most important factors influencing 
the survival and prognosis. DNA methylation of ID4 gene promoter occurred
frequently in patients with AL and was found to be highly related to the tumor
progression. Based on the previous work of the setup of methylation-specific
quantitative PCR system for ID4 gene, this study was designed to investigate the 
relation between the quantitative indicator of methylation density, percentage of
methylation reference(PMR) value, and different disease status of AL. PMR of ID4 
was detected by MS-PCR in bone marrow (BM) samples of 17 healthy persons and 54
AL patients in the status of newly diagnosis, complete remission and disease
relapse. The results showed that at different disease status, PMR value in newly 
diagnosed group was significantly lower than that in complete remission group (P 
= 0.031). Among serial samples, PMR value remained very low at the status of
patients with continuous complete remission (<1.5), and increased along with the
accumulation of tumor cells at relapse. In 1 relapse case, the abnormal rise of
PMR value occurred prior to morphological relapse. PMR value seemed to be related
to body tumor cell load. It is concluded that the quantitative indicator of
methylation density and PMR value may reflect the change of tumor cell load in
acute leukemia patients. Dynamic monitoring of PMR maybe predict leukemia
relapse.

PMID: 24989275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 15;74(16):4482-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1597. Epub 
2014 Jun 24.

Crosstalk between glioma-initiating cells and endothelial cells drives tumor
progression.

Jeon HM(1), Kim SH(2), Jin X(3), Park JB(4), Kim SH(5), Joshi K(6), Nakano I(6), 
Kim H(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. Institute of Life Science and Natural Resources, Korea University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Institute of Life Science and Natural Resources,
Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Department of Neurological Surgery,
James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(3)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. (4)Specific Organs Cancer Branch, Research Institute and Hospital,
National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Pathology,
Yonsei University of School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (6)Department 
of Neurological Surgery, James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio. (7)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Institute of Life Science and Natural
Resources, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. hg-kim@korea.ac.kr.

Glioma-initiating cells (GIC), which reside within the perivascular
microenvironment to maintain self-renewal capacity, are responsible for
glioblastoma initiation, progression, and recurrence. However, the molecular
mechanisms controlling crosstalk between GICs and endothelial cells are poorly
understood. Here, we report that, in both GICs and endothelial cells,
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-driven activation of nitric oxide (NO)
synthase increases NO-dependent inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) expression, 
which in turn promotes JAGGED1-NOTCH activity through suppression of miR129 that 
specifically represses JAGGED1 suppression. This signaling axis promotes tumor
progression along with increased GIC self-renewal and growth of tumor vasculature
in the xenograft tumors, which is dramatically suppressed by NOTCH inhibitor. ID4
levels correlate positively with NOS2 (NO synthase-2), HES1, and HEY1 and
negatively with miR129 in primary GICs. Thus, targeting the PDGF-NOS-ID4-miR129
axis and NOTCH activity in the perivascular microenvironment might serve as an
efficacious therapeutic modality for glioblastoma.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4295931
PMID: 24962027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Mol Signal. 2014 Jun 14;9:5. doi: 10.1186/1750-2187-9-5. eCollection 2014.

Identification of endoglin-dependent BMP-2-induced genes in the murine
periodontal ligament cell line PDL-L2.

Ishibashi O(1), Inui T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biological Macromolecules, Graduate School of Life and
Environmental Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, 1-1 Gakuen-cho, Naka-ku,
Sakai 599-8531, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The periodontal ligament (PDL), connective tissue located between the
cementum of teeth and alveolar bone of the mandibula, plays an important role in 
the maintenance and regeneration of periodontal tissues. We reported previously
that endoglin was involved in the BMP-2-induced osteogenic differentiation of
mouse PDL cells, which is associated with Smad-2 phosphorylation but not
Smad-1/5/8 phosphorylation. In this study, to elucidate the detailed mechanism
underlying the BMP-2 signalling pathway unique to PDL cells, we performed a
microarray analysis to identify BMP-2-inducible genes in PDL-L2 cells, a mouse
PDL-derived cell line, with or without endoglin knockdown.
FINDINGS: Sixty-four genes were upregulated more than twofold by BMP-2 in PDL-L2 
cells. Of these genes, 11 were endoglin-dependent, including Id4, which encodes
ID4, a helix-loop-helix transcription factor closely associated with TGF-ß
signaling and osteoblast differentiation. The endoglin-dependent induction of ID4
by BMP-2 was also verified at a protein level.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that ID4 could be a signal mediator involved in
the BMP-2-induced endoglin-dependent osteogenic differentiation of PDL cells.

PMCID: PMC4062770
PMID: 24949082  [PubMed]


42. Genes Dev. 2014 Jun 15;28(12):1351-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.240465.114.

Functional and molecular features of the Id4+ germline stem cell population in
mouse testes.

Chan F(1), Oatley MJ(1), Kaucher AV(1), Yang QE(1), Bieberich CJ(2), Shashikant
CS(3), Oatley JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Reproductive Biology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington 99164, USA;
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland at Baltimore County,
Baltimore, Maryland 21250, USA; (3)Department of Animal Science, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2014 Aug 1;28(15):1733.

The maintenance of cycling cell lineages relies on undifferentiated
subpopulations consisting of stem and progenitor pools. Features that delineate
these cell types are undefined for many lineages, including spermatogenesis,
which is supported by an undifferentiated spermatogonial population. Here, we
generated a transgenic mouse line in which spermatogonial stem cells are marked
by expression of an inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4)-green fluorescent
protein (Gfp) transgene. We found that Id4-Gfp(+) cells exist primarily as a
subset of the type A(single) pool, and their frequency is greatest in neonatal
development and then decreases in proportion during establishment of the
spermatogenic lineage, eventually comprising ~ 2% of the undifferentiated
spermatogonial population in adulthood. RNA sequencing analysis revealed that
expression of 11 and 25 genes is unique for the Id4-Gfp(+)/stem cell and
Id4-Gfp(-)/progenitor fractions, respectively. Collectively, these findings
provide the first definitive evidence that stem cells exist as a rare subset of
the A(single) pool and reveal transcriptome features distinguishing stem cell and
progenitor states within the mammalian male germline.

© 2014 Chan et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4066404
PMID: 24939937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Dec;25(12):2859-70. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013050446. Epub 2014
Jun 12.

Lupus nephritis susceptibility loci in women with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Chung SA(1), Brown EE(2), Williams AH(3), Ramos PS(4), Berthier CC(5), Bhangale
T(6), Alarcon-Riquelme ME(7), Behrens TW(8), Criswell LA(1), Graham DC(9),
Demirci FY(10), Edberg JC(11), Gaffney PM(12), Harley JB(13), Jacob CO(14),
Kamboh MI(10), Kelly JA(12), Manzi S(15), Moser-Sivils KL(16), Russell LP(3),
Petri M(17), Tsao BP(18), Vyse TJ(9), Zidovetzki R(19), Kretzler M(5), Kimberly
RP(11), Freedman BI(20), Graham RR(8), Langefeld CD(21); International Consortium
for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Genetics.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Rosalind Russell-Ephraim P. Engleman Medical
Research Center for Arthritis, University of California, San Francisco,
California; (2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama, Birmingham,
Alabama; Division of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of
Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama; (3)Department of
Biostatistical Sciences, Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; (4)Division of Rheumatology and
Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina; (5)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; (6)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, and. (7)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; Human DNA Variability Area, Pfizer-University of Granada-Andalusian
Government Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research, Granada, Spain;
(8)Immunology Tissue Growth and Repair Human Genetics Group, Genentech Inc.,
South San Francisco, California; (9)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine 
and Immunology, Infection, and Inflammatory Disease, Kings College, London,
United Kingdom; (10)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; (11)Division of
Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama; (12)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research
Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
(13)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Division of Rheumatology, Center for
Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio; University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; (14)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California; (15)Department of Medicine, West Penn Allegheny Health
System, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (16)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; College of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; (17)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; (18)Division of Rheumatology, Department
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California; (19)Department of
Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California, Riverside, California;
and. (20)Section on Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. (21)Department of
Biostatistical Sciences, Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; clangefe@wakehealth.edu.

Lupus nephritis is a manifestation of SLE resulting from glomerular immune
complex deposition and inflammation. Lupus nephritis demonstrates familial
aggregation and accounts for significant morbidity and mortality. We completed a 
meta-analysis of three genome-wide association studies of SLE to identify lupus
nephritis-predisposing loci. Through genotyping and imputation, >1.6 million
markers were assessed in 2000 unrelated women of European descent with SLE (588
patients with lupus nephritis and 1412 patients with lupus without nephritis).
Tests of association were computed using logistic regression adjusting for
population substructure. The strongest evidence for association was observed
outside the MHC and included markers localized to 4q11-q13 (PDGFRA, GSX2;
P=4.5×10(-7)), 16p12 (SLC5A11; P=5.1×10(-7)), 6p22 (ID4; P=7.4×10(-7)), and
8q24.12 (HAS2, SNTB1; P=1.1×10(-6)). Both HLA-DR2 and HLA-DR3, two well
established lupus susceptibility loci, showed evidence of association with lupus 
nephritis (P=0.06 and P=3.7×10(-5), respectively). Within the class I region,
rs9263871 (C6orf15-HCG22) had the strongest evidence of association with lupus
nephritis independent of HLA-DR2 and HLA-DR3 (P=8.5×10(-6)). Consistent with a
functional role in lupus nephritis, intra-renal mRNA levels of PDGFRA and
associated pathway members showed significant enrichment in patients with lupus
nephritis (n=32) compared with controls (n=15). Results from this large-scale
genome-wide investigation of lupus nephritis provide evidence of multiple
biologically relevant lupus nephritis susceptibility loci.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4243339
PMID: 24925725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Aug;28(8):1239-53. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1100. Epub 2014 Jun 
12.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) inactivation promotes de novo
steroidogenesis and castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Patel D(1), Knowell AE, Korang-Yeboah M, Sharma P, Joshi J, Glymph S,
Chinaranagari S, Nagappan P, Palaniappan R, Bowen NJ, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development (D.P., A.E.K., P.S.,
J.J., S.G., S.C., P.N., N.J.B., J.C.), Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia
30314; and College of Pharmacy (M.K.-Y., R.P.), Mercer University, Atlanta,
Georgia 30341.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in men in the Western
world. The transition of androgen-dependent PCa to castration-resistant (CRPC) is
a major clinical manifestation during disease progression and presents a
therapeutic challenge. Our studies have shown that genetic ablation of inhibitor 
of differentiation 4 (Id4), a dominant-negative helix loop helix protein, in mice
results in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia lesions and decreased Nkx3.1
expression without the loss of androgen receptor (Ar) expression. ID4 is also
epigenetically silenced in the majority of PCa. However, the clinical relevance
and molecular pathways altered by ID4 inactivation in PCa are not known. This
study investigates the effect of loss of ID4 in PCa cell lines on tumorigenicity 
and addresses the underlying mechanism. Stable silencing of ID4 in LNCaP cells
(L-ID4) resulted in increased proliferation, migration, invasion, and
anchorage-independent growth. An increase in the rate of tumor growth, weight,
and volume was observed in L-ID4 xenografts compared with that in the LNCaP cells
transfected with nonspecific short hairpin RNA (L+ns) in noncastrated mice.
Interestingly, tumors were also observed in castrated mice, suggesting that loss 
of ID4 promotes CRPC. RNA sequence analysis revealed a gene signature mimicking
that of constitutively active AR in L-ID4, which was consistent with gain of de
novo steroidogenesis. Prostate-specific antigen expression as a result of
persistent AR activation was observed in L-ID4 cells but not in L+ns cells. The
results demonstrate that ID4 acts as a tumor suppressor in PCa, and its loss,
frequently observed in PCa, promotes CRPC through constitutive AR activation.

PMCID: PMC4116589
PMID: 24921661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 6;9(6):e98669. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098669. eCollection 
2014.

Comparative analysis of gene expression data reveals novel targets of
senescence-associated microRNAs.

Napolitano M(1), Comegna M(2), Succoio M(2), Leggiero E(3), Pastore L(2),
Faraonio R(2), Cimino F(4), Passaro F(2).

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS SDN Foundation, Naples, Italy. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine and
Medical Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy; CEINGE 
- Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy. (3)CEINGE - Advanced Biotechnologies, 
Naples, Italy. (4)IRCCS SDN Foundation, Naples, Italy; Department of Molecular
Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples,
Italy; CEINGE - Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy.

In the last decades, cellular senescence is viewed as a complex mechanism
involved in different processes, ranging from tumor suppression to induction of
age-related degenerative alterations. Senescence-inducing stimuli are myriad and,
recently, we and others have demonstrated the role exerted by microRNAs in the
induction and maintenance of senescence, by the identification of a subset of
Senescence-Associated microRNAs (SAmiRs) up-regulated during replicative or
stress-induced senescence and able to induce a premature senescent phenotype when
over-expressed in human primary cells. With the intent to find novel direct
targets of two specific SAmiRs, SAmiR-494 and -486-5p, and cellular pathways
which they are involved in, we performed a comparative analysis of gene
expression profiles available in literature to select genes down-regulated upon
replicative senescence of human primary fibroblasts. Among them, we searched for 
SAmiR's candidate targets by analyzing with different target prediction
algorithms their 3'UTR for the presence of SAmiR-binding sites. The expression
profiles of selected candidates have been validated on replicative and
stress-induced senescence and the targeting of the 3'UTRs was assessed by
luciferase assay. Results allowed us to identify Cell Division Cycle Associated 2
(CDCA2) and Inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation type 4 (ID4) as novel
targets of SAmiR-494 and SAmiR-486-5p, respectively. Furthermore, we demonstrated
that the over-expression of CDCA2 in human primary fibroblasts was able to
partially counteract etoposide-induced senescence by mitigating the activation of
DNA Damage Response.

PMCID: PMC4048207
PMID: 24905922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Andrology. 2014 Jul;2(4):607-14. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00226.x. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

Evaluation of candidate spermatogonial markers ID4 and GPR125 in testes of adult 
human cadaveric organ donors.

Sachs C(1), Robinson BD, Andres Martin L, Webster T, Gilbert M, Lo HY, Rafii S,
Ng CK, Seandel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.

The optimal markers for human spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are not known.
Among the genes recently linked to SSCs in mice and other animals are the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor ID4 and the orphan G-protein-coupled
receptor GPR125. While ID4 and GPR125 are considered putative markers for SSCs,
they have not been evaluated for coexpression in human tissue. Furthermore,
neither the size nor the character of the human spermatogonial populations that
express ID4 and GPR125, respectively, are known. A major barrier to addressing
these questions is the availability of healthy adult testis tissue from donors
with no known reproductive health problems. To overcome this obstacle, we have
employed healthy testicular tissue from a novel set of organ donors (n = 16; aged
17-68 years) who were undergoing post-mortem clinical organ procurement. Using
immunolabelling, we found that ID4 and GPR125 are expressed on partially
overlapping spermatogonial populations and are more broadly expressed in the
normal adult human testis. In addition, we found that expression of ID4 remained 
stable during ageing. These findings suggest that ID4 and GPR125 could be
efficacious for identifying previously unrecognized human spermatogonial
subpopulations in conjunction with other putative human stem cell markers, both
in younger and older donors.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4153397
PMID: 24902969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2014 Jun 1;19:1386-97.

Id transcriptional regulators in adipogenesis and adipose tissue metabolism.

Patil M, Sharma BK, Satyanarayana A.

Id proteins (Id1-Id4) are helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional regulators that 
lack a basic DNA binding domain. They act as negative regulators of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors by forming heterodimers and inhibit
their DNA binding and transcriptional activity. Id proteins are implicated in the
regulation of various cellular mechanisms such as cell proliferation, cellular
differentiation, cell fate determination, angiogenesis and tumorigenesis. A
handful of recent studies also disclosed that Id proteins have critical functions
in adipocyte differentiation and adipose tissue metabolism. Here, we reviewed the
progress made thus far in understanding the specific functions of Id proteins in 
adipose tissue differentiation and metabolism. In addition to reviewing the known
mechanisms of action, we also discuss possible additional mechanisms in which Id 
proteins might participate in regulating adipogenic and metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC4117208
PMID: 24896358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Fertil Steril. 2014 Aug;102(2):558-565.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.04.022.
Epub 2014 May 23.

Enrichment of spermatogonial stem cells from long-term cultured human testicular 
cells.

Nickkholgh B(1), Mizrak SC(1), Korver CM(1), van Daalen SK(1), Meissner A(1),
Repping S(1), van Pelt AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Women's and Children's Hospital, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Center
for Reproductive Medicine, Women's and Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
a.m.vanpelt@amc.uva.nl.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the degree of enrichment of spermatogonial stem cells
(SSCs) from human testicular cell cultures by ITGA6+, HLA-/ITGA6+, GPR125+, and
HLA-/GPR125+ magnetic-assisted cell sorting (MACS).
DESIGN: Experimental basic science study.
SETTING: Reproductive biology laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Multiple samples of cryopreserved human testicular cells from two
prostate cancer patients with normal spermatogenesis.
INTERVENTION(S): Cultured human testicular cells subjected to four sorting
strategies based on MACS and xenotransplanted to the testes of mice to determine 
the enrichment for SSCs.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Enrichment for human spermatogonia and SSCs tested by
expression analysis of spermatogonial markers ITGA6, GPR125, ZBTB16, UCHL1, and
ID4 using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and by
xenotransplantation into the testes of mice, respectively.
RESULT(S): Compared with the nonsorted cultured testicular cells, only the ITGA6+
and HLA-/GPR125+ sorted cells showed enrichment for ID4. No difference in
expression of ZBTB16 and UCHL1 was observed. Xenotransplantation of the sorted
cell fractions showed a 7.1-fold enrichment of SSCs with ITGA6+.
CONCLUSION(S): Magnetic-assisted cell sorting of cultured human testicular cells 
using ITGA6 allows for enrichment of SSCs, which aids in further molecular
characterization of cultured human SSCs and enhances testicular colonization upon
transplantation in future clinical settings.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24864010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Sep;99(9):E1617-26. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3799. Epub
2014 May 21.

Identification of targets of Twist1 transcription factor in thyroid cancer cells.

Di Maro G(1), Orlandella FM, Bencivenga TC, Salerno P, Ugolini C, Basolo F,
Maestro R, Salvatore G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche (G.D.M., F.M.O.,
T.C.B., P.S.), Università di Napoli "Federico II," Italy 80131; Dipartimento di
Area Medica (C.U.), Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy 56126; 
Dipartimento di Patologia Chirugica, Medica (F.B.), Molecolare e dell'Area
Critica dell' Università di Pisa, Italy 56124; Experimental Oncology 1 (R.M.),
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico, Aviano, Italy 33081; and Dipartimento di
Scienze Motorie e del Benessere (G.S.), Universita' "Parthenope," 80133 Napoli,
Italy 80133.

CONTEXT: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is one of the most aggressive human
tumors. Twist1 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor involved in
cancer development and progression. We showed that Twist1 affects thyroid cancer 
cell survival and motility.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify Twist1 targets in thyroid cancer cells.
DESIGN: Transcriptional targets of Twist1 were identified by gene expression
profiling the TPC-Twist1 cells in comparison with control cells. Functional
studies were performed by silencing in TPC-Twist1 and in CAL62 cells the top 10
upregulated genes and by evaluating cell proliferation, survival, migration, and 
invasion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed to verify direct binding of
Twist1 to target genes. Quantitative RT-PCR was applied to study the expression
level of Twist1 target genes in human thyroid carcinoma samples.
RESULTS: According to the gene expression profile, the top functions enriched in 
TPC-Twist1 cells were cellular movement, cellular growth and proliferation, and
cell death and survival. Silencing of the top 10 upregulated genes reduced
viability of TPC-Twist1 and of CAL62 cells. Silencing of COL1A1, KRT7, and PDZK1 
also induced cell death. Silencing of HS6ST2, THRB, ID4, RHOB, and PDZK1IP also
impaired migration and invasion of TPC-Twist1 and of CAL62 cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that Twist1 directly binds the promoter of the top 10 
upregulated genes. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that HS6ST2, COL1A1, F2RL1,
LEPREL1, PDZK1, and PDZK1IP1 are overexpressed in thyroid carcinoma samples
compared with normal thyroids.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a set of genes that mediates Twist1 biological effects
in thyroid cancer cells.

PMID: 24848707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS One. 2014 May 8;9(5):e96822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096822. eCollection 
2014.

The diagnostic value of DNA methylation in leukemia: a systematic review and
meta-analysis.

Jiang D(1), Hong Q(1), Shen Y(1), Xu Y(1), Zhu H(1), Li Y(1), Xu C(1), Ouyang
G(2), Duan S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Ningbo
First Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence supports a role of DNA methylation in the
pathogenesis of leukemia. The aim of our study was to evaluate the potential
genes with aberrant DNA methylation in the prediction of leukemia risk by a
comprehensive meta-analysis of the published data.
METHODS: A series of meta-analyses were done among the eligible studies that were
harvested after a careful filtration of the searching results from PubMed
literature database. Mantel-Haenszel odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals
were computed for each methylation event assuming the appropriate model.
RESULTS: A total of 535 publications were initially retrieved from PubMed
literature database. After a three-step filtration, we harvested 41 case-control 
articles that studied the role of gene methylation in the prediction of leukemia 
risk. Among the involving 30 genes, 20 genes were shown to be aberrantly
methylated in the leukemia patients. A further subgroup meta-analysis by subtype 
of leukemia showed that CDKN2A, CDKN2B, ID4 genes were significantly
hypermethylated in acute myeloid leukemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analyses identified strong associations between a number of
genes with aberrant DNA methylation and leukemia. Further studies should be
required to confirm the results in the future.

PMCID: PMC4014555
PMID: 24810788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Apr;22(2):269-74. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.02.002.

[Establishment of methylation-specific quantitative PCR system for ID4 gene in
acute leukemia cells and its specificity and sensitivity].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu Y(1), Kang HY(2), Wang LL(3), Lu XC(1), Zhu HL(4), Yu L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China. (2)Clinical Laboratory, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China. (3)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China. (4)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. E-mail:bjzhl202_cn@sina.com. (5)Department of
Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. E-mail:
chunhuiliyu@yahoo.com.

DNA methylation of ID4 gene promoter occurred frequently in patients with acute
leukemia and was found to be highly related to the tumor progression. Due to lack
of the appropriate methylation detection methods, the relation between the
quantification of ID4 methylation and the states of acute leukemia is still
unclear. This study purposed to set up a methylation-specific quantitative PCR
system for ID4 and investigate the specificity and sensitivity of this
methylation detection. The plasmids combined with target gene as well as with
internal reference were constructed, and the standard curves were set up by using
above mentioned plasmids. The specificity of this detection system in cell lines 
was verified through techniques of MSP and quantitative MSP. The sensitivity of
this detection system was verified by mixing methylation-positive and negative
cell lines in varying proportions and through amplification of qualitative MSP.
The results showed that the standard curves were establish successfully. The
results of quantitative MS-PCR in cell lines were consistent with those of
MS-PCR, and as low as 1: 10(-5) of ID4 methylation positive cells could be
detected by the new methylation detection assay. In newly diagnosed acute
leukemia patients, the positive rate of quantitative MSP was higher. It is
concluded that a complete quantitative MSP system for ID4 methylation detection
has been established and this quantitative MSP method has good specificity and
high sensitivity.

PMID: 24762990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 9;9(4):e94022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094022. eCollection 
2014.

Identification of thyroid carcinoma related genes with mRMR and shortest path
approaches.

Xu Y(1), Deng Y(1), Ji Z(1), Liu H(1), Liu Y(1), Peng H(1), Wu J(1), Fan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology head and neck surgery, Shanghai Changzheng
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Thyroid cancer is a malignant neoplasm originated from thyroid cells. It can be
classified into papillary carcinomas (PTCs) and anaplastic carcinomas (ATCs).
Although ATCs are in an very aggressive status and cause more death than PTCs,
their difference is poorly understood at molecular level. In this study, we focus
on the transcriptome difference among PTCs, ATCs and normal tissue from a
published dataset including 45 normal tissues, 49 PTCs and 11 ATCs, by applying a
machine learning method, maximum relevance minimum redundancy, and identified 9
genes (BCL2, MRPS31, ID4, RASAL2, DLG2, MY01B, ZBTB5, PRKCQ and PPP6C) and 1
miscRNA (miscellaneous RNA, LOC646736) as important candidates involved in the
progression of thyroid cancer. We further identified the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) sub network from the shortest paths among the 9 genes in a PPI 
network constructed based on STRING database. Our results may provide insights to
the molecular mechanism of the progression of thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC3981740
PMID: 24718460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Clin Oncol. 2014 May 10;32(14):1453-62. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2013.51.3242. Epub
2014 Apr 7.

IGH@ translocations are prevalent in teenagers and young adults with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and are associated with a poor outcome.

Russell LJ(1), Enshaei A, Jones L, Erhorn A, Masic D, Bentley H, Laczko KS,
Fielding AK, Goldstone AH, Goulden N, Mitchell CD, Wade R, Vora A, Moorman AV,
Harrison CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lisa J. Russell, Amir Enshaei, Lisa Jones, Amy Erhorn, Dino Masic, Helen
Bentley, Anthony V. Moorman, and Christine J. Harrison, Leukaemia Research
Cytogenetics Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne; Karl S. Laczko, Leica Microsystems, Gateshead; Adele K.
Fielding, Royal Free and University College London Medical School; Anthony H.
Goldstone, University College London Hospital; Nicholas Goulden, Great Ormond St 
Hospital, London; Christopher D. Mitchell, John Radcliffe Hospital; Rachel Wade, 
Clinical Trial Service Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford; and Ajay Vora,
Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Feb 20;33(6):672.
    J Clin Oncol. 2014 Nov 10;32(32):3687.

PURPOSE: To determine the prevalence and prognostic association of immunoglobulin
heavy chain (IGH@) translocations in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The cohort comprised 3,269 patients treated on either the
UKALL2003 trial for children and adolescents (1 to 24 years old) or the UKALLXII 
trial for adolescents and adults (15 to 59 years old). High-throughput
fluorescent in situ hybridization was used to detect IGH@ translocations.
RESULTS: We identified IGH@ translocations in 5% of patients with ALL (159 of
3,269 patients), in patients with both B-cell (148 of 2,863 patients) and T-cell 
(11 of 408 patients) disease. Multiple partner genes were identified including
CRLF2 (n = 35), five members of the CEPB gene family (n = 17), and ID4 (n = 11). 
The level of the IGH@-positive clone varied and indicated that some IGH@
translocations were primary events, whereas others were secondary aberrations
often associated with other established aberrations. The age profile of patients 
with IGH@ translocations was distinctive, with a median age of 16 years and peak 
incidence of 11% among 20- to 24-year-old patients. Among patients with B-cell
precursor ALL who were Philadelphia chromosome negative, those with an IGH@
translocation had an inferior overall survival compared with other patients
(UKALL2003: hazard ratio, 2.37; 95% CI, 1.34 to 4.18; P = .003; UKALLXII: hazard 
ratio, 1.73; 95% CI, 1.22 to 2.47; P = .002). However, this adverse effect was
not independent of age or minimal residual disease status and did not seem to be 
driven by an increased risk of relapse.
CONCLUSION: IGH@ translocations define a genetic feature that is frequent among
adolescents and young adults with ALL. Although associated with an adverse
outcome in adults, it is not an independent prognostic factor in children and
adolescents.

PMID: 24711557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Diabetes. 2014 Aug;63(8):2668-75. doi: 10.2337/db13-1757. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Small intestinal glucose exposure determines the magnitude of the incretin effect
in health and type 2 diabetes.

Marathe CS(1), Rayner CK(1), Bound M(1), Checklin H(1), Standfield S(1), Wishart 
J(1), Lange K(1), Jones KL(1), Horowitz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Royal Adelaide Hospital,
Adelaide, Australia and Centre of Research Excellence in Translating Nutritional 
Science to Good Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(2)Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Royal Adelaide Hospital,
Adelaide, Australia and Centre of Research Excellence in Translating Nutritional 
Science to Good Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
michael.horowitz@adelaide.edu.au.

The potential influence of gastric emptying on the "incretin effect," mediated by
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1), is unknown. The objectives of this study were to determine the effects
of intraduodenal (ID) glucose infusions at 2 (ID2) and 4 (ID4) kcal/min (equating
to two rates of gastric emptying within the physiological range) on the size of
the incretin effect, gastrointestinal glucose disposal (GIGD), plasma GIP, GLP-1,
and glucagon secretion in health and type 2 diabetes. We studied 10 male
BMI-matched controls and 11 male type 2 patients managed by diet or metformin
only. In both groups, GIP, GLP-1, and the magnitude of incretin effect were
greater with ID4 than ID2, as was GIGD; plasma glucagon was suppressed by ID2,
but not ID4. There was no difference in the incretin effect between the two
groups. Based on these data, we conclude that the rate of small intestinal
glucose exposure (i.e., glucose load) is a major determinant of the comparative
secretion of GIP and GLP-1, as well as the magnitude of the incretin effect and
GIGD in health and type 2 diabetes.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 24696447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Hum Reprod Update. 2014 Sep-Oct;20(5):702-16. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmu015. Epub
2014 Mar 27.

Genetic variants underlying risk of endometriosis: insights from meta-analysis of
eight genome-wide association and replication datasets.

Rahmioglu N(1), Nyholt DR(2), Morris AP(3), Missmer SA(4), Montgomery GW(5),
Zondervan KT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Center for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK nilufer.rahmioglu@well.ox.ac.uk
krina.zondervan@well.ox.ac.uk. (2)Neurogenetics, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research 
Institute, Brisbane QLD 4029, Australia. (3)Wellcome Trust Center for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK Department of
Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, Duncan Building, Daulby Street, Liverpool
L69 3GA, UK. (4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Molecular Epidemiology, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Brisbane QLD 4029, Australia. (6)Wellcome Trust Center for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK Nuffield
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

BACKGROUND: Endometriosis is a heritable common gynaecological condition
influenced by multiple genetic and environmental factors. Genome-wide association
studies (GWASs) have proved successful in identifying common genetic variants of 
moderate effects for various complex diseases. To date, eight GWAS and
replication studies from multiple populations have been published on
endometriosis. In this review, we investigate the consistency and heterogeneity
of the results across all the studies and their implications for an improved
understanding of the aetiology of the condition.
METHODS: Meta-analyses were conducted on four GWASs and four replication studies 
including a total of 11 506 cases and 32 678 controls, and on the subset of
studies that investigated associations for revised American Fertility Society
(rAFS) Stage III/IV including 2859 cases. The datasets included 9039 cases and 27
343 controls of European (Australia, Belgium, Italy, UK, USA) and 2467 cases and 
5335 controls of Japanese ancestry. Fixed and Han and Elkin random-effects
models, and heterogeneity statistics (Cochran's Q test), were used to investigate
the evidence of the nine reported genome-wide significant loci across datasets
and populations.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis showed that seven out of nine loci had consistent
directions of effect across studies and populations, and six out of nine remained
genome-wide significant (P < 5 × 10(-8)), including rs12700667 on 7p15.2 (P = 1.6
× 10(-9)), rs7521902 near WNT4 (P = 1.8 × 10(-15)), rs10859871 near VEZT (P = 4.7
× 10(-15)), rs1537377 near CDKN2B-AS1 (P = 1.5 × 10(-8)), rs7739264 near ID4 (P =
6.2 × 10(-10)) and rs13394619 in GREB1 (P = 4.5 × 10(-8)). In addition to the six
loci, two showed borderline genome-wide significant associations with Stage
III/IV endometriosis, including rs1250248 in FN1 (P = 8 × 10(-8)) and rs4141819
on 2p14 (P = 9.2 × 10(-8)). Two independent inter-genic loci, rs4141819 and
rs6734792 on chromosome 2, showed significant evidence of heterogeneity across
datasets (P < 0.005). Eight of the nine loci had stronger effect sizes among
Stage III/IV cases, implying that they are likely to be implicated in the
development of moderate to severe, or ovarian, disease. While three out of nine
loci were inter-genic, the remaining were in or near genes with known functions
of biological relevance to endometriosis, varying from roles in developmental
pathways to cellular growth/carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis shows remarkable consistency in endometriosis GWAS
results across studies, with little evidence of population-based heterogeneity.
They also show that the phenotypic classifications used in GWAS to date have been
limited. Stronger associations with Stage III/IV disease observed for most loci
emphasize the importance for future studies to include detailed sub-phenotype
information. Functional studies in relevant tissues are needed to understand the 
effect of the variants on downstream biological pathways.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.

PMCID: PMC4132588
PMID: 24676469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Mar;35(3):247-50. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2014.03.017.

[Effects of arsenic trioxide on Id4 methylation status in bone marrow mononuclear
cells and its clinical efficacy for myelodysplastic syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Shao X(1), Lu R(1), Guan X(1), Liu J(1), Zhao J(1), Shao Z(1), Zhan Z(1), Ma
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology & Oncology, Harbin First Hospital, Harbin 150010,
China.

PMID: 24666496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Wound Repair Regen. 2014 Mar-Apr;22(2):220-7. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12142.

Deregulation of epidermal stem cell niche contributes to pathogenesis of
nonhealing venous ulcers.

Stojadinovic O(1), Pastar I, Nusbaum AG, Vukelic S, Krzyzanowska A, Tomic-Canic
M.

Author information: 
(1)Wound Healing and Regenerative Medicine Research Program, Department of
Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL.

The epidermis is maintained by epidermal stem cells (ESCs) that reside in
distinct niches and contribute to homeostasis and wound closure. Keratinocytes at
the nonhealing edges of venous ulcers (VUs) are healing-incompetent,
hyperproliferative, and nonmigratory, suggesting deregulation of ESCs. To date,
genes which regulate ESC niches have been studied in mice only. Utilizing
microarray analysis of VU nonhealing edges, we identified changes in expression
of genes harboring regulation of ESCs and their fate. In a prospective clinical
study of 10 VUs, we confirmed suppression of the bone morphogenetic protein
receptor (BMPR) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) as well as inhibitors of
DNA-binding proteins 2 and 4 (ID2 and ID4). We also found decreased levels of
phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), nuclear presence of ß-catenin, 
and overexpression of its transcriptional target, c-myc, indicating activation of
the Wnt pathway. Additionally, we found down-regulation of leucine-rich repeats
and immunoglobulin-like domains protein 1 (LRIG1), a gene important for
maintaining ESCs in a quiescent state, and absence of keratin 15 (K15), a marker 
of the basal stem cell compartment suggesting local depletion of ESCs. Our study 
shows that loss of genes important for regulation of ESCs and their fate along
with activation of ß-catenin and c-myc in the VU may contribute to ESC
deprivation and a hyperproliferative, nonmigratory healing incapable wound edge.

© 2014 The Wound Healing Society.

PMCID: PMC4329920
PMID: 24635172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2014 Mar 5;34(10):3523-35. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2606-13.2014.

The transcriptome of utricle hair cell regeneration in the avian inner ear.

Ku YC(1), Renaud NA, Veile RA, Helms C, Voelker CC, Warchol ME, Lovett M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Department of Otolaryngology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110.

Sensory hair cell loss is the major cause of hearing and balance disorders.
Mammals are incapable of sustained hair cell regeneration, but lower vertebrates 
can regenerate these mechano-electrical transducers. We present the first
comprehensive transcriptome (by mRNA-Seq) of hair cell regeneration in the chick 
utricle. We provide pathway and pattern annotations and correlate these with the 
phenotypic events that occur during regeneration. These patterns are surprisingly
synchronous and highly punctuated. We show how these patterns are a new resource 
for identifying components of the hair cell transcriptome and identify 494 new
putative hair-cell-specific genes and validate three of these (of three tested)
by immunohistochemical staining. We describe many surprising new components and
dynamic expression patterns, particularly within NOTCH signaling. For example, we
show that HES7 is specifically expressed during utricle hair cell regeneration
and closely parallels the expression of HES5. Likewise, the expression of ATOH1
is closely correlated with HEYL and the HLH inhibitory transcription factors ID1,
ID2, and ID4. We investigate the correlation between fibroblast growth factor
signaling and supporting cell proliferation and show that FGF20 inhibits
supporting cell proliferation. We also present an analysis of 212 differentially 
expressed transcription factor genes in the regenerative time course that fall
into nine distinct gene expression patterns, many of which correlate with
phenotypic events during regeneration and represent attractive candidates for
future analysis and manipulation of the regenerative program in sensory epithelia
and other vertebrate neuroepithelia.

PMCID: PMC3942572
PMID: 24599453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jun;35(6):5777-86. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1767-6. Epub 2014
Feb 28.

Methylation of tumor suppressor genes in a novel panel predicts clinical outcome 
in paraffin-embedded bladder tumors.

García-Baquero R(1), Puerta P, Beltran M, Alvarez-Mújica M, Alvarez-Ossorio JL,
Sánchez-Carbayo M.

Author information: 
(1)Bladder Cancer Group, Proteomics Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Bizkaia Technology Park,
801 Building, 48160, Derio, Bizkaia, Spain.

DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) represents a frequent and early 
epigenetic event with potential applications for cancer detection and disease
evolution. Our aim was to examine the stratification and prognostic biomarker
role of the methylation of a novel panel of TSGs in bladder cancer. The
methylation status of 18 TSGs was evaluated in bladder cancer cells (n=14) and
paraffin-embedded primary bladder tumors (n=61), using a methylation-specific
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay (MS-MLPA). Recurrence,
progression, and disease-specific survival were analyzed using univariate and
multivariate Cox models. PRDM2, HLTF, ID4, DLC1, BNIP3, H2AFX, CACNA1G, TGIF, and
CACNA1A were discovered methylated in bladder cancer. The methylation of RUNX3
(p=0.026), TWIST1 (p=0.009), SFRP4 (p=0.002), and CCND2 (p=0.027) correlated to
tumor stage. Univariate analyses indicated prognostic associations for recurrence
(DLC1, SFRP5, H2AFX, CACNA1G), progression (DLC1, SFRP5, CACNA1G),
disease-specific (PRDM2, DLC1, SFRP5, CACNA1G, and TIMP3), and overall survival
(SFRP5 and TIMP3). In multivariate analyses, several TSGs remained as independent
prognosticators for recurrence (SFRP5, H2AFX), progression (CACNA1G), and
disease-specific survival (SFRP5). Thus, a novel set of TSGs was identified,
frequently methylated in bladder cancer cells and tumors. TSG methylation allowed
histopathologic and outcome stratification using paraffin-embedded tumors. This
is clinically relevant by offering a strategy for the management of patients
affected with uroepithelial neoplasias in pathology routine laboratories.

PMID: 24577895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Jun;30:14-26. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2014.02.005. Epub
2014 Feb 19.

Transcriptional control of spermatogonial maintenance and differentiation.

Song HW(1), Wilkinson MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (2)Department
of Reproductive Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego,
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
mfwilkinson@ucsd.edu.

Spermatogenesis is a multistep process that generates millions of spermatozoa per
day in mammals. A key to this process is the spermatogonial stem cell (SSC),
which has the dual property of continually renewing and undergoing
differentiation into a spermatogonial progenitor that expands and further
differentiates. In this review, we will focus on how these proliferative and
early differentiation steps in mammalian male germ cells are controlled by
transcription factors. Most of the transcription factors that have so far been
identified as promoting SSC self-renewal (BCL6B, BRACHYURY, ETV5, ID4, LHX1, and 
POU3F1) are upregulated by glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).
Since GDNF is crucial for promoting SSC self-renewal, this suggests that these
transcription factors are responsible for coordinating the action of GDNF in
SSCs. Other transcription factors that promote SSC self-renewal are expressed
independently of GDNF (FOXO1, PLZF, POU5F1, and TAF4B) and thus may act in
non-GDNF pathways to promote SSC cell growth or survival. Several transcription
factors have been identified that promote spermatogonial differentiation (DMRT1, 
NGN3, SOHLH1, SOHLH2, SOX3, and STAT3); some of these may influence the decision 
of an SSC to commit to differentiate while others may promote later
spermatogonial differentiation steps. Many of these transcription factors
regulate each other and act on common targets, suggesting they integrate to form 
complex transcriptional networks in self-renewing and differentiating
spermatogonia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4043860
PMID: 24560784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e87039. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087039. eCollection
2014.

miR-342 regulates BRCA1 expression through modulation of ID4 in breast cancer.

Crippa E(1), Lusa L(2), De Cecco L(1), Marchesi E(1), Calin GA(3), Radice P(1),
Manoukian S(4), Peissel B(4), Daidone MG(5), Gariboldi M(1), Pierotti MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy ; Molecular Genetics of Cancer,
Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare, Milano, Italy. (2)Department of
Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
dei Tumori, Milan, Italy ; Molecular Genetics of Cancer, Fondazione Istituto FIRC
di Oncologia Molecolare, Milano, Italy ; Institute for Biostatistics and Medical 
Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Department of Experimental Therapeutics and The Center for RNA Interference
and Non-Coding RNAs, The University of Texas, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Unit of Medical Genetics, Department
of Preventive and Predictive Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
Tumori, Milano, Italy. (5)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular
Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(6)Scientific Directorate, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy.

A miRNAs profiling on a group of familial and sporadic breast cancers showed that
miRNA-342 was significantly associated with estrogen receptor (ER) levels. To
investigate at functional level the role of miR-342 in the pathogenesis of breast
cancer, we focused our attention on its "in silico" predicted putative target
gene ID4, a transcription factor of the helix-loop-helix protein family whose
expression is inversely correlated with that of ER. ID4 is expressed in breast
cancer and can negatively regulate BRCA1 expression. Our results showed an
inverse correlation between ID4 and miR-342 as well as between ID4 and BRCA1
expression. We functionally validated the interaction between ID4 and miR-342 in 
a reporter Luciferase system. Based on these findings, we hypothesized that
regulation of ID4 mediated by miR-342 could be involved in the pathogenesis of
breast cancer by downregulating BRCA1 expression. We functionally demonstrated
the interactions between miR-342, ID4 and BRCA1 in a model provided by
ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line that presented high levels of ID4.
Overexpression of miR-342 in these cells reduced ID4 and increased BRCA1
expression, supporting a possible role of this mechanism in breast cancer. In the
ER-positive MCF7 and in the BRCA1-mutant HCC1937 cell lines miR-342
over-expression only reduced ID4. In the cohort of patients we studied, a
correlation between miR-342 and BRCA1 expression was found in the ER-negative
cases. As ER-negative cases were mainly BRCA1-mutant, we speculate that the
mechanism we demonstrated could be involved in the decreased expression of BRCA1 
frequently observed in non BRCA1-mutant breast cancers and could be implicated as
a causal factor in part of the familial cases grouped in the heterogeneous class 
of non BRCA1 or BRCA2-mutant cases (BRCAx). To validate this hypothesis, the
study should be extended to a larger cohort of ER-negative cases, including those
belonging to the BRCAx class.

PMCID: PMC3903605
PMID: 24475217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 2;34(1):53-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.531. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Id4 suppresses MMP2-mediated invasion of glioblastoma-derived cells by direct
inactivation of Twist1 function.

Rahme GJ(1), Israel MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH, USA [2] Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 
Hanover, NH, USA. (2)1] Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics, Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA [3] Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA.

Tumor cell invasion is a major contributor to cancer morbidity, and is of
particular importance in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), the highest
grade and most aggressive primary brain tumor. Tumor cell invasion and the
expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are required for GBM
invasion, are enhanced by inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) gene family members, Id1,
Id2 and Id3, which can be highly expressed in glioma. Id4 is expressed in GBM at 
more variable levels than these other family members and we sought to determine
its role in invasion. We found, unexpectedly, that invasion was dramatically
inhibited in cells expressing Id4 as a result of decreased MMP2, a secreted
proteinase key for brain tumor invasion. We demonstrate that Id4 decreased MMP2
expression by a direct inhibitory interaction with Twist1, a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor known to increase MMP2 expression.
Importantly, using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we show that Id4 expression
correlates with survival of glioblastoma patients and inversely correlates with
MMP2 expression. These data suggest that the upregulation of MMP2 resulting from 
decreased Id4 expression in GBM may contribute to the morbidity and mortality of 
GBM patients.

PMID: 24413082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Dec 28;19(48):9334-42. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i48.9334.

Inhibitor of differentiation proteins do not influence prognosis of biliary tract
cancer.

Harder J(1), Müller MJ(1), Fuchs M(1), Gumpp V(1), Schmitt-Graeff A(1), Fischer
R(1), Frank M(1), Opitz O(1), Hasskarl J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jan Harder, Department of Gastroenterology, Hematology and Oncology,
Hegau-Bodensee-Hochrhein Kliniken, 78221 Singen, Germany.

AIM: To investigate the expression and clinical relevance of inhibitor of
differentiation (ID) proteins in biliary tract cancer.
METHODS: ID protein expression was analyzed in 129 samples from patients with
advanced biliary tract cancer (BTC) (45 extrahepatic, 50 intrahepatic, and 34
gallbladder cancers), compared to normal controls and correlated with clinical an
pathological parameters.
RESULTS: ID1-3 proteins are frequently overexpressed in all BTC subtypes
analyzed. No correlation between increased ID protein expression and tumor
grading, tumor subtype or treatment response was detected. Survival was
influenced primary tumor localization (extrahepatic vs intrahepatic and gall
bladder cancer, OS 1.5 years vs 0.9 years vs 0.7 years, P = 0.002), by stage at
diagnosis (OS 2.7 years in stage I vs 0.6 years in stage IV, P < 0.001),
resection status and response to systemic chemotherapy. In a multivariate model, 
ID protein expression did not correlate with clinical prognosis. Nevertheless,
there was a trend of shorter OS in patients with loss of cytoplasmic ID4 protein 
expression (P = 0.076).
CONCLUSION: ID protein expression is frequently deregulated in BTC but does not
influence clinical prognosis. Their usefulness as prognostic biomarkers in BTC is
very limited.

PMCID: PMC3882406
PMID: 24409060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Apr;35(4):951-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt479. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

Id2, Id3 and Id4 overcome a Smad7-mediated block in tumorigenesis, generating
TGF-ß-independent melanoma.

DiVito KA(1), Simbulan-Rosenthal CM, Chen YS, Trabosh VA, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The role for the inhibitors of differentiation (Ids) proteins in melanomagenesis 
has been poorly explored. In other cell types, Ids have been shown to contribute 
to cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis and, along with a number of
other genes, are direct downstream targets of the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-ß pathway. Expression of Smad7, which suppress TGF-ß signaling, or
synthetic TGF-ß inhibitors, was shown to potently suppress melanomagenesis. We
found that endogenous Id2, Id3 and Id4 expression was elevated in 1205Lu versus
1205Lu cells constitutively expressing Smad7, indicating Ids may play a role in
melanomagenesis. Therefore, the effects of Tet-inducible expression of Id2, Id3
or Id4 along with Smad7 in TGF-ß-dependent 1205Lu human melanoma cells were
explored in vitro and in vivo. 1205Lu cells formed subcutaneous tumors in athymic
mice, whereas cells expressing Smad7 failed to form tumors. However, 1205Lu cells
expressing Smad7 along with doxycycline-induced Id2, Id3 or Id4 were able to
overcome the potent tumorigenic block mediated by S7, to varying degrees.
Conversely, Id small interfering RNA knockdown suppressed anchorage-independent
growth of melanoma. Histology of tumors from 1205Lu cells expressing Smad7 + Id4 
revealed an average of 31% necrosis, compared with 5.2% in tumors from 1205Lu
with vector only. Downstream, Ids suppressed cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, 
and re-upregulated invasion and metastasis-related genes matrix metalloproteinase
2 (MMP2), MMP9, CXCR4 and osteopontin, shown previously to be downregulated in
response to Smad7. This study shows that Id2, Id3 and Id4 are each able to
overcome TGF-ß dependence, and establish a role for Ids as key mediators of TGF-ß
melanomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4031572
PMID: 24343358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cancer. 2013 Dec 13;12:161. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-161.

Id4 dependent acetylation restores mutant-p53 transcriptional activity.

Knowell AE, Patel D, Morton DJ, Sharma P, Glymph S, Chaudhary J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta
University, 223 James P, Brawley Dr, SW, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA.
jchaudhary@cau.edu.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms that can restore biological activity of mutant p53 are
an area of high interest given that mutant p53 expression is observed in one
third of prostate cancer. Here we demonstrate that Id4, an HLH transcriptional
regulator and a tumor suppressor, can restore the mutant p53 transcriptional
activity in prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: Id4 was over-expressed in prostate cancer cell line DU145 harboring
mutant p53 (P223L and V274F) and silenced in LNCaP cells with wild type p53. The 
cells were used to quantitate apoptosis, p53 localization, p53 DNA binding and
transcriptional activity. Immuno-precipitation/-blot studies were performed to
demonstrate interactions between Id4, p53 and CBP/p300 and acetylation of
specific lysine residues within p53.
RESULTS: Ectopic expression of Id4 in DU145 cells resulted in increased apoptosis
and expression of BAX, PUMA and p21, the transcriptional targets of p53. Mutant
p53 gained DNA binding and transcriptional activity in the presence of Id4 in
DU145 cells. Conversely, loss of Id4 in LNCaP cells abrogated wild type p53 DNA
binding and transactivation potential. Gain of Id4 resulted in increased
acetylation of mutant p53 whereas loss of Id4 lead to decreased acetylation in
DU145 and LNCaP cells respectively. Id4 dependent acetylation of p53 was in part 
due to a physical interaction between Id4, p53 and acetyl-transferase CBP/p300.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results suggest that Id4 regulates the activity 
of wild type and mutant p53. Id4 promoted the assembly of a macromolecular
complex involving CBP/P300 that resulted in acetylation of p53 at K373, a
critical post-translational modification required for its biological activity.

PMCID: PMC3866570
PMID: 24330748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Feb;12(2):283-94. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0349. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

BMP signaling induces astrocytic differentiation of clinically derived
oligodendroglioma propagating cells.

Srikanth M(1), Kim J, Das S, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)303 E. Chicago Avenue, Ward 10-233, Chicago, IL 60611.
maya@fsm.northwestern.edu.

Oligodendrogliomas are a type of glioma that lack detailed investigation because 
of an inability to cultivate oligodendroglioma cells that faithfully recapitulate
their salient qualities. We have successfully isolated and propagated glioma
stem-like cells from multiple clinical oligodendroglioma specimens. These
oligodendroglioma-propagating cells (OligPC) are multipotent and form xenografts 
with oligodendroglioma features. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) are considered
potent inhibitors of oligodendrogliogenesis during development; therefore, the
effects of BMP signaling in OligPCs were characterized. BMP pathway components
are expressed by OligPCs and canonical signaling via Smad proteins is intact.
This signaling potently depletes CD133-positive OligPCs, decreasing
proliferation, and inducing astrocytic differentiation. Furthermore, analyses
revealed that cytoplasmic sequestration of the oligodendrocyte differentiation
factors OLIG1/2 by the BMP signaling effectors ID2 and ID4 is a plausible
underlying mechanism. These findings elucidate the molecular pathways that
underlie the effects of BMP signaling on oligodendroglioma stem-like
cells.IMPLICATIONS: Stem-like cells are capable of propagating
oligodendrogliomas, and BMP signaling potently diminishes their stemness by
inducing astrocytic differentiation, suggesting that BMP activation may be
effective as a cancer stem cell-targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC4006982
PMID: 24269952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Hematology. 2014 Sep;19(6):329-37. doi: 10.1179/1607845413Y.0000000137. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

CpG island methylator phenotype and its relationship with prognosis in adult
acute leukemia patients.

Fu HY, Wu DS, Zhou HR, Shen JZ.

OBJECTIVE: To investigated the relationship between CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP) and prognosis in adults with acute leukemia.
METHODS: Bone marrow samples from 53 acute myeloid leukemia and 50 acute
lymphoblastic leukemia patients were collected. The methylation status of 18
tumor suppressor genes was determined using methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: Greater than 30% of acute leukemia patients had methylated p15, p16,
CDH1, CDH13, RUNX3, sFRP1, ID4, and DLC-1 genes; methylation of =4 were defined
as CIMP positive. Age, type of leukemia, white blood cell count, and CIMP status 
were significantly associated with recurrence-free survival (RFS) and overall
survival (OS) (P < 0.05). CIMP status was an independent prognostic factor for OS
(hazard ratio: 2.07, 95% confidence interval: 1.03-4.15, P = 0.040).
CIMP-negative patients had significantly improved RFS and OS (P < 0.05). p16 and 
DLC1 methylation was significantly associated with RFS and OS (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: CIMP may serve as an independent risk factor for evaluating the
prognosis of patients with acute leukemia.

PMID: 24164743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Anticancer Res. 2013 Oct;33(10):4271-8.

Id4 promotes senescence and sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis in DU145
prostate cancer cells.

Carey JP(1), Knowell AE, Chinaranagari S, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, 223 James P. Brawley 
Dr. SW, Atlanta, GA 30314, U.S.A. jchaudhary@cau.edu.

Inhibitor of differentiation proteins (Id1, 2, 3 and 4) are dominant negative
regulators of basic helix loop helix transcription factors and play dominant
roles in cancer cells, spanning several molecular pathways including senescence, 
invasion, metastasis, proliferation and apoptosis. In contrast to high Id1, Id2
and Id3 expression, the expression of Id4 is epigenetically silenced in prostate 
cancer. In the present study we demonstrated a novel role of Id4, that of
promotion of cellular senescence in prostate cancer cells.MATERIALS AND METHODS: 
Id4 was ectopically expressed in DU145 cells (DU145+Id4). The cells treated with 
Doxorubicin (0-500 nm) or vehicle control were analyzed for apoptosis, senescence
(SA-beta Galactosidase), and expression of CDKN1A (p21), CDKN1B(p27), CDKN2A
(p16), E2F1, vimentin and E-cadherin by immuno-histochemistry and/or Western
blot.
RESULTS: In the present study we demonstrated that Id4 promotes cellular
senescence in prostate cancer cell line DU145. Ectopic overexpression of Id4 in
androgen receptor-negative DU145 prostate cancer cells resulted in increased
expression of p16, p21, p27, E-cadherin and vimentin but down-regulated E2F1
expression. Id4 also potentiated the effect of doxorubicin induced senescence and
apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: The absence of functional p16, pRB and p53 in DU145 suggests that Id4
could alter additional molecular pathways such as those involving E2F1 to promote
senescence and increased sensitivity to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. The
results of the present study support the role of Id4 as a tumor suppressor in
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4042247
PMID: 24122992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 3;8(10):e77351. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077351. eCollection
2013.

The fate of spermatogonial stem cells in the cryptorchid testes of RXFP2
deficient mice.

Ferguson L(1), How JJ, Agoulnik AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Herbert Wertheim College of
Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, United States of
America.

The environmental niche of the spermatogonial stem cell pool is critical to
ensure the continued generation of the germ cell population. To study the
consequences of an aberrant testicular environment in cryptorchidism we used a
mouse model with a deletion of Rxfp2 gene resulting in a high intra-abdominal
testicular position. Mutant males were infertile with the gross morphology of the
cryptorchid testis progressively deteriorating with age. Few spermatogonia were
identifiable in 12 month old cryptorchid testes. Gene expression analysis showed 
no difference between mutant and control testes at postnatal day 10. In three
month old males a decrease in expression of spermatogonial stem cell (SSC)
markers Id4, Nanos2, and Ret was shown. The direct counting of ID4+ cells
supported a significant decrease of SSCs. In contrast, the expression of Plzf, a 
marker for undifferentiated and differentiating spermatogonia was not reduced,
and the number of PLZF+ cells in the cryptorchid testis was higher in three month
old testes, but equal to control in six month old mutants. The PLZF+ cells did
not show a higher rate of apoptosis in cryptorchid testis. The expression of the 
Sertoli cell FGF2 gene required for SSC maintenance was significantly reduced in 
mutant testis. Based on these findings we propose that the deregulation of
somatic and germ cell genes in the cryptorchid testis, directs the SSCs towards
the differentiation pathway. This leads to a depletion of the SSC pool and an
increase in the number of PLZF+ spermatogonial cells, which too, eventually
decreases with the exhaustion of the stem cell pool. Such a dynamic suggests that
an early correction of cryptorchidism is critical for the retention of the SSC
pool.

PMCID: PMC3789668
PMID: 24098584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Apr;71(7):1305-14. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1444-8. Epub
2013 Aug 18.

Tetraspanin TSPAN12 regulates tumor growth and metastasis and inhibits ß-catenin 
degradation.

Knoblich K(1), Wang HX, Sharma C, Fletcher AL, Turley SJ, Hemler ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.

Ablation of tetraspanin protein TSPAN12 from human MDA-MB-231 cells significantly
decreased primary tumor xenograft growth, while increasing tumor apoptosis.
Furthermore, TSPAN12 removal markedly enhanced tumor-endothelial interactions and
increased metastasis to mouse lungs. TSPAN12 removal from human MDA-MB-231 cells 
also caused diminished association between FZD4 (a key canonical Wnt pathway
receptor) and its co-receptor LRP5. The result likely explains substantially
enhanced proteosomal degradation of ß-catenin, a key effecter of canonical Wnt
signaling. Consistent with disrupted canonical Wnt signaling, TSPAN12 ablation
altered expression of LRP5, Naked 1 and 2, DVL2, DVL3, Axin 1, and GSKß3
proteins. TSPAN12 ablation also altered expression of several genes regulated by 
ß-catenin (e.g. CCNA1, CCNE2, WISP1, ID4, SFN, ME1) that may help to explain
altered tumor growth and metastasis. In conclusion, these results provide the
first evidence for TSPAN12 playing a role in supporting primary tumor growth and 
suppressing metastasis. TSPAN12 appears to function by stabilizing FZD4-LRP5
association, in support of canonical Wnt-pathway signaling, leading to enhanced
ß-catenin expression and function.

PMID: 23955570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e71814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071814. eCollection
2013.

Mesenchymal stem cell conditioning promotes rat oligodendroglial cell maturation.

Jadasz JJ(1), Kremer D, Göttle P, Tzekova N, Domke J, Rivera FJ, Adjaye J,
Hartung HP, Aigner L, Küry P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, University of Düsseldorf,
Düsseldorf, Germany. kuery@uni-duesseldorf.de

Oligodendroglial progenitor/precursor cells (OPCs) represent the main cellular
source for the generation of new myelinating oligodendrocytes in the adult
central nervous system (CNS). In demyelinating diseases such as multiple
sclerosis (MS) myelin repair activities based on recruitment, activation and
differentiation of resident OPCs can be observed. However, the overall degree of 
successful remyelination is limited and the existence of an MS-derived
anti-oligodendrogenic milieu prevents OPCs from contributing to myelin repair. It
is therefore of considerable interest to understand oligodendroglial homeostasis 
and maturation processes in order to enable the development of remyelination
therapies. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been shown to exert positive
immunomodulatory effects, reduce demyelination, increase neuroprotection and to
promote adult neural stem cell differentiation towards the oligodendroglial
lineage. We here addressed whether MSC secreted factors can boost the OPC's
oligodendrogenic capacity in a myelin non-permissive environment. To this end, we
analyzed cellular morphologies, expression and regulation of key factors involved
in oligodendroglial fate and maturation of primary rat cells upon incubation with
MSC-conditioned medium. This demonstrated that MSC-derived soluble factors
promote and accelerate oligodendroglial differentiation, even under astrocytic
endorsing conditions. Accelerated maturation resulted in elevated levels of
myelin expression, reduced glial fibrillary acidic protein expression and was
accompanied by downregulation of prominent inhibitory differentiation factors
such as Id2 and Id4. We thus conclude that apart from their suggested application
as potential anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory MS treatment, these cells
might also be exploited to support endogenous myelin repair activities.

PMCID: PMC3741203
PMID: 23951248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Acta Radiol. 2014 Mar;55(2):208-17. doi: 10.1177/0284185113494980. Epub 2013 Jul 
29.

Hybrid iterative reconstruction algorithm in brain CT: a radiation dose reduction
and image quality assessment study.

Löve A(1), Siemund R, Höglund P, Van Westen D, Stenberg L, Petersen C,
Björkman-Burtscher IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Iterative reconstruction (IR) algorithms improve image quality and
allow for radiation dose reduction in CT. Dose reduction is particularly
challenging in brain CT where good low-contrast resolution is essential. Ideally,
evaluation of image quality combines objective measurements and subjective
assessment of clinically relevant quality criteria. Subjective assessment is
associated with various pitfalls and biases.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the potential of the hybrid IR algorithm iDOSE(4) to
preserve image quality in phantom and clinical brain CT acquired with 30% reduced
radiation dose, and to discuss the image quality assessment methods.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty patients underwent two consecutive brain CTs with
normal radiation dose (ND) and 30% reduced dose (RD). Both ND and RD were
reconstructed with FBP. In addition the reduced dose CTs were reconstructed with 
two levels of IR (ID2, ID4). Three image quality criteria (grey-white-matter
discrimination, basal ganglia delineation, general image quality) were graded and
ranked by six neuroradiologists. Noise levels and contrast-to-noise ratios (CNR) 
were measured in clinical data. Noise, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), spatial
resolution, and noise-power spectrum (NPS) were also assessed in a phantom.
RESULTS: Subjective image quality was considered adequate for clinical use for
all reconstructions, graded good or excellent in 93% of cases for ND, 83% for
ID4, 79% for ID2, and 67% for RD. For all quality parameters, ID4 and ID2 were
graded better than RD (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0055 and P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.035), but worse than ND (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). 
In clinical images, objective measurements showed lower noise and significantly
higher CNR in ID4 compared with ND and RD (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). CNR was similar for ID2
and ND. In the phantom, IR reduced noise while maintaining spatial resolution and
NPS.
CONCLUSION: The IR algorithm improves image quality of reduced dose CTs and
consistently delivers sufficient image quality for clinical purposes. Pitfalls
related to subjective assessment can be addressed with careful study design.

PMID: 23897306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Gastroenterology. 2013 Oct;145(4):820-30.e10. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.07.034. 
Epub 2013 Jul 25.

Progastrin stimulates colonic cell proliferation via CCK2R- and
ß-arrestin-dependent suppression of BMP2.

Jin G(1), Westphalen CB, Hayakawa Y, Worthley DL, Asfaha S, Yang X, Chen X, Si Y,
Wang H, Tailor Y, Friedman RA, Wang TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Progastrin stimulates colonic mucosal proliferation and
carcinogenesis through the cholecystokinin 2 receptor (CCK2R)-partly by
increasing the number of colonic progenitor cells. However, little is known about
the mechanisms by which progastrin stimulates colonic cell proliferation. We
investigated the role of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in progastrin
induction of colonic cell proliferation via CCK2R.
METHODS: We performed microarray analysis to compare changes in gene expression
in the colonic mucosa of mice that express a human progastrin transgene, gastrin 
knockout mice, and C57BL/6 mice (controls); the effects of progastrin were also
determined on in vitro colonic crypt cultures from cholecystokinin 2 receptor
knockout and wild-type mice. Human colorectal and gastric cancer cells that
expressed CCK2R were incubated with progastrin or Bmp2; levels of ß-arrestin 1
and 2 were knocked down using small interfering RNAs. Cells were analyzed for
progastrin binding, proliferation, changes in gene expression, and symmetric cell
division.
RESULTS: The BMP pathway was down-regulated in the colons of human progastrin
mice compared with controls. Progastrin suppressed transcription of Bmp2 through 
a pathway that required CCK2R and was mediated by ß-arrestin 1 and 2. In mouse
colonic epithelial cells, down-regulation of Bmp2 led to decreased
phosphorylation of Smads1/5/8 and suppression of inhibitor of DNA binding 4. In
human gastric and colorectal cancer cell lines, CCK2R was necessary and
sufficient for progastrin binding and induction of proliferation; these effects
were blocked when cells were incubated with recombinant Bmp2. Incubation with
progastrin increased the number of CD44(+), bromodeoxyuridine+, and NUMB(+)
cells, indicating an increase in symmetric divisions of putative cancer stem
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Progastrin stimulates proliferation in colons of mice and cultured
human cells via CCK2R- and ß-arrestin 1 and 2-dependent suppression of Bmp2
signaling. This process promotes symmetric cell division.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3829714
PMID: 23891976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Clin Implant Dent Relat Res. 2015 Jan;17 Suppl 1:e35-44. doi: 10.1111/cid.12121. 
Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Correlation between the bone density recorded by a computerized implant motor and
by a histomorphometric analysis: a preliminary in vitro study on bovine ribs.

Iezzi G(1), Scarano A, Di Stefano D, Arosio P, Doi K, Ricci L, Piattelli A,
Perrotti V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University of
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the present preliminary in vitro study on bovine ribs was
to validate a new intraoperative site-specific classification of bone Density
Index (IDI), obtained by an innovative computerized implant motor, by correlating
these data with the data obtained by the histomorphometrical evaluation of the
same samples.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five segments of bovine ribs were used, and a total of 22 
perforations were performed. A computerized implant motor ("Torque Measuring
Motor") was used to evaluate the bone density, which was classified into four
classes: ID1, ID2, ID3, and ID4. Histomorphometrical analysis of bone density,
expressed as percentage of bony trabeculae over the total biopsy area, was also
performed. The data of bone density obtained by the implant motor were
statistically correlated with the histomorphometrical results.
RESULTS: A significant positive correlation was found between the bone density
measured by the implant motor and the bone density assessed by histomorphometry
(r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.89, p<U+2009><<U+2009>.0001). Moreover, a significant positive correlation in D1, D2,
and D4, whereas a negative, not significant correlation in D3 was found.
CONCLUSION: Within the limitations of this in vitro study, the intraoperative
site-specific classification of bone density, obtained with this innovative
system, could be helpful for the clinician to tailor the surgical protocol to the
different situations in implant dentistry.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23879771  [PubMed - in process]


75. Glia. 2013 Sep;61(9):1471-87. doi: 10.1002/glia.22535. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Myelin inhibits oligodendroglial maturation and regulates oligodendrocytic
transcription factor expression.

Plemel JR(1), Manesh SB, Sparling JS, Tetzlaff W.

Author information: 
(1)ICORD (International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries), Blusson Spinal Cord
Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Myelin loss is a hallmark of multiple sclerosis (MS) and promoting central
nervous system myelin repair has become a major therapeutic target. Despite the
presence of oligodendrocytes precursors cells (OPCs) in chronic lesions of MS,
remyelination often fails. The mechanism underlying this failure of remyelination
remains unknown, but it is hypothesized that environmental cues act to inhibit
the maturation/differentiation of oligodendroglia, preventing remyelination. The 
rate of CNS remyelination is correlated to the speed of phagocytosis of myelin
debris, which is present following demyelination and trauma. Thus, myelin debris 
could inhibit CNS remyelination. Here, we demonstrate that OPCs cultured on
myelin were robustly inhibited in their maturation, as characterized by the
decreased expression of immature and mature oligodendrocytes markers, the
impaired production of myelin gene products, as well as their stalled
morphological complexity relative to OPCs cultured on a control substrate. OPCs
in contact with myelin stopped proliferating and decreased the expression of OPC 
markers to a comparable degree as cells grown on a control substrate. The
expression of two transcription factors known to prevent OPC differentiation and 
maturation were increased in cells that were in contact with myelin: inhibitor of
differentiation family (ID) members 2 and 4. Overexpression of ID2 and ID4 in
OPCs was previously reported to decrease the percentage of cells expressing
mature oligodendrocyte markers. However, knockdown of ID2 and/or ID4 in OPCs did 
not increase oligodendroglial maturation on or off of myelin, suggesting that
contact with myelin regulates additional regulatory elements.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23839973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cancer Genet. 2013 May;206(5):162-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.04.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 1.

Chromosomal translocations involving the IGH@ locus in B-cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: 29 new cases and a review of the literature.

Chapiro E(1), Radford-Weiss I, Cung HA, Dastugue N, Nadal N, Taviaux S, Barin C, 
Struski S, Talmant P, Vandenberghe P, Mozziconacci MJ, Tigaud I, Lefebvre C,
Penther D, Bastard C, Lippert E, Mugneret F, Romana S, Bernard OA, Harrison CJ,
Russell LJ, Nguyen-Khac F; Groupe Francophone de Cytogénétique Hématologique.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, University Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, France.

Chromosomal translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus (IGH@) 
are recurrent but rare in B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(BCP-ALL), and various partner genes have been described. Here, we report a new
series of 29 cases of BCP-ALL with IGH@ translocations. The partner gene was
identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization and/or molecular cloning in 20
patients. Members of the CEBP gene family (n = 11), BCL2 (n = 3), ID4 (n = 3),
EPOR (n = 2), and TRA/D@ (n = 1) were identified and demonstrated by quantitative
real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction to be markedly
up-regulated. The present cases, added to those already reported, confirm the
diversity of the partner genes, which, apart from BCL2, are specific to BCP-ALL. 
Collectively, patients with IGH@ translocations may represent a novel sub-group
of BCP-ALL occurring in adolescents and young adults.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23827691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Cancer. 2013 Jun 21;12:67. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-67.

Id4 deficiency attenuates prostate development and promotes PIN-like lesions by
regulating androgen receptor activity and expression of NKX3.1 and PTEN.

Sharma P, Knowell AE, Chinaranagari S, Komaragiri S, Nagappan P, Patel D, Havrda 
MC, Chaudhary J.

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4), a member of the
helix-loop-helix family of transcriptional regulators has emerged as a tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer. Id4 is expressed in the normal prostate where its 
expression is also regulated by androgens. In this study we investigated the
effect of loss of Id4 (Id4-/-) on adult prostate morphology.
METHODS: Histological analysis was performed on prostates from 6-8 weeks old
Id4-/-, Id4+/- and Id4+/+ mice. Expression of Id1, Sox9, Myc, androgen receptor, 
Akt, p-Akt, Pten and Nkx3.1 was investigated by immunohistochemistry. Androgen
receptor binding on NKX3.1 promoter was studied by chromatin
immuno-precipitation. Id4 was either over-expressed or silenced in prostate
cancer cell lines DU145 and LNCaP respectively followed by analysis of PTEN,
NKX3.1 and Sox9 expression.
RESULTS: Id4-/- mice had smaller prostates with fewer tubules, smaller tubule
diameters and subtle mPIN like lesions. Levels of androgen receptor were similar 
between wild type and Id4-/- prostate. Decreased NKX3.1 expression was in part
due to decreased androgen receptor binding on NKX3.1 promoter in Id4-/- mice. The
increase in the expression of Myc, Sox9, Id1, Ki67 and decrease in the expression
of PTEN, Akt and phospho-AKT was associated with subtle mPIN like lesions in
Id4-/- prostates. Finally, prostate cancer cell line models in which Id4 was
either silenced or over-expressed confirmed that Id4 regulates NKX3.1, Sox9 and
PTEN.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that loss of Id4 attenuates normal prostate
development and promotes hyperplasia/dysplasia with subtle mPIN like lesions
characterized by gain of Myc and Id1 and loss of Nkx3.1 and Pten expression. One 
of the mechanisms by which Id4 may regulate normal prostate development is
through regulating androgen receptor binding to respective response elements such
as those on NKX3.1 promoter. In spite of these complex alterations, large
neoplastic lesions in Id4-/- prostates were not observed suggesting the
possibility of mechanisms/pathways such as loss of Akt that could restrain the
formation of significant pre-cancerous lesions.

PMCID: PMC3694449
PMID: 23786676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jul;30(1):455-61. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2450. Epub 2013 May 10.

Association between lymphoma prognosis and aberrant methylation of ID4 and ZO-1
in bone marrow and paraffin-embedded lymphoma tissues of treatment-naive
patients.

Cen J(1), Shen J, Wang X, Kang H, Wang L, Sun L, Li Y, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Navy General Hospital, Beijing 100048, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the association between lymphoma 
prognosis and aberrant methylation of inhibitor of DNA binding factor 4 (ID4) and
tight junction protein 1 (ZO-1) genes in samples isolated from the bone marrow
and paraffin-embedded lymphoma tissues of treatment-naive lymphoma patients. The 
bone marrow biopsy and paraffin-embedded lymphoma tissue samples from
treatment-naive lymphoma patients were obtained, along with corresponding control
samples from subjects without lymphoma and from lymph nodes of chronic
cholecystitis and reactive lymphadenitis patients. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP)
reactions were performed to analyze the methylation status on the promoter
regions of ID4 and ZO-1. ID4 and ZO-1 promoter regions in the control group were 
completely unmethylated, whereas the rates of methylation of ID4 and ZO-1 in
paraffin-embedded lymphoma tissues of the lymphoma patients were 80.4 and 84.3%, 
respectively. The methylation positivity rates of both the ID4 or ZO-1 genes in
lymphoma patients were 92.2%, which was significantly higher compared to the
rates in the control group (0%). The methylation positivity rates of the ID4 and 
ZO-1 genes in the bone marrow and paraffin-embedded lymphoma tissues of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients were significantly higher compared to the rates in 
the Hodgkin lymphoma patients. The survival rate of lymphoma patients with
methylated ID4 was significantly lower compared to that of patients with
unmethylated ID4. The methylation of the ID4 and ZO-1 genes may be a specific
molecular marker for lymphoma diagnosis. The methylation of the ID4 gene may be
an indicator of poor prognosis in lymphoma patients.

PMID: 23670122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e61605. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061605. Print 2013.

Differential expression of ID4 and its association with TP53 mutation, SOX2, SOX4
and OCT-4 expression levels.

Galatro TF(1), Uno M, Oba-Shinjo SM, Almeida AN, Teixeira MJ, Rosemberg S, Marie 
SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil. thaisgalatro@usp.br

Inhibitor of DNA Binding 4 (ID4) is a member of the helix-loop-helix ID family of
transcription factors, mostly present in the central nervous system during
embryonic development, that has been associated with TP53 mutation and activation
of SOX2. Along with other transcription factors, ID4 has been implicated in the
tumorigenic process of astrocytomas, contributing to cell dedifferentiation,
proliferation and chemoresistance. In this study, we aimed to characterize the
ID4 expression pattern in human diffusely infiltrative astrocytomas of World
Health Organization (WHO) grades II to IV of malignancy (AGII-AGIV); to correlate
its expression level to that of SOX2, SOX4, OCT-4 and NANOG, along with TP53
mutational status; and to correlate the results with the clinical end-point of
overall survival among glioblastoma patients. Quantitative real time PCR
(qRT-PCR) was performed in 130 samples of astrocytomas for relative expression,
showing up-regulation of all transcription factors in tumor cases. Positive
correlation was found when comparing ID4 relative expression of infiltrative
astrocytomas with SOX2 (r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.50; p<0.005), SOX4 (r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.43; p<0.005) and OCT-4
(r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.39; p<0.05). The results from TP53 coding exon analysis allowed
comparisons between wild-type and mutated status only in AGII cases,
demonstrating significantly higher levels of ID4, SOX2 and SOX4 in mutated cases 
(p<0.05). This pattern was maintained in secondary GBM and further confirmed by
immunohistochemistry, suggesting a role for ID4, SOX2 and SOX4 in early
astrocytoma tumorigenesis. Combined hyperexpression of ID4, SOX4 and OCT-4
conferred a much lower (6 months) median survival than did hypoexpression (18
months). Because both ID4 alone and a complex of SOX4 and OCT-4 activate SOX2
transcription, it is possible that multiple activation of SOX2 impair the
prognosis of GBM patients. These observational results of associated expression
of ID4 with SOX4 and OCT-4 may be used as a predictive factor of prognosis upon
further confirmation in a larger GBM series.

PMCID: PMC3628974
PMID: 23613880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Transl Res. 2013 Aug;162(2):77-92. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 Apr
6.

Cyclooxygenase-2-prostaglandin E2-eicosanoid receptor inflammatory axis: a key
player in Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus associated malignancies.

Paul AG(1), Chandran B, Sharma-Walia N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Ill., USA.

The role of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), its lipid metabolite prostaglandin E2
(PGE2), and Eicosanoid (EP) receptors (EP; 1-4) underlying the proinflammatory
mechanistic aspects of Burkitt's lymphoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, cervical
cancer, prostate cancer, colon cancer, and Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) is an active
area of investigation. The tumorigenic potential of COX-2 and PGE2 through EP
receptors forms the mechanistic context underlying the chemotherapeutic potential
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Although role of the COX-2 is
described in several viral associated malignancies, the biological significance
of the COX-2/PGE2/EP receptor inflammatory axis is extensively studied only in
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus (KSHV/HHV-8) associated malignancies
such as KS, a multifocal endothelial cell tumor and primary effusion lymphoma
(PEL), a B cell-proliferative disorder. The purpose of this review is to
summarize the salient findings delineating the molecular mechanisms downstream of
COX-2 involving PGE2 secretion and its autocrine and paracrine interactions with 
EP receptors (EP1-4), COX-2/PGE2/EP receptor signaling regulating KSHV
pathogenesis and latency. KSHV infection induces COX-2, PGE2 secretion, and EP
receptor activation. The resulting signal cascades modulate the expression of
KSHV latency genes (latency associated nuclear antigen-1 [LANA-1] and viral-Fas
(TNFRSF6)-associated via death domain like interferon converting enzyme-like-
inhibitory protein [vFLIP]). vFLIP was also shown to be crucial for the
maintenance of COX-2 activation. The mutually interdependent interactions between
viral proteins (LANA-1/vFLIP) and COX-2/PGE2/EP receptors was shown to play key
roles in the biological mechanisms involved in KS and PEL pathogenesis such as
blockage of apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, transformation, proliferation,
angiogenesis, adhesion, invasion, and immune-suppression. Understanding the
COX-2/PGE2/EP axis is very important to develop new safer and specific
therapeutic modalities for KS and PEL. In addition to COX-2 being a therapeutic
target, EP receptors represent ideal targets for pharmacologic agents as PGE2
analogues and their blockers/antagonists possess antineoplastic activity, without
the reported gastrointestinal and cardiovascular toxicity observed with few a
NSAIDs.

Copyright © 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Urol. 2013 Aug;190(2):723-30. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.01.105. Epub 2013 Feb
26.

Methylation of a novel panel of tumor suppressor genes in urine moves forward
noninvasive diagnosis and prognosis of bladder cancer: a 2-center prospective
study.

García-Baquero R(1), Puerta P, Beltran M, Alvarez M, Sacristan R, Alvarez-Ossorio
JL, Sánchez-Carbayo M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Markers Group, Molecular Pathology Program, Spanish National Cancer
Center, Madrid, Spain; Urology Department, Hospital Puerta del Mar, Cadiz, Spain.

PURPOSE: Changes in DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes early in
carcinogenesis represent potential indicators of cancer detection and disease
evolution. We examined the diagnostic, stratification and prognostic biomarker
roles in urine of the methylation of a novel panel of tumor suppressor genes in
bladder cancer.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We evaluated the methylation of 18 tumor suppressor genes
in 2 prospective, independent sets of urine samples (training set of 120
preparations and validation set of 128) from patients with bladder cancer (170)
and controls (78) using methylation specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. Diagnostic performance was evaluated with ROC curves. Recurrence, 
progression and disease specific survival were analyzed using univariate and
multivariate Cox models.
RESULTS: PRDM2, HLTF, ID4, DLC1, BNIP3, H2AFX, CACNA1G, TGIF and CACNA1A were
methylated in bladder cancer. CCND2, SCGB3A1, BNIP3, ID4 and RUNX3 were the most 
frequently methylated tumor suppressor genes in each urine set. Methylation of
several tumor suppressor genes correlated with clinicopathological variables,
such as stage, tumor grade, focality or age. ROC analysis revealed significant
diagnostic accuracy for RUNX3 and CACNA1A in the training set, and for RUNX3 and 
ID4 in the validation set. On univariate and multivariate analysis CACNA1A
methylation correlated with recurrence in the training set, while in the
validation set PRDM2 and BNIP3 were significantly associated with recurrence and 
disease specific survival, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumor suppressor gene methylation allowed for histopathological and 
clinical stratification. Urine methylation has noninvasive usefulness not only
for diagnostic assessment but also as independent bladder cancer prognosticators.

Copyright © 2013 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;21(1):121-5. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.01.025.

[Clinical observation of decitabine-treating patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang H(1), Zhu HY, Jiang MM, Wang QS, Han XP, Huang WR, Jing Y, Wang SH, Zhang
SS, Mei JH, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

This study was purposed to investigate the clinical efficiencies and adverse
reactions of treating the myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) by using decitabine. The clinical data of 12 MDS and AML patients 
treated with decitabine were analyzed retrospectively. Among 12 patients there
were 1 case of MDS-RA, 2 cases of MDS-RAEB-I, 3 cases of MDS-RAEB-II, 2 cases of 
AML-M4, 2 cases of AML-M5, 1 case of AML-M6 and 1 case of AML-M0. In decitabine
chemotherapy program for 5 days (n = 8), decitabine 20 mg/(m(2)·d) × 5 days was
applied, 4 weeks for 1 cycle; in program for 3 days (n = 2), decitabine 15
mg/m(2), once 8 h for 3 days, 6 weeks for 1 cycle; another program (n = 2),
decitabine 20 mg/(m(2)·d) every other day for 5 times. For 1 patient achieved
complete remission (CR) after treatment with decitabine, ID4 gene methylated
level was detected by MS-PCR and ML-PCR before and after treatment. The results
showed that 2 cases achieved CR, 1 case partial remission, 5 cases stable
disease, 1 case progress of disease and 3 cases died. Disease control rate was
66.67% (8/12), the effective rate 25% (3/12). The average survival time was (11.5
± 2.1) months. 1-year OS rate was 40%, 2-year OS rate was 16.7%. MS-PCR detection
showed that the decitabine could significantly reduce the ID4 gene methylation
level. It is concluded that decitabine can stabilize disease status of MDS
patients, reduce blood transfusion dependence and improve the life quality of
patients, and even some patients who transformed from MDS to leukemia achieved CR
after treatment with decitabine. Decitabine can reduce the ID4 gene methylation
level. The main adverse reaction of decitabine was myelosuppression, infection
and so on. So the blood transfusions, antibiotics and other supportive treatments
for these patients are needed. Most of patients well tolerate the adverse effects
of decitabine after active symptomatic and supportive treatment. The efficacy and
survival rate of patients in this study were similar to that of application of
decitabine to treat MDS in other domestic studies.

PMID: 23484704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58257. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058257. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Genome-wide association study link novel loci to endometriosis.

Albertsen HM(1), Chettier R, Farrington P, Ward K.

Author information: 
(1)Juneau Biosciences, LLC, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Endometriosis is a common gynecological condition with complex etiology defined
by the presence of endometrial glands and stroma outside the womb. Endometriosis 
is a common cause of both cyclic and chronic pelvic pain, reduced fertility, and 
reduced quality-of-life. Diagnosis and treatment of endometriosis is, on average,
delayed by 7-10 years from the onset of symptoms. Absence of a timely and
non-invasive diagnostic tool is presently the greatest barrier to the
identification and treatment of endometriosis. Twin and family studies have
documented an increased relative risk in families. To identify genetic factors
that contribute to endometriosis we conducted a two-stage genome-wide association
study (GWAS) of a European cohort including 2,019 surgically confirmed
endometriosis cases and 14,471 controls. Three of the SNPs we identify associated
at P<5×10(-8) in our combined analysis belong to two loci: LINC00339-WNT4 on
1p36.12 (rs2235529; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.65×10(-9), OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.29, CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.18-1.40) and RND3-RBM43 on
2q23.3 (rs1519761; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.70×10(-8), OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.20, Cl<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.13-1.29, and rs6757804;
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.05×10(-8), OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.20, Cl<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.13-1.29). Using an adjusted Bonferoni
significance threshold of 4.51×10(-7) we identify two additional loci in our
meta-analysis that associate with endometriosis:, RNF144B-ID4 on 6p22.3
(rs6907340; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.19×10(-7), OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.20, Cl<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.12-1.28), and
HNRNPA3P1-LOC100130539 on 10q11.21 (rs10508881; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.08×10(-7), OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.19,
Cl<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.11-1.27). Consistent with previously suggested associations to WNT4 our
study implicate a 150 kb region around WNT4 that also include LINC00339 and
CDC42. A univariate analysis of documented infertility, age at menarche, and
family history did not show allelic association with these SNP markers. Clinical 
data from patients in our study reveal an average delay in diagnosis of 8.4 years
and confirm a strong correlation between endometriosis severity and infertility
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1182, P<0.001, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.18). This GWAS of endometriosis was conducted with
high diagnostic certainty in cases, and with stringent handling of population
substructure. Our findings broaden the understanding of the genetic factors that 
play a role in endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3589333
PMID: 23472165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Pathol Oncol Res. 2013 Jul;19(3):437-46. doi: 10.1007/s12253-012-9599-4. Epub
2013 Feb 9.

Expression pattern of id proteins in medulloblastoma.

Snyder AD(1), Dulin-Smith AN, Houston RH, Durban AN, Brisbin BJ, Oostra TD,
Marshall JT, Kahwash BM, Pierson CR.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Institute, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding or inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins are up
regulated in a variety of neoplasms, particularly in association with high-grade,
poorly differentiated tumors, while differentiated tissues show little or no Id
expression. The four Id genes are members of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of
transcription factors and act as negative regulators of transcription by binding 
to and sequestering HLH complexes. We tested the hypothesis that Id proteins are 
overexpressed in medulloblastoma by performing immunohistochemistry using a
medulloblastoma tissue microarray with 45 unique medulloblastoma and 11 normal
control cerebella, and antibodies specific for Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. A
semi-quantitative staining score that took staining intensity and the proportion 
of immunoreactive cells into account was used. Id1 was not detected in normal
cerebella or in medulloblastoma cells, but 78 % of tumors showed strong Id1
expression in endothelial nuclei of tumor vessels. Id2 expression was scant in
normal cerebella and increased in medulloblastoma (median staining score: 4). Id3
expression was noted in some neurons of the developing cerebellar cortex, but it 
was markedly up regulated in medulloblastoma (median staining score: 12) and in
tumor endothelial cells. Id4 was not expressed in normal cerebella or in tumor
cells. Id2 or Id3 overexpression drove proliferation in medulloblastoma cell
lines by altering the expression of critical cell cycle regulatory proteins in
favor of cell proliferation. This study shows that Id1 expression in endothelial 
cells may contribute to angiogenic processes and that increased expression of Id2
and Id3 in medulloblastoma is potentially involved in tumor cell proliferation
and survival.

PMCID: PMC3826575
PMID: 23397264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Med. 2012 Oct;1(2):187-97. doi: 10.1002/cam4.19. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Id1 and Id3 expression is associated with increasing grade of prostate cancer:
Id3 preferentially regulates CDKN1B.

Sharma P(1), Patel D, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Centre for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia, 30314, USA.

As transcriptional regulators of basic helix-oop-helix (bHLH) transcription and
non-bHLH factors, the inhibitor of differentiation (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4)
proteins play a critical role in coordinated regulation of cell growth,
differentiation, tumorigenesis, and angiogenesis. Id1 regulates prostate cancer
(PCa) cell proliferation, apoptosis, and androgen independence, but its clinical 
significance in PCa remains controversial. Moreover, there is lack of evidence on
the expression of Id2 and Id3 in PCa progression. In this study we investigated
the expression of Id2 and Id3 and reevaluated the expression of Id1 in PCa. We
show that increased Id1 and Id3 protein expression is strongly associated with
increasing grade of PCa. At the molecular level, we report that silencing either 
Id1 or Id3 attenuates cell cycle. Although structurally and mechanistically
similar, our results show that both these proteins are noncompensatory at least
in PCa progression. Moreover, through gene silencing approaches we show that Id1 
and Id3 primarily attenuates CDKN1A (p21) and CDKN1B (p27), respectively. We also
demonstrate that silencing Id3 alone significantly attenuates proliferation of
PCa cells as compared with Id1. We propose that increased Id1 and Id3 expression 
attenuates all three cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKN2B, -1A, and -1B)
resulting in a more aggressive PCa phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3544440
PMID: 23342268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Med. 2012 Oct;1(2):176-86. doi: 10.1002/cam4.16. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Epigenetic inactivation of inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4) correlates with
prostate cancer.

Sharma P(1), Chinaranagari S, Patel D, Carey J, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center For Cancer Research and Therapeutics Development, Clark Atlanta
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

The inhibitor of DNA-binding (Id) proteins, Id1-4 are negative regulators of
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. As key regulators of cell
cycle and differentiation, expression of Id proteins are increasingly observed in
many cancers and associated with aggressiveness of the disease. Of all the four
Id proteins, the expression of Id1, Id2, and to a lesser extent, Id3 in prostate 
cancer and the underlying molecular mechanism is relatively well known. On the
contrary, our previous results demonstrated that Id4 acts as a potential tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer. In the present study, we extend these observations
and demonstrate that Id4 is down-regulated in prostate cancer due to promoter
hypermethylation. We used prostate cancer tissue microarrays to investigate Id4
expression. Methylation specific PCR on bisulfite treated DNA was used to
determine methylation status of Id4 promoter in laser capture micro-dissected
normal, stroma and prostate cancer regions. High Id4 expression was observed in
the normal prostate epithelial cells. In prostate cancer, a stage-dependent
decrease in Id4 expression was observed with majority of high grade cancers
showing no Id4 expression. Furthermore, Id4 expression progressively decreased in
prostate cancer cell line LNCaP and with no expression in androgen-insensitive
LNCaP-C81 cell line. Conversely, Id4 promoter hypermethylation increased in
LNCaP-C81 cells suggesting epigenetic silencing. In prostate cancer samples, loss
of Id4 expression was also associated with promoter hypermethylation. Our results
demonstrate loss of Id4 expression in prostate cancer due to promoter
hypermethylation. The data strongly support the role of Id4 as a tumor
suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3544455
PMID: 23342267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Hum Reprod. 2013 Feb;19(2):82-92. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gas052. Epub 2012 Nov
16.

Expression and localization of inhibitor of differentiation (ID) proteins during 
tissue and vascular remodelling in the human corpus luteum.

Nio-Kobayashi J(1), Narayanan R, Giakoumelou S, Boswell L, Hogg K, Duncan WC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, The Queen's
Medical Research Institute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.

Members of the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) superfamily are likely to
have major roles in the regulation of tissue and vascular remodelling in the
corpus luteum (CL). There are four inhibitor-of-differentiation (ID1-4) genes
that are regulated by members of the TGF-ß superfamily and are involved in the
transcriptional regulation of cell growth and differentiation. We studied their
expression, localization and regulation in dated human corpora lutea from across 
the luteal phase (n = 22) and after human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
administration in vivo (n = 5), and in luteinized granulosa cells (LGCs), using
immunohistochemistry and quantitative RT-PCR. ID1-4 can be localized to multiple 
cell types in the CL across the luteal phase. Endothelial cell ID3 (P < 0.05) and
ID4 (P < 0.05) immunostaining intensities peak at the time of angiogenesis but
overall ID1 (P < 0.05) and ID3 (P < 0.05) expression peaks at the time of
luteolysis, and luteal ID3 expression is inhibited by hCG in vivo (P < 0.01). In 
LGC cultures in vitro, hCG had no effect on ID1, down-regulated ID3 (P < 0.001), 
and up-regulated ID2 (P < 0.001) and ID4 (P < 0.01). Bone morphogenic proteins
(BMPs) had no effect on ID4 expression but up-regulated ID1 (P < 0.01 to P <
0.005). BMP up-regulation of ID2 (P < 0.05) was additive to the hCG up-regulation
of ID2 expression (P < 0.001), while BMP cancelled out the down regulative effect
of hCG on ID3 regulation. As well as documenting regulation patterns specific for
ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4, we have shown that IDs are located and differentially
regulated in the human CL, suggesting a role in the transcriptional regulation of
luteal cells during tissue and vascular remodelling.

PMID: 23160862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer. 2013 Mar 1;119(5):1004-12. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27821. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Epigenetic silencing of Id4 identifies a glioblastoma subgroup with a better
prognosis as a consequence of an inhibition of angiogenesis.

Martini M(1), Cenci T, D'Alessandris GQ, Cesarini V, Cocomazzi A, Ricci-Vitiani
L, De Maria R, Pallini R, Larocca LM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Inhibitors of DNA binding/differentiation (Id1 to Id4) are a family
of helix-loop-helix transcription factors, which are highly expressed during
embryogenesis and at lower levels in mature tissues. Id4 plays an important role 
in neuronal stem cell differentiation, and its deregulation has been implicated
in glial neoplasia.
METHODS: The methylation status of Id4 was analyzed by methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 62 glioblastoma (GBM) cases and in 20 normal
brain tissues. Methylation status of Id4 was confirmed by sequencing after
subcloning and messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression. We also evaluated the
mRNA expression of MGP (matrix GLA protein), TGF-ß1 (transforming growth factor
beta 1), and VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) by real-time PCR analysis.
Clinical and histological assessment of tumor angiogenesis was performed by
evaluating the relative enhancing tumor ratio on magnetic resonance imaging and
microvessel density on von Willebrand factor-stained sections, respectively.
RESULTS: The promoter of Id4 was methylated in 23 of 62 (37%) GBMs. In methylated
GBMs, Id4 mRNA was significantly reduced, compared with unmethylated GBMs (P =
.0002). A significant reduction of protein expression was detected in all
hypermethylated cases. GBMs with methylated Id4 showed a significant reduction of
MGP, TGF-ß1, and VEGF mRNA expression and had significantly lower relative
enhancing tumor ratio (P = .0108) and microvessel density (P = .0241) values with
respect to unmethylated GBMs. Finally, Id4 methylation was significantly
associated with a favorable clinical outcome (P = .0006).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that methylation of Id4 may be involved in the
pathogenesis of GBM and in the resistance of this neoplasm to conventional
treatment throughout MGP-mediated neoangiogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 23132729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Dec;136(3):705-15. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2301-4. 
Epub 2012 Oct 27.

Epigenetic progression of columnar cell lesions of the breast to invasive breast 
cancer.

Verschuur-Maes AH(1), de Bruin PC, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht Cancer Center, PO
Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Promoter hypermethylation of several tumour suppressor genes often occurs during 
breast carcinogenesis, but little is known about epigenetic silencing in the
possible precursor columnar cell lesion (CCL). Promoter hypermethylation of 50
different tumour suppressor genes was assessed in normal breast tissue (N = 10), 
CCL (N = 15), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) grade I originating in CCL (N = 5) 
and paired CCL (N = 15) with DCIS (N = 7) and/or invasive carcinoma (N = 14) by
Methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Increasing
mean cumulative methylation levels were found from normal breast tissue to CCL to
DCIS and invasive carcinoma (P < 0.001) with similar methylation levels in DCIS
and invasive carcinoma. Methylation levels and frequencies (in the overall
analysis and analysis of only the synchronous lesions) were the highest for
RASSF1, CCND2, ID4, SCGB3A1 and CDH13. The methylation levels of ID4, CCND2, and 
CDH13 increased significantly from normal breast tissue to CCL and to
DCIS/invasive carcinoma. RASSF1, SCGB3A1 and SFRP5 had significant higher
methylation levels in CCL compared to normal breast tissue, but showed no
significant differences between CCL, DCIS and invasive carcinoma. Also, no
difference was found between CCLs with and without atypia, or CCLs with or
without synchronous cancer. In conclusion, promoter hypermethylation for several 
established tumour suppressor genes is already present in CCLs, underlining that 
promoter hypermethylation is an early event in breast carcinogenesis. Atypia in
CCL or the presence of synchronous more advanced lesions does not seem to be
accompanied by higher methylation levels.

PMID: 23104224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. ACS Nano. 2012 Oct 23;6(10):8484-7. doi: 10.1021/nn304707b.

Rationally designed tumor-penetrating nanocomplexes.

Karagiannis ED(1), Alabi CA, Anderson DG.

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA.

Comment on
    ACS Nano. 2012 Oct 23;6(10):8620-31.

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) therapeutics have broad potential uses in medicine 
but require safe and effective delivery vehicles to function. An ideal delivery
system should encapsulate and protect the siRNA cargo from serum proteins,
exhibit target tissue and cell specificity, penetrate the cell surface, and
release its cargo in the desired intracellular compartment. One approach to the
design of delivery vehicles that meets all of these requirements utilizes the
systematic assembly of multiple components that can address each barrier. This
rational approach was adopted by Ren et al., who designed novel myristoylated
tandem peptides that consist of a tumor-targeting module and a cell-penetrating
module, as described in this issue of ACS Nano. These tandem peptides were
formulated with siRNAs into nanocomplexes for cell-specific delivery to a variety
of tumor cell lines. The correlation of the structural properties of the
nanocomplex to cell-type-specific activity via a computational approach
identified the valence of the tumor-targeting ligand and overall nanocomplex
charge as important parameters for the activity of the formulations. The in vivo 
gene silencing potency of these peptide-based nanocomplex formulations was
demonstrated by Ren et al. in an ovarian cancer model. Tumor-penetrating
nanocomplexes carrying a siRNA sequence against a novel oncogene (ID4) led to a
significant reduction in tumor burden and an 80% increase in mouse survival. As
such, the combination of a systematic approach with computational modeling can be
advantageous for improving the delivery and potency of siRNA therapeutics.

PMID: 23088785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Prostate. 2013 May;73(6):624-33. doi: 10.1002/pros.22603. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Inhibitor of differentiation 1 (Id1) and Id3 proteins play different roles in
TGFß effects on cell proliferation and migration in prostate cancer cells.

Strong N(1), Millena AC, Walker L, Chaudhary J, Khan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta
University, Atlanta, Georgia 30314, USA.

BACKGROUND: In prostate cancer cells, transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)
inhibits proliferation in earlier stages of the disease; however, the cancer
cells become refractory to growth inhibitory effects in advanced stages where
TGFß promotes cancer progression and metastasis. Inhibitor of differentiation
(Id) family of closely related proteins (Id1-Id4) are dominant negative
regulators and basic helix loop helix (bHLH) transcription factors and in general
promote proliferation, and inhibit differentiation. In the present study, we have
investigated the role of Id1 and Id3 proteins in the growth inhibitory effects of
TGFß on prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: The effect of TGF ß on proliferation and Id1 and Id3 expression were
investigated in PZ-HPV7, DU145, and PC3 cells. Id1 silencing through siRNA was
also used in DU145 and PC3 cells to examine its role in anti-proliferative and
migratory effects of TGFß.
RESULTS: TGFß increased expression of Id1 and Id3 in all cell lines followed by a
later down regulation of Id1 in PZ-HPV7 expression and DU145 cells but not in PC3
cells. Id3 expression remained elevated in all three cell lines. This loss of Id1
protein correlated with an increase of CDKNI p21. Id1 knockdown in both DU145 and
PC3 cells resulted in decreased proliferation. However, while TGFß caused a
further decrease in proliferation of DU145, but had no further effects in PC3
cells. Knockdown of Id1 or Id3 inhibited TGFß1induced migration in PC3 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest an essential role of Id1 and Id3 in TGFß1
effects on proliferation and migration in prostate cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4018743
PMID: 23060149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Nepal Med Coll J. 2011 Dec;13(4):241-6.

True palmar pattern in vitiligo--a case control study.

Bhakta A(1), Mistri S, Mondal GC, Bandyopadhyay M, Bhattacharaya T, Ghosh SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, NRS Medical College, Kolkata, India.
drabhijit3@gmail.com

Characteristic epidermal ridges formed on the finger pad and on the palm by the
end of the second trimester and remain unchanged thereafter and those are
responsible for the highly specific finger prints of each individual. These
ridges are nither influenced by later prenatal period nor they subject to any
influence in the postnatal environmental factors because the formation of ridge
patterns gets already completed by about the eighteenth week of gestation.
Dermatoglyphics is a scientific study of such epidermal ridges. Dermatoglyphic
study of both palms of clinically diagnosed vitiligo patients and control
subjects were carried out and statisticaltly analysed in respect to sex and side 
of hands. The study revealed variable number of deviations of this patterns in
Vitiligo patients when compared with that of control. Increased number of true
palmar patterns in right hypothenar, right thenar and both inter digital areas 2 
(ID-2) and decreased TPP in Rt. ID3, Rt. ID4 in vitiligo male patients and
increased TPP in Rt. Hypothenar and Rt. ID1 and decreased TPP in Rt. ID2 and Lt. 
ID 3 in vitiligo female patients while compared with that of the control group.
Some of the variations observed were stastically significant.

PMID: 23016471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Glia. 2012 Dec;60(12):1944-53. doi: 10.1002/glia.22410. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Histone deacetylase activity is required for human oligodendrocyte progenitor
differentiation.

Conway GD(1), O'Bara MA, Vedia BH, Pol SU, Sim FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14214, USA.

The molecular mechanisms controlling human oligodendrocyte development are poorly
characterized. Microarray analysis of human oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPCs) and immature oligodendrocytes revealed that specific-class I histone
deacetylase (HDAC) target genes were actively repressed during oligodendrocyte
commitment. Although epigenetic regulation of oligodendrocyte differentiation has
been established in rodent development, the role of HDACs in human OPCs remains
undefined. We used HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) trichostatin A (TSA) and sodium
butyrate to determine the importance of HDAC activity in human primary OPC
differentiation. Treatment with either drug resulted in significant
dose-dependent inhibition of O4(+) oligodendrocyte cell differentiation,
reduction of oligodendrocyte morphological maturation, and downregulation of
myelin basic protein mRNA. High dose TSA treatment was also associated with
reduction in OPC proliferation. HDACi treatment prevented downregulation of SOX2,
ID4, and TCF7L2 mRNAs but did not regulate HES5, suggesting that targets of HDAC 
repression may differ between species. These results predict that HDACi treatment
would impair proliferation and differentiation by parenchymal oligodendrocyte
progenitors, and thereby degrade their potential for endogenous repair in human
demyelinating disease. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22927334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:254085. doi: 10.1155/2012/254085. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

TP53 mutation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and stemlike features in breast
cancer subtypes.

Coradini D(1), Fornili M, Ambrogi F, Boracchi P, Biganzoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Community Health Sciences, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, 20133 Milan,
Italy. danila.coradini@yahoo.it

Altered p53 protein is prevalently associated with the pathologic class of
triple-negative breast cancers and loss of p53 function has recently been linked 
to the induction of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and acquisition of
stemness properties. We explored the association between TP53 mutational status
and expression of some genes involved in the canonical TGF-ß signaling pathway
(the most potent EMT inducer) and in two early EMT associated events: loss of
cell polarity and acquisition of stemness-associated features. We used a publicly
accessible microarray dataset consisting of 251 p53-sequenced primary breast
cancers. Statistical analysis indicated that mutant p53 tumors (especially those 
harboring a severe mutation) were consistent with the aggressive class of
triple-negative cancers and that, differently from cell cultures, surgical tumors
underexpressed some TGF-ß related transcription factors known as involved in EMT 
(ID1, ID4, SMAD3, SMAD4, SMAD5, ZEB1). These unexpected findings suggest an
interesting relationship between p53 mutation, mammary cell dedifferentiation,
and the concomitant acquisition of stemlike properties (as indicated by the
overexpression of PROM1 and NOTCH1 genes), which improve tumor cells
aggressiveness as indicated by the overexpression of genes associated with cell
proliferation (CDK4, CDK6, MKI67) and migration (CXCR4, MMP1).

PMCID: PMC3414214
PMID: 22899882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Aug 15;4(147):147ra112. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003778.

Targeted tumor-penetrating siRNA nanocomplexes for credentialing the ovarian
cancer oncogene ID4.

Ren Y(1), Cheung HW, von Maltzhan G, Agrawal A, Cowley GS, Weir BA, Boehm JS,
Tamayo P, Karst AM, Liu JF, Hirsch MS, Mesirov JP, Drapkin R, Root DE, Lo J,
Fogal V, Ruoslahti E, Hahn WC, Bhatia SN.

Author information: 
(1)Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The comprehensive characterization of a large number of cancer genomes will
eventually lead to a compendium of genetic alterations in specific cancers.
Unfortunately, the number and complexity of identified alterations complicate
endeavors to identify biologically relevant mutations critical for tumor
maintenance because many of these targets are not amenable to manipulation by
small molecules or antibodies. RNA interference provides a direct way to study
putative cancer targets; however, specific delivery of therapeutics to the tumor 
parenchyma remains an intractable problem. We describe a platform for the
discovery and initial validation of cancer targets, composed of a systematic
effort to identify amplified and essential genes in human cancer cell lines and
tumors partnered with a novel modular delivery technology. We developed a
tumor-penetrating nanocomplex (TPN) that comprised small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
complexed with a tandem tumor-penetrating and membrane-translocating peptide,
which enabled the specific delivery of siRNA deep into the tumor parenchyma. We
used TPN in vivo to evaluate inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) as a novel
oncogene. Treatment of ovarian tumor-bearing mice with ID4-specific TPN
suppressed growth of established tumors and significantly improved survival.
These observations not only credential ID4 as an oncogene in 32% of high-grade
ovarian cancers but also provide a framework for the identification, validation, 
and understanding of potential therapeutic cancer targets.

PMCID: PMC3633234
PMID: 22896676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;32(4):471-3.

[Study on the correlation between Chinese medical syndrome types and ID4 gene
promoter methylation in human acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu F(1), Xu RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Yantaishan Hospital, Shandong 264001.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation between Chinese medical syndrome type
(CMST) and the ID4 gene promoter methylation state in the bone marrow cells of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, and to discuss the correlation between ID4
gene methylation and the occurrence, development of AML.
METHODS: Thirty-five inpatients or outpatients from the Department of Hematology,
the Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
were recruited as the test group, while 10 healthy volunteers from the health
medical center of the Affiliated Hospital, Shandong University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine were recruited as the control group. The ID4 gene promoter
methylation states were detected using methylation specific polymerase chain
reaction (MS-PCR) in the two groups. Inter-group comparison was performed and
CMSTs were compared to analyze the correlation between CMSTs and the gene
promoter methylation.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven AML patients (77.1%) had methylation of ID4 gene, showing
statistical difference when compared with the control group (P < 0.01). The ID4
methylation positive rate of ID4 gene promoter methylation was sequenced from low
to high as qi and yin deficiency syndrome < inter-accumulation of blood stasis
and phlegm syndrome < toxic heat inflaming syndrome, showing statistical
difference when compared with the control group (P < 0.05). The peripheral white 
blood cells and the bone marrow blast cells were higher in ID4 methylation
positive patients than in the ID4 methylation negative control patients with
statistical difference (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients of inter-accumulation of blood stasis and phlegm syndrome
and toxic heat inflaming syndrome were more likely to have ID4 gene methylation. 
The ID4 methylation positive expression has verified the essence of evil
domination in the early AML at the molecular level. It can also reflect the
degree of malignancy of AML to some extent.

PMID: 22803425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Neuroscience. 2012 Sep 27;221:96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.06.063.
Epub 2012 Jul 4.

Regulation of Olig2 during astroglial differentiation in the subventricular zone 
of a cuprizone-induced demyelination mouse model.

Chen LP(1), Li ZF, Ping M, Li R, Liu J, Xie XH, Song XJ, Guo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050000, People's Republic of China.

The mammalian subventricular zone (SVZ) is the largest germinative zone of the
adult brain. Progenitor cells generated from the SVZ play important roles during 
the remyelination process. To determine the functional role of Olig2 in
regulating astroglial differentiation in the mouse SVZ, we used the cuprizone
mouse model to investigate demyelination. We found that cuprizone administration 
significantly enhanced the expression of Olig2 and increased astroglial
differentiation in the SVZ, as compared with control. Moreover, cytoplasmic
translocation of Olig2 occurred after demyelination. In vitro studies further
revealed that supplementation of culture media with growth factors enhanced the
oligodendroglial differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs),
whereas serum alone promoted astroglial differentiation and cytoplasmic
translocation of Olig2. Additionally, the expression levels of bone morphogenetic
proteins 2 and 4 (BMP2 and BMP4) and inhibitor of DNA binding 2 and 4 (Id2 and
Id4) were greatly elevated during astroglial differentiation. BMP inhibition by
noggin suppressed the astroglial differentiation of OPCs. Our results indicate
that Olig2 may serve as a key regulator during the directional differentiation of
progenitor cells after demyelination. The BMP signaling pathway may contribute to
the cytoplasmic translocation and altered expression of Olig2 during the
remyelination process. These findings provide a better understanding of the
mechanisms involved in remyelination.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biol Direct. 2012 Jul 3;7:21. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-7-21.

Pathway-based classification of cancer subtypes.

Kim S(1), Kon M, DeLisi C.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics program, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND: Molecular markers based on gene expression profiles have been used in
experimental and clinical settings to distinguish cancerous tumors in stage,
grade, survival time, metastasis, and drug sensitivity. However, most significant
gene markers are unstable (not reproducible) among data sets. We introduce a
standardized method for representing cancer markers as 2-level hierarchical
feature vectors, with a basic gene level as well as a second level of (more
stable) pathway markers, for the purpose of discriminating cancer subtypes. This 
extends standard gene expression arrays with new pathway-level activation
features obtained directly from off-the-shelf gene set enrichment algorithms such
as GSEA. Such so-called pathway-based expression arrays are significantly more
reproducible across datasets. Such reproducibility will be important for clinical
usefulness of genomic markers, and augment currently accepted cancer
classification protocols.
RESULTS: The present method produced more stable (reproducible) pathway-based
markers for discriminating breast cancer metastasis and ovarian cancer survival
time. Between two datasets for breast cancer metastasis, the intersection of
standard significant gene biomarkers totaled 7.47% of selected genes, compared to
17.65% using pathway-based markers; the corresponding percentages for ovarian
cancer datasets were 20.65% and 33.33% respectively. Three pathways, consisting
of Type_1_diabetes mellitus, Cytokine-cytokine_receptor_interaction and
Hedgehog_signaling (all previously implicated in cancer), are enriched in both
the ovarian long survival and breast non-metastasis groups. In addition,
integrating pathway and gene information, we identified five (ID4, ANXA4, CXCL9, 
MYLK, FBXL7) and six (SQLE, E2F1, PTTG1, TSTA3, BUB1B, MAD2L1) known cancer genes
significant for ovarian and breast cancer respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Standardizing the analysis of genomic data in the process of cancer 
staging, classification and analysis is important as it has implications for both
pre-clinical as well as clinical studies. The paradigm of diagnosis and
prediction using pathway-based biomarkers as features can be an important part of
the process of biomarker-based cancer analysis, and the resulting canonical
(clinically reproducible) biomarkers can be important in standardizing genomic
data. We expect that identification of such canonical biomarkers will improve
clinical utility of high-throughput datasets for diagnostic and prognostic
applications.

PMCID: PMC3485163
PMID: 22759382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Epigenetics. 2012 Jul;7(7):772-80. doi: 10.4161/epi.20299. Epub 2012 Jul 1.

A systematic comparison of quantitative high-resolution DNA methylation analysis 
and methylation-specific PCR.

Claus R(1), Wilop S, Hielscher T, Sonnet M, Dahl E, Galm O, Jost E, Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. r.claus@dkfz.de

Assessment of DNA methylation has become a critical factor for the
identification, development and application of methylation based biomarkers. Here
we describe a systematic comparison of a quantitative high-resolution mass
spectrometry-based approach (MassARRAY), pyrosequencing and the broadly used
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) technique analyzing clinically relevant
epigenetically silenced genes in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). By MassARRAY and
pyrosequencing, we identified significant DNA methylation differences at the ID4 
gene promoter and in the 5' region of members of the SFRP gene family in 62 AML
patients compared with healthy controls. We found a good correlation between data
obtained by MassARRAY and pyrosequencing (correlation coefficient R(2) = 0.88).
MSP-based assessment of the identical samples showed less pronounced differences 
between AML patients and controls. By direct comparison of MSP-derived and
MassARRAY-based methylation data as well as pyrosequencing, we could determine
overestimation of DNA methylation data by MSP. We found sequence-context
dependent highly variable cut-off values of quantitative DNA methylation values
serving as discriminator for the two MSP methylation categories. Moreover, good
agreements between quantitative methods and MSP could not be achieved for all
investigated loci. Significant correlation of the quantitative assessment but not
of MSP-derived methylation data with clinically important characteristics in our 
patient cohort demonstrated clinical relevance of quantitative DNA methylation
assessment. Taken together, while MSP is still the most commonly applied
technique for DNA methylation assessment, our data highlight advantages of
quantitative approaches for precise characterization and reliable biomarker use
of aberrant DNA methylation in primary patient samples, particularly.

PMCID: PMC3414395
PMID: 22647397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Aug;135(1):93-102. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2070-0. 
Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Id4 protein is highly expressed in triple-negative breast carcinomas: possible
implications for BRCA1 downregulation.

Wen YH(1), Ho A, Patil S, Akram M, Catalano J, Eaton A, Norton L, Benezra R,
Brogi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. weny@mskcc.org

BRCA1 germline mutation carriers usually develop ER, PR and HER2 negative breast 
carcinoma. Somatic BRCA1 mutations are rare in sporadic breast cancers, but other
mechanisms could impair BRCA1 functions in these tumors, particularly in
triple-negative breast carcinomas (TNBCs). Id4, a helix-loop-helix DNA binding
factor, blocks BRCA1 gene transcription in vitro and could downregulate BRCA1 in 
vivo. We compared Id4 immunoreactivity in 101 TNBCs versus 113 non-TNBCs, and
correlated the results with tumor morphology and immunoreactivity for CK5/6,
CK14, EGFR, and androgen receptor (AR). Id4 was present in 76 out of 101 (75 %)
TNBCs: 40 (40 %) TNBCs displayed Id4 positivity in >50 % of neoplastic cells, 23 
(23 %) in 5-50 %, and 13 (13 %) in <5 %. In contrast, only 6 (5 %) of 113
non-TNBCs showed focal Id4 positivity, limited to fewer than 5 % of the tumor (p 
< 0.0001). Id4 expression significantly associated with high histologic grade (p 
= 0.0002) and mitotic rate (p = 0.006). Id4 decorated all 12 TNBCs with large
central acellular zone of necrosis in our series, with positive staining in 10-90
% of the cells. Id4 signal strongly correlated with cytokeratin CK14 reactivity
(p < 0.0001), but not with CK5/6 and EGFR. All apocrine carcinomas in our series 
were positive for AR and most for EGFR, but they were negative for CK5/6, CK14,
and Id4, with only two exceptions. Our results document substantial expression of
Id4 in most TNBCs, which could result in functional downregulation of BRCA1
pathways in these tumors.

PMID: 22538771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Ceska Gynekol. 2012 Feb;77(1):52-7.

[Non-invasive monitoring of the timing of early embryo cleavages--objectively
measurable predictor of human embryo viability].

[Article in Slovak]

Hlinka D(1), Lazarovská S, Rutarová J, Pichlerová M, Rezácová J, Dudás M.

Author information: 
(1)Prague Fertility Centre, Praha.

OBJECTIVE: The evaluation of the developmental abilities of human embryos
according to the timing of their early mitotic cleavages.
DESIGN: Retrospective study.
SETTING: Prague Fertility Centre and Institute for Care of Mother and Child, CAR,
Prague.
METHODS: The embryos obtained in IVF program were used for further observations
and subjected to automated time-lapse monitoring (PrimoVision, Cryo-Innovation, 1
picture/10 min, intermittent white-light illumination) under standard cultivation
conditions (37.0 degrees C, 5% CO2 in humid air). Image sequences were digitally 
recorded for later use. For intravital spindle detection we used polaryzing
microscopy (Oosight, Research Instruments) and Hoechst 33342 fluorescent dye for 
intravital chromatin visualization. A total number of 180 human embryos which
gave a vital pregnancies (FHB, fetal heart beat) were analysed retrospectively
for timing of early cleavages. In our study, the exact timing of the four
interphases (IP) and synchrony of sister cell divisions (ID, interval division)
occurring after fertilization were identified and manually recorded. Interphases:
IP1 was defined as the period from fertilization till 2 cell stage. IP2 between 2
and 3 cells stages, IP3 between 3 and 5 and IP4 between 5 and 9 cells embryo.
INTERVAL DIVISION: ID2 was recorded as a time interval between 3 and 4 cells, ID3
between 5 and 8 cells and ID4 between 9 and 16 cells stage embryos.
RESULTS: In the embryos giving viable pregnancies, the durations of IP1 was 20-26
hrs. IP2 was 10-12 hrs, IP3 was 14-16 hrs and IP4 was 20-26 hrs. In these
embryos, the sister blastomeres cleaved in a very synchronous manner. The
duration of ID1 was recorded to varry from 120 to 210 min. ID2 from 20 to 60
min., ID3 from 120 to 240 min. and ID4 from 230 to 360 min.
CONCLUSION: The viable embryos cleave in a very similar time pattern which can be
defined and applied as referencial value. Non-invasive monitoring of the timing
of early embryo cleavages can be used as an objectively measurable predictor of
human embryo.

PMID: 22536641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Cancer. 2012 Oct 1;131(7):E1078-87. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27606. Epub 2012 May
17.

Antagonistic modulation of gliomagenesis by Pax6 and Olig2 in PDGF-induced
oligodendroglioma.

Appolloni I(1), Calzolari F, Barilari M, Terrile M, Daga A, Malatesta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, DIMES, University of Genoa, Genoa 16132, 
Italy.

Gliomas are aggressive tumors of the central nervous system originating from
proliferating neural cells. Regulators of neural stem or progenitor cells biology
may thus influence aspects of brain tumorigenesis, such as the maintenance of
tumor-propagating potential. We investigated the role of Pax6, a neurogenic
transcription factor already suggested as a positive prognostic marker for human 
gliomas, in a well-characterized in vivo model of PDGF-B-driven
oligodendroglioma. In this system, the expression of Pax6 severely impairs tumor 
propagation by inducing a reduction of cell proliferation and the acquisition of 
differentiation traits in tumor-initiating cells. The overexpression of Pax6
correlates with a downregulation of Olig2, a bHLH transcription factor that
normally antagonizes Pax6 in adult neurogenic niches and that plays a key role in
the maintenance of neural stem and progenitor cells. Furthermore, we found that
Olig2 is strictly required to maintain the malignancy of oligodendroglioma cells,
since its silencing by interfering RNA abrogates tumor propagation. We finally
show evidence that this function depends, at least in part, on the silencing of
ID4, a dominant negative bHLH protein, whose upregulation follows Olig2 loss. In 
our model, the upregulation of ID4 mimics the loss of Olig2 in impairing the
tumor-propagating potential of glioma cells. Our data, therefore, establish the
relevance of physiological regulators of neural stem cell biology in regulating
glial tumor malignancy and provide support for their functional interactions in
this context.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22514120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33213. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033213. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Genome wide analysis of acute myeloid leukemia reveal leukemia specific methylome
and subtype specific hypomethylation of repeats.

Saied MH(1), Marzec J, Khalid S, Smith P, Down TA, Rakyan VK, Molloy G, Raghavan 
M, Debernardi S, Young BD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and the London
School of Medicine, Queen Mary University, London, United Kingdom.

Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing
(MeDIP-seq) has the potential to identify changes in DNA methylation important in
cancer development. In order to understand the role of epigenetic modulation in
the development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) we have applied MeDIP-seq to the 
DNA of 12 AML patients and 4 normal bone marrows. This analysis revealed
leukemia-associated differentially methylated regions that included gene
promoters, gene bodies, CpG islands and CpG island shores. Two genes (SPHKAP and 
DPP6) with significantly methylated promoters were of interest and further
analysis of their expression showed them to be repressed in AML. We also
demonstrated considerable cytogenetic subtype specificity in the methylomes
affecting different genomic features. Significantly distinct patterns of
hypomethylation of certain interspersed repeat elements were associated with
cytogenetic subtypes. The methylation patterns of members of the SINE family
tightly clustered all leukemic patients with an enrichment of Alu repeats with a 
high CpG density (P<0.0001). We were able to demonstrate significant inverse
correlation between intragenic interspersed repeat sequence methylation and gene 
expression with SINEs showing the strongest inverse correlation (R(2) = 0.7). We 
conclude that the alterations in DNA methylation that accompany the development
of AML affect not only the promoters, but also the non-promoter genomic features,
with significant demethylation of certain interspersed repeat DNA elements being 
associated with AML cytogenetic subtypes. MeDIP-seq data were validated using
bisulfite pyrosequencing and the Infinium array.

PMCID: PMC3315563
PMID: 22479372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cancer Sci. 2012 Jun;103(6):1028-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02260.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 4.

Regulation of glioblastoma multiforme stem-like cells by inhibitor of DNA binding
proteins and oligodendroglial lineage-associated transcription factors.

Wu Y(1), Richard JP, Wang SD, Rath P, Laterra J, Xia S.

Author information: 
(1)Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Tumor-initiating stem cells (also referred to as cancer stem cells, CSCs) are a
subpopulation of cancer cells that play unique roles in tumor propagation,
therapeutic resistance and tumor recurrence. It is increasingly important to
understand how molecular signaling regulates the self-renewal and differentiation
of CSCs. Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are critical for the
differentiation of normal stem cells, yet their roles in neoplastic stem cells
are not well understood. In glioblastoma neurosphere cultures that contain cancer
stem cells (GBM-CSCs), the bHLH family member inhibitors of DNA binding protein 2
and 4 (Id2 and Id4) were found to be upregulated during the differentiation of
GBM-CSCs in response to histone deacetylase inhibitors. In this study, we
examined the functions of Id2 and Id4 in GBM neurosphere cells and identified Id 
proteins as efficient differentiation regulators of GBM-CSCs. Overexpression of
Id2 and Id4 promoted the lineage-specific differentiation of GBM neurosphere
cells as evidenced by the induction of neuronal/astroglial differentiation
markers Tuj1 and GFAP and the inhibition of the oligodendroglial marker GalC. Id 
protein overexpression also reduced both stem cell marker expression and
neurosphere formation potential, a biological marker of cancer cell "stemness."
We further showed that Id2 and Id4 regulated GBM neurosphere differentiation
through downregulating of another bHLH family member, the oligodendroglial
lineage-associated transcription factors (Olig) 1 and 2. Our results provide
evidence for distinct functions of Id proteins in neoplastic stem cells, which
supports Id proteins and their downstream targets as potential candidates for
differentiation therapy in CSCs.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association and Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at
Kennedy Krieger.

PMCID: PMC3855314
PMID: 22380883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(9):1671-82. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06452-11. Epub 2012 Feb
21.

Biochemical and phosphoproteomic analysis of the helix-loop-helix protein E47.

Teachenor R(1), Beck K, Wright LY, Shen Z, Briggs SP, Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA.

Numerous in vitro as well as genetic studies have demonstrated that the
activities of the E2A proteins are regulated at multiple levels, including
modulation of DNA binding by the Id proteins, association with the
transcriptional modulators p300 and ETO, and posttranslational modifications.
Here, we use affinity purification of tagged E47 combined with mass spectrometry 
in order to show that E47 interacts with the entire ensemble of Id proteins,
namely, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. Furthermore, we find that the lysine-specific
histone demethylase 1 (LSD1), the protein arginine N-methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5),
the corepressor CoREST, and the chaperones of the 14-3-3 family associate with
affinity-purified E47. We also identify a spectrum of amino acid residues in E47 
that are phosphorylated, including an AKT substrate site. We did, however, find
that mutation of the identified AKT substrate site by itself did not perturb B
cell development. In sum, these studies show that the entire ensemble of Id
proteins has the ability to interact with E47, identify factors that associate
with E47, and reveal a spectrum of phosphorylated residues in E47, including an
AKT substrate site.

PMCID: PMC3347234
PMID: 22354994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cancer Lett. 2012 Aug 28;321(2):195-202. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.02.009. Epub 
2012 Feb 14.

Loss of Med1/TRAP220 promotes the invasion and metastasis of human non-small-cell
lung cancer cells by modulating the expression of metastasis-related genes.

Kim HJ(1), Roh MS, Son CH, Kim AJ, Jee HJ, Song N, Kim M, Seo SY, Yoo YH, Yun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Dong-A University, Busan
602-714, South Korea.

Med1/TRAP220 is an essential component of the TRAP/Mediator complex. In this
study, we present a novel function of Med1 in human non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) progression. We found that the loss of Med1 expression was strongly
associated with increased rates of invasion and metastasis in NSCLC patients.
Consistent with lung cancer patient data, the knockdown of Med1 in NSCLC cell
lines led to an increase in cell migration and invasion. Med1-depleted cells
displayed an increase in metastasis in a xenograft tumor model and in an in vivo 
metastasis assay. Moreover, a microarray analysis revealed that the mRNA levels
of the metastasis-related genes uPAR, ID2, ID4, PTP4A1, PKP3, TGM2, PLD1, TIMP2, 
RGS2, and HOXA4 were altered upon Med1 knockdown. Collectively, these results
suggest that the loss of Med1 increases the invasive potential of human NSCLC
cells by modulating the expression of metastasis-related genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22342682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;131(3):662-72. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26414. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

A gene signature identified using a mouse model of androgen receptor-dependent
prostate cancer predicts biochemical relapse in human disease.

Thompson VC(1), Day TK, Bianco-Miotto T, Selth LA, Han G, Thomas M, Buchanan G,
Scher HI, Nelson CC; Australian Prostate Cancer BioResource, Greenberg NM, Butler
LM, Tilley WD.

Author information: 
(1)Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories and Adelaide Prostate Cancer
Research Centre, Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Hanson
Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 May;189(5):1990.

Mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) have been detected in experimental and
clinical prostate tumors. Mice with enforced prostate-specific expression of one 
such receptor variant, AR-E231G, invariably develop prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia by 12 weeks and metastatic prostate cancer by 52 weeks. The aim of this
study was to identify genes with altered expression in the prostates of AR-E231G 
mice at an early stage of disease that may act as drivers of AR-mediated
tumorigenesis. The gene expression profile of AR-E231G prostate tissue from
12-week-old mice was compared to an equivalent profile from mice expressing the
AR-T857A receptor variant (analogous to the AR-T877A variant in LNCaP cells),
which do not develop prostate tumors. One hundred and thirty-two genes were
differentially expressed in AR-E231G prostates. Classification of these genes
revealed enrichment for cellular pathways known to be involved in prostate
cancer, including cell cycle and lipid metabolism. Suppression of two genes
upregulated in the AR-E231G model, ADM and CITED1, increased cell death and
reduced proliferation of human prostate cancer cells. Many genes differentially
expressed in AR-E231G prostates are also deregulated in human tumors. Three of
these genes, ID4, NR2F1 and PTGDS, which were expressed at consistently lower
levels in clinical prostate cancer compared to nonmalignant tissues, formed a
signature that predicted biochemical relapse (hazard ratio 2.2, p = 0.038). We
believe that our findings support the value of this novel mouse model of prostate
cancer to identify candidate therapeutic targets and/or biomarkers of human
disease.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 22275114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Neurosci Res. 2012 May;90(5):925-32. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22826. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

ID2: A negative transcription factor regulating oligodendroglia differentiation.

Chen XS(1), Zhang YH, Cai QY, Yao ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

Remyelination of the central nervous system in multiple sclerosis patients is
often incomplete. Remyelination depends on normal oligodendrogenesis and the
differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) into mature
oligodendrocytes (OL). Inhibitor of DNA binding (ID), a transcription factor, is 
thought to inhibit oligodendrogenesis and the differentiation of OPC. This
Mini-Review aims to reveal the roles of and mechanisms used by IDs (mainly ID2)
in this process. An interaction between ID2 and retinoblastoma tumor suppressor
is responsible for the cell cycle transition from G1 to S. The translocation of
ID2 between the nucleus and cytoplasm is regulated by E47 and OLIG. An
interaction between ID2 and OLIG mediates the inhibitory effects of bone
morphogenic proteins and G protein-coupled receptor 17 on oligodendroglia
differentiation. ID2 expression is regulated by Wnt and histone deacetylases
during the differentiation of OPC. ID4, another member of the ID family,
functions similarly to ID2 in regulating the differentiation of OPC. The main
difference is that ID4 is essential for oligodendrogenesis, whereas ID2 is
nonessential. This could have important implications for demyelinating diseases, 
and interfering with these pathways might represent a viable therapeutic approach
for these diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22253220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. EMBO J. 2012 Mar 7;31(5):1190-202. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.486. Epub 2012 Jan 10.

RP58 controls neuron and astrocyte differentiation by downregulating the
expression of Id1-4 genes in the developing cortex.

Hirai S(1), Miwa A, Ohtaka-Maruyama C, Kasai M, Okabe S, Hata Y, Okado H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain Development and Neural Regeneration, Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan.

Appropriate number of neurons and glial cells is generated from neural stem cells
(NSCs) by the regulation of cell cycle exit and subsequent differentiation.
Although the regulatory mechanism remains obscure, Id (inhibitor of
differentiation) proteins are known to contribute critically to NSC proliferation
by controlling cell cycle. Here, we report that a transcriptional factor, RP58,
negatively regulates all four Id genes (Id1-Id4) in developing cerebral cortex.
Consistently, Rp58 knockout (KO) mice demonstrated enhanced astrogenesis
accompanied with an excess of NSCs. These phenotypes were mimicked by the
overexpression of all Id genes in wild-type cortical progenitors. Furthermore,
Rp58 KO phenotypes were rescued by the knockdown of all Id genes in mutant
cortical progenitors but not by the knockdown of each single Id gene. Finally, we
determined p57 as an effector gene of RP58-Id-mediated cell fate control. These
findings establish RP58 as a novel key regulator that controls the self-renewal
and differentiation of NSCs and restriction of astrogenesis by repressing all Id 
genes during corticogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3297993
PMID: 22234186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Lab Anim Res. 2011 Dec;27(4):333-8. doi: 10.5625/lar.2011.27.4.333. Epub 2011 Dec
19.

Inhibitor of DNA-binding 4 contributes to the maintenance and expansion of cancer
stem cells in 4T1 mouse mammary cancer cell line.

Park SJ(1), Kim RJ, Nam JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Suppressor, Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute,
Gachon University of Medicine and Science, Incheon, Korea.

The cancer stem cell (CSC) hypothesis proposes that CSCs are the root of cancer. 
CSC-targeted therapies may prevent cancer relapse and provide more effective
treatment. The expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1, as assessed by the
Aldefluor assay, has been recognized as a marker of CSCs in breast cancer.
Inhibitors of DNA-binding proteins (IDs) have an important role in stem cell
differentiation. In this study, we examined IDs necessary for the regulation of
stem properties in Aldefluor(pos) 4T1 cells. When the expression profile of IDs
in Aldefluor(neg) and Aldefluor(pos) 4T1 cells was compared, qRT-PCR analysis
showed that ID4 expression was highly upregulated in Aldefluor(pos) 4T1 cells. In
addition, knockdown of ID4 expression suppressed the properties of CSCs,
including their sphere-forming ability and side population phenotype. The
findings suggest that ID4 may be a therapeutic target for the treatment of
advanced breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3251764
PMID: 22232642  [PubMed]


111. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):741-52. doi: 10.1002/stem.1030.

Genome-wide analysis of N1ICD/RBPJ targets in vivo reveals direct transcriptional
regulation of Wnt, SHH, and hippo pathway effectors by Notch1.

Li Y(1), Hibbs MA, Gard AL, Shylo NA, Yun K.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.

The Notch pathway plays a pivotal role in regulating cell fate decisions in many 
stem cell systems. However, the full repertoire of Notch target genes in vivo and
the mechanisms through which this pathway activity is integrated with other
signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we report a transgenic mouse in
which the activation of the Notch pathway massively expands the neural stem cell 
(NSC) pool in a cell context-dependent manner. Using this in vivo system, we
identify direct targets of RBPJ/N1ICD in cortical NSCs at a genome-wide level
through combined ChIP-Seq and transcriptome analyses. Through a highly
conservative analysis of these datasets, we identified 98 genes that are directly
regulated by N1ICD/RPBJ in vivo. These include many transcription factors that
are known to be critical for NSC self-renewal (Sox2, Pax6, Tlx, and Id4) and the 
transcriptional effectors of the Wnt, SHH, and Hippo pathways, TCF4, Gli2, Gli3, 
Yap1, and Tead2. Since little is known about the function of the Hippo-Yap
pathway in NSCs, we analyzed Yap1 expression and function in NSCs. We show that
Yap1 expression is restricted to the stem cell compartment in the developing
forebrain and that its expression is sufficient to rescue Notch pathway
inhibition in NSC self-renewal assays. Together, results of this study reveal a
previously underappreciated complexity and breadth of Notch1 targets in vivo and 
show direct interaction between Notch and Hippo-Yap pathways in NSCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3734558
PMID: 22232070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogenesis. 2012 Jul 2;1:e17. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2012.17.

Methylation profile of triple-negative breast carcinomas.

Branham MT(1), Marzese DM, Laurito SR, Gago FE, Orozco JI, Tello OM, Vargas-Roig 
LM, Roqué M.

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, IHEM-CCT-CONICET, School of
Medical Sciences, National University of Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina [2] School of
Medical Sciences, National University of Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina.

Breast cancer is a group of clinically, histopathologically and molecularly
heterogeneous diseases, with different outcomes and responses to treatment.
Triple-negative (TN) breast cancers are defined as tumors that lack the
expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and epidermal growth
factor receptor 2. This subgroup accounts for 15% of all types of breast cancer
and its prevalence is higher among young African, African-American and Latino
women. The hypermethylation of CpG islands (CpGI) is a common epigenetic
alteration for suppressing gene expression in breast cancer and has been shown to
be a key factor in breast carcinogenesis. In this study we analyzed the
hypermethylation of 110 CpGI within 69 cancer-related genes in TN tumors. For the
methylation analysis, we used the methyl-specific multiplex-ligation probe
amplification assay. We found that the number of methylated CpGI is similar
between TN and non-TN tumors, but the methylated genes between the groups are
different. The methylation profile of TN tumors is defined by the methylation of 
five genes (that is, CDKN2B, CD44, MGMT, RB and p73) plus the non-methylation of 
11 genes (that is, GSTP1, PMS2, MSH2, MLH1, MSH3, MSH6, DLC1, CACNA1A, CACNA1G,
TWIST1 and ID4). We conclude that TN tumors have a specific methylation profile. 
Our findings give new information for better understanding tumor etiology and
encourage future studies on potential drug targets for triple-negative breast
tumors, which now lack a specific treatment.

PMCID: PMC3412652
PMID: 23552734  [PubMed]


113. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Dec;19(6):1388-92.

[Effect of 5-Aza-CdR on biological activity and inhibitor of DNA binding 4 gene
expression in human erythroleukemia cell line K562].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LF(1), Huang S, Huang C, Li CR, Li DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

This study was aimed to investigate the effect of 5-Aza-CdR on the biological
activity of human erythroleukemia cell line K562 and the expression of inhibitor 
of DNA binding 4 (ID4). ID4 methylation in K562 cell line was detected by
methylation-specific PCR. RQ-PCR was used to analyze the expression levels of ID4
mRNA in K562 cell line treated by different concentrations of 5-Aza-CdR. Cell
apoptosis rate and cell cycle were analyzed by flow cytometry. The result showed 
that ID4 gene methylation existed in K562 cells, ID4 mRNA expression in K562
cells treated with 5-Aza-CdR increased in a concentration-dependent manner, the
difference between experimental groups was statistical significant (p < 0.01).
The 5-Aza-CdR could enhance the apoptotic rate of K562 cells in time and
dose-dependent manner, the apoptotic rate of K562 cells highly correlated to
relative expression level of ID4 mRNA (r = 0.95). After the K562 cells were
treated by 5-Aza-CdR for 48 hours, cells in G(0)/G(1) phase increased, cells in
G(2)/M phase decreased along with enhancement of drug concentration. It is
concluded that methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-CdR can re-express the silent
ID4 gene in K562 cells. The upregulation of ID4 may be a key factor to give rise 
to cell apoptosis, and the cell cycle of K562 cells can be arrested by 5-Aza-CdR.

PMID: 22169289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Vaccine. 2012 Jan 11;30(3):572-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.11.068. Epub 2011
Nov 26.

The effect of adjuvants on the immune response induced by a DBL4<U+025B>-ID4 VAR2CSA
based Plasmodium falciparum vaccine against placental malaria.

Pinto VV(1), Salanti A, Joergensen LM, Dahlbäck M, Resende M, Ditlev SB, Agger
EM, Arnot DE, Theander TG, Nielsen MA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Parasitology, Department of International Health,
University of Copenhagen, CSS, Øster Farimagsgade 5 A, DK-1014 Copenhagen K,
Denmark. vvp@sund.ku.dk

A vaccine protecting women against placental malaria could be based on the
sub-domains of the VAR2CSA antigen, since antibodies against the DBL4<U+025B>-ID4
subunit of the VAR2CSA protein can inhibit parasite binding to the placental
ligand chondroitin sulphate A (CSA). Here we tested the ability of DBL4<U+025B>-ID4 to
induce binding-inhibitory antibodies when formulated with adjuvants approved for 
human use. We have characterized the immune response of DBL4<U+025B>-ID4 in combination 
with Freund's complete and incomplete adjuvant and with three adjuvants currently
being used in clinical trials: Montanide(®) ISA 720, Alhydrogel(®) and CAF01.
Antibodies induced against DBL4<U+025B>-ID4 in combination with these adjuvants
inhibited parasite binding to CSA from 82% to 99%. Although, different epitope
recognition patterns were obtained for the different formulations, all adjuvant
combinations induced strong Th1 and Th2 type responses, resulting in IgG with
similar binding strength, with to the DBL4<U+025B>-ID4 antigen. These results
demonstrate that the DBL4<U+025B>-ID4 antigen is highly immunogenic and that binding
inhibitory antibodies are induced when formulated with any of the tested
adjuvants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22122859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2011 Dec;138(23):5247-56. doi: 10.1242/dev.069203.

ID4 regulates mammary gland development by suppressing p38MAPK activity.

Dong J(1), Huang S, Caikovski M, Ji S, McGrath A, Custorio MG, Creighton CJ,
Maliakkal P, Bogoslovskaia E, Du Z, Zhang X, Lewis MT, Sablitzky F, Brisken C, Li
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

The ID family of helix-loop-helix proteins regulates cell proliferation and
differentiation in many different developmental pathways, but the functions of
ID4 in mammary development are unknown. We report that mouse Id4 is expressed in 
cap cells, basal cells and in a subset of luminal epithelial cells, and that its 
targeted deletion impairs ductal expansion and branching morphogenesis as well as
cell proliferation induced by estrogen and/or progesterone. We discover that
p38MAPK is activated in Id4-null mammary cells. p38MAPK is also activated
following siRNA-mediated Id4 knockdown in transformed mammary cells. This p38MAPK
activation is required for the reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis in
Id4-ablated mammary glands. Therefore, ID4 promotes mammary gland development by 
suppressing p38MAPK activity.

PMCID: PMC3210500
PMID: 22069192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 30;286(52):44424-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.277046. Epub
2011 Oct 31.

Type II arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 regulates gene expression of inhibitors 
of differentiation/DNA binding Id2 and Id4 during glial cell differentiation.

Huang J(1), Vogel G, Yu Z, Almazan G, Richard S.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group and the Bloomfield Center for Research on
Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B Davis Jewish
General Hospital, Montréal, Québec H3T 1E2, Canada.

PRMT5 is a type II protein arginine methyltranferase that catalyzes
monomethylation and symmetric dimethylation of arginine residues. PRMT5 is
functionally involved in a variety of biological processes including embryo
development and circadian clock regulation. However, the role of PRMT5 in
oligodendrocyte differentiation and central nervous system myelination is
unknown. Here we show that PRMT5 expression gradually increases throughout
postnatal brain development, coinciding with the period of active myelination.
PRMT5 expression was observed in neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes.
siRNA-mediated depletion of PRMT5 in mouse primary oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells abrogated oligodendrocyte differentiation. In addition, the PRMT5-depleted 
oligodendrocyte progenitor and C6 glioma cells expressed high levels of the
inhibitors of differentiation/DNA binding, Id2 and Id4, known repressors of glial
cell differentiation. We observed that CpG-rich islands within the Id2 and Id4
genes were bound by PRMT5 and were hypomethylated in PRMT5-deficient cells,
suggesting that PRMT5 plays a role in gene silencing during glial cell
differentiation. Our findings define a role of PRMT5 in glial cell
differentiation and link PRMT5 to epigenetic changes during oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3247987
PMID: 22041901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Arch Pharm (Weinheim). 2012 Apr;345(4):265-74. doi: 10.1002/ardp.201100047. Epub 
2011 Oct 18.

Comparative structural analysis of a-glucosidase inhibitors on difference
species: a computational study.

Narayana Moorthy NS(1), Ramos MJ, Fernandes PA.

Author information: 
(1)REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences,
University of Porto, Portugal. hari.moorthy@fc.up.pt

Structural feature analysis of chlorogenic acid derivatives made up of varying
lengths of alkyl groups as a-glucosidases inhibitors were performed by QSAR
techniques. The statistically significant models derived from the study were
validated by leave one out, Y-randomization and test set methods. The predictive 
capacity of the models was assessed by its validation parameters such as
crossvalidated correlation coefficients (Q(2)), predictive residual analysis and 
other correlation parameters. The results obtained from the study show that the
models were constructed with vsurf like properties (vsurf_ID4, vsurf_ID7 and
vsurf_CW8), partial charge (Q_VSA_FNEG) and conformation dependent charged
(dipoleX) descriptors. The integy moments of hydrophobicity descriptors (ID4 and 
ID7) are contributed for the inhibitory activity of the a-glucosidases enzymes of
both the species. The vsurf_ID7 descriptor has contributed significantly
(negatively) for the inhibitory activity prediction of a-glucosidases enzymes of 
S. cerevisiae. The partial negative charge on the surface of the molecules is
detrimental for the activity, which reveals that the active site of the enzymes
may have negatively charged groups. The pharmacophore analysis results also
confirm the presence of hydrophilic properties on the vdW surface of the
molecules. These results explain that the active sites of a-glucosidase enzymes
of both the species have the same environment for the interaction. The alkyl side
chain on the molecules is important for the pharmacokinetic behavior of the
molecules and reduces the interaction energy of the molecules with the water.
Hence, these results will be useful for designing novel molecules with multiple
activities.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22006830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Oct;35(10):1463-72. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318224d2cd.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors express stem cell factors, which relate to the
expression of EZH2 and Id proteins.

Venneti S(1), Le P, Martinez D, Xie SX, Sullivan LM, Rorke-Adams LB, Pawel B,
Judkins AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are highly aggressive pediatric tumors
associated with loss of expression of SMARCB1, commonly occurring in the central 
nervous system [referred to as atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs)] and in
the kidney and soft tissues. Histologically, MRTs are characterized by
immunohistochemical evidence of primitive neuroectodermal, mesenchymal, and
epithelial differentiation. The ability of MRTs to differentiate along multiple
lines, as evidenced by both histologic features and polyphenotypic
immunohistochemical staining, and the proliferative nature of MRT cells are
characteristics shared with the self-renewal and plasticity of embryonic stem
cells (ES). To test the hypothesis that MRTs share similarities with ES, we used 
immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expression of various stem cell markers in a
tissue microarray containing 26 AT/RTs and 16 non-central nervous system MRTs
(NCMRTs). Staining intensity was scored as negative (0), low (1+), moderate (2+),
and strong (3+) and was multiplied by the percentage of positive tumor cells to
establish a semiquantitative measure for each marker. In AT/RT, strong-to-low
expression was noted with glypican-3 (20 of 26, 77%), Sall4 (23 of 26, 88%),
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (25 of 26, 96%), and undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (19 of 26, 73%). Markers that showed low expression in
AT/RT were Sox2 (8 of 26, 31%), Nanog (7 of 26, 27%), Klf4 (10 of 26, 38%),
Zfp206 (5 of 26, 19%), and musashi-1 (21 of 26, 81%). Similarly, in NCMRT,
expression was noted with glypican-3 (12 of 16, 75%), Sall4 (13 of 16, 81%),
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (16 of 16, 100%), undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (12 of 16, 75%), Sox2 (5 of 16, 31%), Nanog (8 of 16,
50%), Klf4 (8 of 16, 50%), Zfp206 (13 of 16, 81%), and musashi-1 (11 of 16, 75%).
Placental alkaline phosphatase, Oct4, c-KIT, CD30, a-fetoprotein, and ß- -human
chorionic gonadotrophin were not expressed in all cases. Markers that regulate
the expression of stem cell transcription factors were also expressed in MRT.
AT/RT cases showed expression of Id proteins: Id1 (17 of 26, 65%), Id2 (24 of 26,
92%), Id3 (22 of 26, 85%), and Id4 (22 of 26, 85%). Low expression was observed
with EZH2 (15 of 26, 58%). Similarly, NCMRT cases showed expression of Id1 (15 of
16, 94%), Id2 (16 of 16, 100%), Id3 (16 of 16, 100%), Id4 (13 of 16, 81%), and
EZH2 (13 of 16, 81%). Finally, regression analysis revealed a significant
relationship between the expression of stem cell markers and EZH2 (P<0.0001), Id1
(P=0.0087), Id2 (P=0.0002), Id3 (P=0.0033), and Id4 (P<0.0001). These data
suggest that MRTs express many stem cell-associated transcription factors, which 
may be regulated by the expression of EZH2 and the Id family of proteins. This
study underscores similarities between MRTs and stem cells and may help elucidate
common biologic pathways that could serve in advancing more effective therapeutic
strategies to treat MRTs.

PMID: 21921784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. World J Urol. 2012 Jun;30(3):319-25. doi: 10.1007/s00345-011-0750-8. Epub 2011
Sep 1.

ID4 is frequently downregulated and partially hypermethylated in prostate cancer.

Vinarskaja A(1), Goering W, Ingenwerth M, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Moorenstr. 5, 40225,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

PURPOSE: The candidate tumor suppressor ID4 is downregulated in various cancers
by DNA hypermethylation. We have performed the first systematic analysis of ID4
expression and methylation in prostate cancer.
METHODS: ID4 mRNA expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR in 47 carcinoma 
and 13 benign prostatic tissues obtained by prostatectomy. Methylation was
analyzed in an extended series of samples by methylation-specific MS-PCR and
pyrosequencing, controlled by bisulfite sequencing.
RESULTS: ID4 expression was significantly decreased in prostate cancers,
especially in cases with adverse clinical and histopathological features and
earlier recurrence. Hypermethylation in carcinomas was detected by MS-PCR and
pyrosequencing, but the results of the two techniques were not fully concordant. 
The difference was created by generally partial and heterogeneous methylation.
Weak methylation was also detected in benign prostatic tissue samples.
CONCLUSIONS: ID4 downregulation may contribute to prostate cancer pathogenesis
and is often accompanied by DNA hypermethylation. The case of ID4 illustrates
exemplarily the limits and pitfalls of techniques for the detection of
methylation changes in prostate cancer tissues.

PMID: 21882048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Anat Cell Biol. 2011 Jun;44(2):128-34. doi: 10.5115/acb.2011.44.2.128. Epub 2011 
Jun 30.

ID4 mediates proliferation of astrocytes after excitotoxic damage in the mouse
hippocampus.

Lee YS(1), Kang JW, Lee YH, Kim DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Chungnam National University,
Daejeon, Korea.

Inhibitor of DNA binding (ID) proteins bind to and inhibit the function of basic 
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, including those that regulate
proliferation and differentiation during development. However, little is known
about the role of ID proteins in glial activation under neuropathological
conditions. In this study, we evaluated the expression of ID4 following induction
of excitotoxic lesions in mouse brain by kainic acid injection. The number of
ID4-expressing astrocytes increased in the CA1 layer of the injured hippocampus
until 3 days post-lesion. To analyze the effects of ID4 on cell proliferation,
primary astrocytes were transduced with recombinant adenovirus expressing
GFP-ID4. Overexpression of ID4 led to increased proliferation of astrocytes.
These results suggest that ID4 plays a proliferative role in astrocyte activation
after excitotoxin-induced hippocampal neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC3145841
PMID: 21829756  [PubMed]


121. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 20;21(8):1356-66. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0275. Epub 2011 
Aug 24.

Characterization of epidermal growth factor-induced dysplasia in the adult rat
subventricular zone.

Lindberg OR(1), Brederlau A, Jansson A, Nannmark U, Cooper-Kuhn C, Kuhn HG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, Institute for Neuroscience and
Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a mitogen widely used when culturing adult
neural stem cells in vitro. Although proliferative effects can also be observed
in vivo, intracerebroventricular infusion of EGF has been found to counteract
neuronal determination and promote glial differentiation instead. However, EGF
receptor activation has different effects on the subventricular zone (SVZ) in
mice and rats, possibly because of species differences in SVZ cell composition.
Specifically in the rat, EGF stimulation of the SVZ induces the formation of
hyperplastic polyps. The present study aims at molecular and morphological
characterization of these subventricular polyps. Using immunohistochemistry,
electron microscopy, and gene expression analysis, we demonstrate in hyperplastic
EGF-induced polyps an upregulation in protein expression of Sox2, Olig2, GFAP,
nestin, and vimentin. We found polyp-specific dysplastic changes in the form of
coexpression of Sox2 and Olig2. This highly proliferative, Sox2/Olig2
coexpressing dysplastic cell type is >10-fold enriched in the hyperplastic polyps
compared with control SVZ and most likely causes the polyp formation. Unique
ultrastructural features of the polyps include a lack of ependymal cell lining as
well as a large number of cells with large, light, ovoid nuclei and a cytoplasm
with abundant ribosomes, whereas other polyp cells contain invaginated nuclei but
fewer ribosomes. EGF also induced changes in the expression of Id genes Id1, Id2,
and Id4 in the SVZ. Taken together, we here demonstrate dysplastic, structural,
and phenotypical changes in the rat SVZ following EGF stimulation, which are
specific to hyperplastic polyps.

PMID: 21740235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;19(3):582-4.

[ID4 promoter methylation in acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu RR(1), Liu F, Cui X, Zhang XW, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hospital Affliated to Shandong University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan 250011, Shandong Province, China.
xrr18@sina.com

Objective of this study was to investigate the ID4 gene methylation status in
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) was
used to detect the promoter methylation status of ID4 gene in bone marrow samples
from 46 AML patients with different subtypes and stage of disease and from 10
patients with iron deficiency anemia (IDA) as a control. The results showed that 
ID4 gene in bone marrow of IDA patients was completely non-methylated, while ID4 
gene methylation was found in 39 out of 46 AML patients (positive rate 84.8%).
The positive rates of ID4 gene methylation in different FAB types M1, M2, M3, M4,
M5, M6 were 100% (4/4), 75% (9/12), 100% (8/8), 77.8% (7/9), 81.8% (9/11), 100%
(2/2) respectively. The positive rates of ID4 gene methylation in newly diagnosed
and complete remitted of AML patients were 90% (27/30) and 63.3% (7/11)
respectively; ID4 methylation was detected in 5 relapsed and refractory AML
patients. There were statistically significant differences in ID4 gene
methylation between AML and IDA patients (p < 0.01). It is concluded that
compared with IDA patients, ID4 gene methylation changes of different degrees
occur in AML patients with different subtypes and stages, which suggests that ID4
gene methylation may be an early molecular event in the process of AML.

PMID: 21729527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Hum Pathol. 2011 Dec;42(12):1878-87. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.02.005. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Parakeratosis in skin is associated with loss of inhibitor of differentiation 4
via promoter methylation.

Ruchusatsawat K(1), Wongpiyabovorn J, Protjaroen P, Chaipipat M, Shuangshoti S,
Thorner PS, Mutirangura A.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Health, Department of Medical Sciences, Nonthaburi
11000, Thailand.

Parakeratosis refers to incomplete maturation of epidermal keratinocytes,
resulting in abnormal retention of nuclei in the stratum corneum. It occurs in
many diseases of the skin, particularly in psoriasis. Down-regulation of
inhibitor of differentiation 4 messenger RNA has been demonstrated in psoriatic
skin, but the specificity and mechanism for this finding are unknown. In this
study, we addressed specificity by immunohistochemical staining for inhibitor of 
differentiation 4 protein in skin disorders showing parakeratosis, including:
psoriasis (n = 9), chronic eczema (n = 6), and squamous cell carcinoma (n = 7).
In these conditions, parakeratotic keratinocytes in the upper layers of the skin 
lacked inhibitor of differentiation 4 protein expression, whereas keratinocytes
in the lower layers were densely stained, in contrast to diffuse expression in
normal skin. Because promoter hypermethylation of inhibitor of differentiation 4 
has been described in several cancers, we determined the methylation pattern of
the inhibitor of differentiation 4 promoter in psoriasis and compared this with
squamous cell carcinoma. We found a novel methylation pattern of the inhibitor of
differentiation 4 promoter in both conditions. Inhibitor of differentiation 4
promoter methylation was significantly increased in psoriasis (34.8%) and
squamous cell carcinoma (21.8%), compared with normal skin (0%). Moreover, cells 
in the upper and lower parts of psoriatic epidermis were, respectively,
hypermethylated and nonmethylated, at the inhibitor of differentiation 4
promoter. Comparable studies in several cell lines confirmed that
hypermethylation of the promoter was associated with loss of inhibitor of
differentiation 4 messenger RNA and protein expression. Our study demonstrates a 
previously unreported link between gene-specific promoter hypermethylation and
abnormal cellular differentiation in several skin diseases. This mechanism might 
provide clues for novel therapies for skin disorders characterized by
parakeratosis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21663940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Cancer. 2011 Dec 15;129(12):2797-806. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25962. Epub 2011 May
25.

MicroRNA miR-335 is crucial for the BRCA1 regulatory cascade in breast cancer
development.

Heyn H(1), Engelmann M, Schreek S, Ahrens P, Lehmann U, Kreipe H, Schlegelberger 
B, Beger C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

The expression of microRNAs is altered in various cancer types, leading to their 
definition as onco- and tumor-suppressor microRNAs. In our study, we investigated
the role of miR-335 in the formation of sporadic human breast cancer and its
involvement in the regulatory network of the breast cancer susceptibility gene
BRCA1. To validate single components of the BRCA1 cascade, microRNA
overexpression was performed in a cell culture model with subsequent protein
analysis and luciferase reporter assays. Here, we were able to identify miR-335
as simultaneously regulating the known BRCA1 activators ERa, IGF1R, SP1 and the
repressor ID4, including a feedback regulation of miR-335 expression by
estrogens. Overexpression of miR-335 resulted in an upregulation of BRCA1 mRNA
expression, suggesting a functional dominance of ID4 signaling. The relevance of 
the miR-335 regulation for human breast cancer was confirmed in primary sporadic 
breast cancer specimens with significantly decreased miR-335 levels (p < 0.05) in
comparison to normal controls. Interestingly, the microRNA expression level
correlated positively to the BRCA1 transcript level, supporting the hypothesis of
a miR-335-mediated regulation of the tumor suppressor gene. Functionally,
overexpression of miR-335 led to decreased cell viability and an increase in
apoptosis, supporting its tumor-suppressive function. In summary, our data
indicate that miR-335 affects different targets in the upstream BRCA1-regulatory 
cascade with impact on key cellular functions such as proliferation and
apoptosis. Deregulation of the microRNA during breast cancer development and
progression may thereby lead to an increased tumorigenic potential by
inactivating crucial tumor-suppressive signals.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21618216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;17(13):4531-40. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-0763.
Epub 2011 May 6.

Association of CHFR promoter methylation with disease recurrence in locally
advanced colon cancer.

Tanaka M(1), Chang P, Li Y, Li D, Overman M, Maru DM, Sethi S, Phillips J, Bland 
GL, Abbruzzese JL, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to determine whether DNA methylation biomarkers 
are associated with recurrence and survival in colon cancer patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A retrospective analysis of 82 patients who received
curative surgical resection for American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)
high-risk stage II or III colon cancer (1999-2007) was conducted. DNA methylation
status was quantitatively evaluated by the pyrosequencing method. We preselected 
three tumor suppressor genes and one locus of interest; CHFR, ID4, RECK, and
MINT1. Mean methylation levels of multiple CpG sites in the promoter regions were
used for analysis; 15% or more was defined as methylation positive. The
association of recurrence-free survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) with
methylation status was analyzed by the log-rank test, Kaplan-Meier method, and
Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: Methylation levels of ID4, MINT1, and RECK did not correlate with RFS or
OS. CHFR was methylation positive in 63% patients. When methylation status was
dichotomized (negative or low: <30%, high: =30%), patients with CHFR
methylation-high (44%) had worse RFS (P = 0.006) and reduced OS (P = 0.069). When
stratified by stage, CHFR methylation-high was associated with reduced RFS (P =
0.004) and OS (P = 0.010) in stage III patients. CHFR methylation-high was
commonly associated with N2 disease (P = 0.04) and proximal tumors (P = 0.002).
Multivariate analysis indicated AJCC T4 disease and CHFR methylation-high (P =
0.001 and P = 0.015, respectively) were independent predictors for recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: The extent of CHFR promoter methylation correlates with RFS,
indicating it is a promising epigenetic marker for recurrence.

PMID: 21551253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Biol Reprod. 2011 Aug;85(2):347-56. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.091330. Epub 2011
May 4.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 4 is expressed selectively by single spermatogonia in
the male germline and regulates the self-renewal of spermatogonial stem cells in 
mice.

Oatley MJ(1), Kaucher AV, Racicot KE, Oatley JM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology and Health, Department of Dairy and Animal
Science, College of Agricultural Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2011 Aug;85(2):221-3.

Continual spermatogenesis at a quantitatively normal level is required to sustain
male fertility. The foundation of this process relies on maintenance of an
undifferentiated spermatogonial population consisting of spermatogonial stem
cells (SSCs) that self-renew as well as transient amplifying progenitors produced
by differentiation. In mammals, type A(single) spermatogonia form the SSC
population, but molecular markers distinguishing these from differentiating
progenitors are undefined and knowledge of mechanisms regulating their functions 
is limited. We show that in the mouse male germline the transcriptional repressor
ID4 is expressed by a subpopulation of undifferentiated spermatogonia and
selectively marks A(single) spermatogonia. In addition, we found that ID4
expression is up-regulated in isolated SSC-enriched fractions by stimulation from
GDNF, a key growth factor driving self-renewal. In mice lacking ID4 expression,
quantitatively normal spermatogenesis was found to be impaired due to progressive
loss of the undifferentiated spermatogonial population during adulthood.
Moreover, reduction of ID4 expression by small interfering RNA treatment
abolished the ability of wild-type SSCs to expand in vitro during long-term
culture without affecting their survival. Collectively, these results indicate
that ID4 is a distinguishing marker of SSCs in the mammalian germline and plays
an important role in the regulation of self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC3142260
PMID: 21543770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;71(9):3410-21. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3340.

ID4 imparts chemoresistance and cancer stemness to glioma cells by derepressing
miR-9*-mediated suppression of SOX2.

Jeon HM(1), Sohn YW, Oh SY, Kim SH, Beck S, Kim S, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic
of Korea.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 15;71(12):4325.
    Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 15;71(18):6085. Oh, Se-Young [corrected to Oh, Se-Yeong].

Glioma stem cells (GSC) possess tumor-initiating potential and are relatively
resistant to conventional chemotherapy and irradiation. Thus, they are considered
to be major drivers for glioma initiation, progression, and recurrence. However, 
the precise mechanism governing acquisition of their drug resistance remains to
be elucidated. Our previous study has shown that inhibitor of differentiation 4
(ID4) dedifferentiates Ink4a/Arf(-/-) mouse astrocytes and human glioma cells to 
glioma stem-like cells (induced GSCs or iGSCs). In this article, we report that
ID4-driven iGSCs exhibit chemoresistant behavior to anticancer drugs through
activation of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters. We found that ID4 enhanced
SOX2 protein expression by suppressing microRNA-9* (miR-9*), which can repress
SOX2 by targeting its 3'-untranslated region. Consequently, ID4-mediated SOX2
induction enhanced ABCC3 and ABCC6 expression through direct transcriptional
regulation, indicating that ID4 regulates the chemoresistance of iGSCs by
promoting SOX2-mediated induction of ABC transporters. Furthermore, we found that
short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of SOX2 in ID4-driven iGSCs resulted in loss
of cancer stemness. Moreover, ectopic expression of SOX2 could dedifferentiate
Ink4a/Arf(-/-) astrocytes and glioma cells to iGSCs, indicating a crucial role of
SOX2 in genesis and maintenance of GSCs. Finally, we found that the significance 
of the ID4-miR-9*-SOX2-ABCC3/ABCC6 regulatory pathway is recapitulated in GSCs
derived from patients with glioma. Together, our results reveal a novel
regulatory mechanism by which ID4-driven suppression of miR-9* induces SOX2,
which imparts stemness potential and chemoresistance to glioma cells and GSCs.

PMID: 21531766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. JAMA. 2011 Apr 13;305(14):1432-40. doi: 10.1001/jama.2011.351.

Safety and immunogenicity of 4 intramuscular double doses and 4 intradermal low
doses vs standard hepatitis B vaccine regimen in adults with HIV-1: a randomized 
controlled trial.

Launay O(1), van der Vliet D, Rosenberg AR, Michel ML, Piroth L, Rey D, Colin de 
Verdière N, Slama L, Martin K, Lortholary O, Carrat F; ANRS HB03 VIHVAC-B Trial.

Collaborators: Bentata M, Frésard A, Lascoux C, Lortholary O, Ghosn J, Rami A,
Lafeuillade A, de Truchis P, Jeantils V, Vittecocq D, Slama L, Chakvetadze E,
Pialoux G, Abgrall S, Levy Y, Valantin MA, Girard PM, Molina JM, Neau D, Miailhes
P, Poizot-Martin I, Matheron S, Reynes J, Bonnet B, Rosenthal E, Rey D, Fischer
P, Lang JM, Cuzin L, Verdon R, Piroth L, Leclercq P, Ajana F, May T, Lefort A,
Elharrar B, Launay O, Carrat F, van der Vliet D, Rosenberg A, Michel ML,
Lortholary O, Piroth L, Rey D, Sogni P, Poizot-Martin I, Cuzin L, Allain L,
Hanslik T, Bailly F, Touzé E, Gougeon ML, Pol S, Chaix ML, Aboulker JP, Allain L,
Kaabeche K, Carrat F, van der Vliet D, Martin K, Pouget N, Dorival-Mouly C,
Pallanca M, Kouyami PF, Bendriss R, Kakou J, Brévot O, Goderel I, Pannetier G,
Sallé AV, Chau F.

Author information: 
(1)Paris Descartes University, France. odile.launay@cch.aphp.fr

Comment in
    JAMA. 2011 Jul 13;306(2):156; author reply 156-7.

CONTEXT: Alternative schedules more immunogenic than the standard hepatitis B
vaccine regimen are needed in patients with human immunodeficiency virus 1
(HIV-1) infection.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the safety and immunogenicity of 4 intramuscular
double-dose and 4 intradermal low-dose regimens vs the standard hepatitis B
vaccine regimen.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: An open-label, multicenter, 1:1:1
parallel-group, randomized trial conducted between June 28, 2007, and October 23,
2008 (date of last patient visit, July 3, 2009) at 33 centers in France with
patients enrolled in French National Agency for Research on AIDS and Viral
Hepatitis trials in adults with HIV-1 infection who were hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
seronegative and having CD4 cell counts of more than 200 cells/µL.
INTERVENTION: Patients were randomly assigned to receive 3 intramuscular
injections of the standard dose (20 µg) of recombinant HBV vaccine at weeks 0, 4,
and 24 (IM20 × 3 group, n = 145); 4 intramuscular double doses (40 µg [2
injections of 20 µg]) of recombinant HBV vaccine at weeks 0, 4, 8, and 24 (IM40 ×
4 group, n = 148); or 4 intradermal injections of low doses (4 µg [1/5 of 20 µg])
of recombinant HBV vaccine at weeks 0, 4, 8, and 24 (ID4 × 4 group, n = 144).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Percentage of responders at week 28, defined as patients
with hepatitis B surface antibody (anti-HBs) of at least 10 mIU/mL in patients
who received at least 1 dose of vaccine. Patients with missing anti-HBs titer
measurement at the final follow-up visit at week 28 were considered as
nonresponders in the primary (efficacy) analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 437 patients were randomized to the 3 study groups, of whom
11 did not receive any vaccine. Of these, 396 had available anti-HBs titers at
week 28. The percentage of responders at week 28 was 65% (95% confidence interval
[CI], 56%-72%) in the IM20 × 3 group (n = 91), 82% (95% CI, 77%-88%) in the IM40 
× 4 group (n = 119) (P < .001 vs IM20 × 3 group), and 77% (95% CI, 69%-84%) in
the ID4 × 4 group (n = 108) (P = .02 vs IM20 × 3 group). No safety signal and no 
effect on CD4 cell count or viral load were observed.
CONCLUSION: In adults with HIV-1, both the 4 intramuscular double-dose regimen
and the 4 intradermal low-dose regimen improved serological response compared
with the standard HBV vaccine regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00480792.

PMID: 21486976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 May 15;17(10):3443-54. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1071. 
Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Molecular karyotypes of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells at disease onset reveal 
distinct copy number alterations in chemosensitive versus refractory Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Slovak ML(1), Bedell V, Hsu YH, Estrine DB, Nowak NJ, Delioukina ML, Weiss LM,
Smith DD, Forman SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, Department of Hematology/Stem Cell Transplantation,
City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

PURPOSE: To determine the recurring DNA copy number alterations (CNA) in
classical Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) by microarray-based comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) using laser capture microdissected CD30(+) Hodgkin and
Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Archived tissues from 27 CD30(+) HL plus control samples
were analyzed by DNA microarrays. The HL molecular karyotypes were compared with 
the genomic profiles of germinal center B cells and treatment outcome
(chemotherapy responsive vs. primary refractory disease).
RESULTS: Gains and losses observed in more than 35% of HL samples were localized 
to 22 and 12 chromosomal regions, respectively. Frequent gains (>65%) were
associated with growth and proliferation, NF-<U+03BA>B activation, cell-cycle control,
apoptosis, and immune and lymphoid development. Frequent losses (>40%) observed
encompassed tumor suppressor genes (SPRY1, NELL1, and ID4, inhibitor of DNA
binding 4), transcriptional repressors (TXNIP, thioredoxin interacting protein), 
SKP2 (S-phase kinase-associated protein 2; ubiquitin ligase component), and an
antagonist of NF-<U+03BA>B activation (PPARGC1A). In comparison to the germinal center
profiles, the most frequent imbalances in HL were losses in 5p13 (AMACR, GDNF,
and SKP2), and gains in 7q36 (SHH, sonic hedgehog homolog) and 9q34 (ABL1, CDK9, 
LCN2, and PTGES). Gains (>35%) in the HL chemoresponsive patients housed genes
known to regulate T-cell trafficking or NF-<U+03BA>B activation (CCL22, CX3CL1, CCL17,
DOK4, and IL10), whereas the refractory samples showed frequent loss of 4q27
(interleukin; IL21/IL2) and 17p12, and gain of 19q13.3 (BCL3/RELB).
CONCLUSION: We identified nonrandom CNAs in the molecular karyotypes of classical
HL. Several recurring genetic lesions correlated with disease outcome. These
findings may be useful prognostic markers in the counseling and management of
patients and for the development of novel therapeutic approaches in primary
refractory HL.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3096736
PMID: 21385932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncotarget. 2010 May;1(1):48-58.

ID4: a new player in the cancer arena.

Dell'Orso S(1), Ganci F, Strano S, Blandino G, Fontemaggi G.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Oncogenomics Unit, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, 00144-Rome,
Italy.

Id proteins (Id-1 to 4) are dominant negative regulators of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors. They play a key role during development, 
preventing cell differentiation while inducing cell proliferation. They are
poorly expressed in adult life but can be reactivated in tumorigenesis. Several
evidences indicate that Id proteins are associated with loss of differentiation, 
unrestricted proliferation and neoangiogenesis in diverse human cancers.
Recently, we identified Id4 as a transcriptional target of the protein complex
mutant p53/E2F1/p300 in breast cancer. Id4 protein binds, stabilizes and enhances
the translation of mRNAs encoding proangiogenic cytokines, such as IL8 and
GRO-alpha, increasing the angiogenic potential of cancer cells. We present here
an overview of the current experimental data that links Id4 to cancer. We provide
evidence also of the induction of Id4 following anticancer treatments in mutant
p53- carrying cells. Indeed, mutant p53 is recruited to a specific region of the 
Id4 promoter upon DNA damage. Our findings indicate that Id4, besides its
proangiogenic role, might also participate in the chemoresistance associated to
mutant p53 proteins exerting gain of function activities.

PMCID: PMC4053547
PMID: 21293053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 27;9:14. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-9-14.

Bioinformatic detection of E47, E2F1 and SREBP1 transcription factors as
potential regulators of genes associated to acquisition of endometrial
receptivity.

Tapia A(1), Vilos C, Marín JC, Croxatto HB, Devoto L.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Materno Infantil, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. atapiap@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The endometrium is a dynamic tissue whose changes are driven by the
ovarian steroidal hormones. Its main function is to provide an adequate substrate
for embryo implantation. Using microarray technology, several reports have
provided the gene expression patterns of human endometrial tissue during the
window of implantation. However it is required that biological connections be
made across these genomic datasets to take full advantage of them. The objective 
of this work was to perform a research synthesis of available gene expression
profiles related to acquisition of endometrial receptivity for embryo
implantation, in order to gain insights into its molecular basis and regulation.
METHODS: Gene expression datasets were intersected to determine a consensus
endometrial receptivity transcript list (CERTL). For this cluster of genes we
determined their functional annotations using available web-based databases. In
addition, promoter sequences were analyzed to identify putative transcription
factor binding sites using bioinformatics tools and determined over-represented
features.
RESULTS: We found 40 up- and 21 down-regulated transcripts in the CERTL. Those
more consistently increased were C4BPA, SPP1, APOD, CD55, CFD, CLDN4, DKK1, ID4, 
IL15 and MAP3K5 whereas the more consistently decreased were OLFM1, CCNB1,
CRABP2, EDN3, FGFR1, MSX1 and MSX2. Functional annotation of CERTL showed it was 
enriched with transcripts related to the immune response, complement activation
and cell cycle regulation. Promoter sequence analysis of genes revealed that DNA 
binding sites for E47, E2F1 and SREBP1 transcription factors were the most
consistently over-represented and in both up- and down-regulated genes during the
window of implantation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research synthesis allowed organizing and mining high throughput
data to explore endometrial receptivity and focus future research efforts on
specific genes and pathways. The discovery of possible new transcription factors 
orchestrating the CERTL opens new alternatives for understanding gene expression 
regulation in uterine function.

PMCID: PMC3040129
PMID: 21272326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;31(12):821-825.

[Methylation of Id4 gene and inhibitive effect of arsenic trioxide on it in Raji 
cells.]

[Article in Chinese]

Qu F(1), Zhao CH, Diao YQ, Zhu XL, Chen J, Li M, Liu CP, Jiang L, Jin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedeatrics the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical Universty,
Shijiazhuang 050011, China. Email: qfincn@yahoo.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To study methylation of Id4 gene and demethylation effect of arsenic
trioxide (ATO) in Raji cells. METHODS: Human Burkitt's Raji lymphoma cells were
cultared and treated with ATO at different concentrations and different time
points. Methylated degree of Id4 gene was detected by methylation specificity
polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR), Id4 mRNA expression in Raji cell by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), the growth of cell by MTT
assay, and cell apoptosis and cycle distribution by Flow Cytometry (FCM).
RESULTS: (1) The Id4 gene exhaustive methylation in control group, and
hypermethylation in experimental group were reversed by ATO in a dose-dependent
manner. (2) Id4 mRNA expression in Raji cells treated with ATO for 48 h increased
gradually with ATO concentration increasing in experimental group. (3) Raji cell 
growth inhibited rates after different concentrations of ATO treatment for 24,
48, 72 h were 12.15% ~ 92.17% in the experimental group (P < 0.05). (4) Apoptosis
peak emerged after ATO treatment for 48 hours in experimental group, while a much
lower apoptosis in control group. (5) After ATO treatment for 48 h in experiment 
group, the cells were arrested at G(0)/G(1) phase in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: Id4 gene presents exhaustive methylation in Raji cells. ATO can
reverse the hypermethylation of Id4 gene and recover the expression of Id4 mRNA. 
Hypermethylation of Id4 gene is one of the reasons of Raji cells malignant
proliferations.

PMID: 21223739  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


133. Infect Agent Cancer. 2010 Dec 31;5:27. doi: 10.1186/1750-9378-5-27.

Epstein-Barr virus-specific methylation of human genes in gastric cancer cells.

Ryan JL(1), Jones RJ, Kenney SC, Rivenbark AG, Tang W, Knight ER, Coleman WB,
Gulley ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and the Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7525, USA. margaret_gulley@med.unc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) is found in 10% of all gastric
adenocarcinomas but its role in tumor development and maintenance remains
unclear. The objective of this study was to examine EBV-mediated dysregulation of
cellular factors implicated in gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Gene expression patterns were examined in EBV-negative and EBV-positive 
AGS gastric epithelial cells using a low density microarray, reverse
transcription PCR, histochemical stains, and methylation-specific DNA sequencing.
Expression of PTGS2 (COX2) was measured in AGS cells and in primary gastric
adenocarcinoma tissues.
RESULTS: In array studies, nearly half of the 96 human genes tested, representing
15 different cancer-related signal transduction pathways, were dysregulated after
EBV infection. Reverse transcription PCR confirmed significant impact on factors 
having diverse functions such as cell cycle regulation (IGFBP3, CDKN2A, CCND1,
HSP70, ID2, ID4), DNA repair (BRCA1, TFF1), cell adhesion (ICAM1), inflammation
(COX2), and angiogenesis (HIF1A). Demethylation using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
reversed the EBV-mediated dysregulation for all 11 genes listed here. For some
promoter sequences, CpG island methylation and demethylation occurred in an
EBV-specific pattern as shown by bisulfite DNA sequencing. Immunohistochemistry
was less sensitive than was western blot for detecting downregulation of COX2
upon EBV infection. Virus-related dysregulation of COX2 levels in vitro was not
recapitulated in vivo among naturally infected gastric cancer tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV alters human gene expression in ways that could contribute to
the unique pathobiology of virus-associated cancer. Furthermore, the frequency
and reversability of methylation-related transcriptional alterations suggest that
demethylating agents have therapeutic potential for managing EBV-related
carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3023757
PMID: 21194482  [PubMed]


134. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;18(6):1402-4.

[Methylation status of id4 gene promoter in patients with chronic myeloid
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XR(1), Kang HY, Cen J, Li YH, Wang LL, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

This study was purposed to investigate the methylation status of id4 gene
promoter in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and explore the
relationship between methylation of the id4 gene and progress of CML. The
methylation status of id4 gene in 48 chronic myeloid leukemia patients and 10
healthy individuals was detected by using methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (MS-PCR). The results showed that id4 gene was unmethylated in bone
marrow samples from both healthy individuals and CML patients in chronic phase
(CP). The rate of id4 gene methylation in both CML patients in accelerated phase 
(AP) and blast crisis (BC) was 66%, and was higher than those of CML patients in 
CP phase. There was significant difference between them (p < 0.05). In one CML
patient who received a serial observations, the status of id4 was unmethylated in
CP, but it was methylated in AP and BC phase. It is concluded that the id4 gene
in CML patients is unmethylated in CP, while it is methylated in AP or BC. The
detection of id4 gene methylation status may be useful for monitoring disease
advance in CML and may be used as a marker of disease progression in CML.

PMID: 21176338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;12(12):940-942.

[ID4 methylation patterns in childhood T line and B line lymphocytic leukemia.]

[Article in Chinese]

Hu HB(1), Hu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. Email:
qunhu0464@yahoo.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship of methylation of inhibitor of DNA binding 4
(ID4) gene core promoter region with childhood T line, B line and T/B acute
lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). METHODS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (MS-PCR) was used to detect the methylation status of ID4 promoter
region in 18 children with newly-diagnosed ALL (2 cases of T-ALL, 13 cases of
B-ALL and 3 cases of T/B-ALL). Thirty-four hospitalized children with non-tumor
disease served as the control group. RESULTS: The complete methylation rate of
ID4 gene promoter region (15/18, 83%) was significantly higher than the partial
methylation rate (3/18, 17%) in the 18 ALL children (P<0.05). The complete
methylation rate of ID4 gene promoter region in children with T-ALL, B-ALL and
T/B-ALL (50%, 85% and 100% respectively) was significantly higher than that in
the control group (18%; P<0.05). In contrast, the partial methylation rate and
non-methylation rate in the three ALL groups were significantly lower than those 
in the control group (P<0.05). There were no statistically significant
differences in the methylation patterns among the B-ALL, T-ALL and T/B-ALL cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The methylation of ID4 promoter region may be related to the
pathogenesis of childhood ALL. The methylation patterns of ID4 promoter region
are identical in B-ALL, T-ALL and T/B-ALL.

PMID: 21172127  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


136. Neuroscience. 2011 Feb 23;175:367-79. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.12.007.
Epub 2010 Dec 9.

The expression and roles of inhibitor of DNA binding helix-loop-helix proteins in
the developing and adult mouse retina.

Du Y(1), Yip HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Inhibitor of DNA binding (Id) proteins bind to and inhibit the function of basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors including those that regulate
retinal development. However, little is known about the role of Id proteins in
the growth and differentiation of the retina during development. The purpose of
this study is to observe the expression of Id proteins in the developing and
adult mouse retinas as the first step in investigating the functions of Id family
members in the eye. The expression of Id1-4 was examined by real-time PCR,
Western blot, and immunohistochemistry in wild-type and Id1/Id3 double-knockout
mice. Id1-4 genes and proteins showed high expression levels in the retina at
embryonic and early postnatal stages, whereas declined in the adult. Expression
of Id proteins was observed in the inner neuroblastic layer (NBL) at embryonic
(E) day 13.5 through 16.5. Id4 expression began at E18.5. By E18.5 and postnatal 
day 1, the expression of Id1-4 exhibited distinct yet overlapping patterns in the
ganglion cell layer and inner part of NBL. In the adult, Ids were expressed in
retinal ganglion cells, amacrine cells, bipolar cells, and horizontal cells. No
Id expression was found in Müller cells. Id1 and Id3 double-knockout mice
(Id1(-/-)/Id3(-/-)) showed smaller retinal size compared to wild-type or
heterozygous littermates. However, histological analyses in Id1 and Id3
single-knockout retinas revealed no obvious defects in developmental phenotype.
Our results indicate that the expression of the Id family may play an important
role in regulating retinal progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Oct;38(7):4637-42. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0597-x. Epub 2010
Dec 4.

Olig1 and ID4 interactions in living cells visualized by bimolecular fluorescence
complementation technique.

Guo SJ(1), Hu JG, Zhao BM, Shen L, Wang R, Zhou JS, Lü HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, and Anhui Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, 
Bengbu Medical College, Anhui 233030, People's Republic of China.

Olig1, a member of class B basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH), plays key roles in
early oligodendrocyte specification. Inhibitors of DNA binding (Id) is another
sub-class of HLH proteins, act as dominant-negative regulators of bHLH proteins, 
which can form heterodimers with class A or B bHLH proteins, but lack the
critical basic DNA binding domain. Id4 was recently found to interact with olig1 
and inhibit oligodendrocyte differentiation. However, there still no direct
evidence to reveal the spatial and temporal interaction of olig1 and ID4 in
living cells. In this study, we performed bimolecular fluorescence
complementation (BiFC) analysis to further characterize the distinct subcellular 
localization of olig1, ID4 and their dimer in living SW1116 cells. To examine the
subcellular localization of olig1 and ID4 by themselves, the olig1-EGFP or
ID4-DsRed2 fusion proteins were also expressed in SW1116 cells, respectively. As 
predicted, the olig1-EGFP fusion proteins were located in the nucleus, and
ID4-DsRed2 fusion proteins were located in the cytoplasm. When olig1-EGFP and
ID4-DsRed2 fusion proteins were co-expressed, the green and red signals were
co-located in the cytoplasm. Using BiFC, the strong BiFC signals could be
detected in pBiFC-olig1VN173 and pBiFC-ID4VC155 co-transfected cells and the
fluorescence signal was located in the cytoplasm. These results collectively
confirmed that olig1 and ID4 could interact and form dimer in living cells, and
ID4 could block the transport of olig1 from cytoplasm to nucleus.

PMID: 21132377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Oct;18(5):1192-7.

[Clinical significance of zo-1 and id4 gene abnormal methylation in multiple
myeloma].

[Article in Chinese]

Kang HY(1), Wang XR, Wang LL, Wang C, Cen J, Gao L, Liu Y, Li YH, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable heterogeneous disease derived from
malignant clonal expansion of plasma cells. The evaluation of prognosis,
detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) and treatment of MM are unclear for
decades. Recently, Velcade and autotransplantation have been broadly applied to
MM patients and achieved better outcomes, but there is yet no effective and
universal marker for MRD detection in MM. Both genetic and epigene-tic
aberrations play important roles in the pathogenesis and development of cancer.
Our preliminary data showed that aberrant promoter methylation of zo-1 and id4
genes was correlated with their gene silencing in several types of hematological 
malignancies. Therefore, this study was aimed to identify the promoter
methylation status of zo-1 and id4 genes in MM and their relationship with the
prognosis, MRD and treatment of MM. The methylation status of zo-1 and id4 genes 
of MM cell lines U266, H929 and IM9 was tested by using MS-PCR; the methylation
status of zo-1, id4 gene promoters in bone marrow samples of 20 MM patients and 6
healthy persons was detected by MS-PCR. The results showed that the zo-1, id4
gene in MM cell lines all were methylation positive (complete or partial
methylation), the zo-1, id4 gene in samples of 5 healthy persons all were
completely unmethylated. The methylation positive rate of zo-1 and id4 genes were
50% and 85% respectively, which were significantly higher than that in normal
bone marrow (0%). The coverage rate of zo-1 and id4 gene methylation was 95%.
There were no significant differences in the methylation status of both genes
among the patients with different heavy chains, different light chains and
symptoms. It is concluded that the change of zo-1, id4 genes methylation status
occurs in MM patients and has specificity, which may be a new gene marker of MM, 
methylation analysis of zo-1 and id4 genes may be important for MRD monitoring in
patients with MM.

PMID: 21129259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2011 Jan 20;117(3):862-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-05-284638. Epub 2010
Nov 22.

Silencing of the inhibitor of DNA binding protein 4 (ID4) contributes to the
pathogenesis of mouse and human CLL.

Chen SS(1), Claus R, Lucas DM, Yu L, Qian J, Ruppert AS, West DA, Williams KE,
Johnson AJ, Sablitzky F, Plass C, Byrd JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, Human
Cancer Genetics Program, the Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding protein 4 (ID4) is a member of the dominant-negative
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor family that lacks DNA binding
activity and has tumor suppressor function. ID4 promoter methylation has been
reported in acute myeloid leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL),
although the expression, function, and clinical relevance of this gene have not
been characterized in either disease. We demonstrate that the promoter of ID4 is 
consistently methylated to various degrees in CLL cells, and increased promoter
methylation in a univariable analysis correlates with shortened patient survival.
However, ID4 mRNA and protein expression is uniformly silenced in CLL cells
irrespective of the degree of promoter methylation. The crossing of ID4(+/-) mice
with Eµ-TCL1 mice triggers a more aggressive murine CLL as measured by lymphocyte
count and inferior survival. Hemizygous loss of ID4 in nontransformed
TCL1-positive B cells enhances cell proliferation triggered by CpG
oligonucleotides and decreases sensitivity to dexamethasone-mediated apoptosis.
Collectively, this study confirms the importance of the silencing of ID4 in
murine and human CLL pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3035078
PMID: 21098398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):R1463-77. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00866.2009. Epub 2010 Sep 29.

ID family protein expression and regulation in hypoxic pulmonary hypertension.

Lowery JW(1), Frump AL, Anderson L, DiCarlo GE, Jones MT, de Caestecker MP.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Univ. Medical Center, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling has been linked to the development of 
pulmonary hypertension (PH). Inhibitors of differentiation (ID) proteins (ID1-4) 
are a family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are downstream 
targets of the BMP signaling pathway, but the role that ID proteins play in the
development of PH is unknown. To address this, we evaluated pulmonary expression 
of ID proteins in a mouse model of hypoxia-induced PH. There is selective
induction of ID1 and ID3 expression in hypoxic pulmonary vascular smooth muscle
cells (VSMCs) in vivo, and ID1 and ID3 expression are increased by hypoxia in
cultured pulmonary VSMCs in a BMP-dependent fashion. ID4 protein is barely
detectable in the mouse lung, and while ID2 is induced in hypoxic peripheral
VSMCs in vivo, it is not increased by hypoxia or BMP signaling in cultured
pulmonary VSMCs. In addition, the PH response to chronic hypoxia is
indistinguishable between wild type and Id1 null mice. This is associated with a 
compensatory increase in ID3 but not ID2 expression in pulmonary VSMCs of Id1
null mice. These findings indicate that ID1 is dispensable for mounting a normal 
pulmonary vascular response to hypoxia, but suggest that ID3 may compensate for
loss of ID1 expression in pulmonary VSMCs. Taken together, these findings
indicate that ID1 and ID3 expression are regulated in a BMP-dependent fashion in 
hypoxic pulmonary VSMCs, and that ID1 and ID3 may play a cooperative role in
regulating BMP-dependent VSMC responses to chronic hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3007180
PMID: 20881097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Transl Med. 2010 Sep 17;8:86. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-8-86.

Multiplexed methylation profiles of tumor suppressor genes and clinical outcome
in lung cancer.

Castro M(1), Grau L, Puerta P, Gimenez L, Venditti J, Quadrelli S,
Sánchez-Carbayo M.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, Instituto Angel H. Roffo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Changes in DNA methylation of crucial cancer genes including tumor
suppressors can occur early in carcinogenesis, being potentially important early 
indicators of cancer. The objective of this study was to examine a multiplexed
approach to assess the methylation of tumor suppressor genes as tumor
stratification and clinical outcome prognostic biomarkers for lung cancer.
METHODS: A multicandidate probe panel interrogated DNA for aberrant methylation
status in 18 tumor suppressor genes in lung cancer using a methylation-specific
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay (MS-MLPA). Lung cancer
cell lines (n = 7), and primary lung tumors (n = 54) were examined using MS-MLPA.
RESULTS: Genes frequently methylated in lung cancer cell lines including SCGB3A1,
ID4, CCND2 were found among the most commonly methylated in the lung tumors
analyzed. HLTF, BNIP3, H2AFX, CACNA1G, TGIF, ID4 and CACNA1A were identified as
novel tumor suppressor candidates methylated in lung tumors. The most frequently 
methylated genes in lung tumors were SCGB3A1 and DLC1 (both 50.0%). Methylation
rates for ID4, DCL1, BNIP3, H2AFX, CACNA1G and TIMP3 were significantly different
between squamous and adenocarcinomas. Methylation of RUNX3, SCGB3A1, SFRP4, and
DLC1 was significantly associated with the extent of the disease when comparing
localized versus metastatic tumors. Moreover, methylation of HTLF, SFRP5 and
TIMP3 were significantly associated with overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: MS-MLPA can be used for classification of certain types of lung
tumors and clinical outcome prediction. This latter is clinically relevant by
offering an adjunct strategy for the clinical management of lung cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2955578
PMID: 20849603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Jun;20(6):1011-9. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0355. Epub 2010 Nov 
4.

Low doses of bone morphogenetic protein 4 increase the survival of human
adipose-derived stem cells maintaining their stemness and multipotency.

Vicente López MA(1), Vázquez García MN, Entrena A, Olmedillas Lopez S,
García-Arranz M, García-Olmo D, Zapata A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Complutense University,
Madrid, Spain. avicente@bio.ucm.es

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have emerged as important tools for cell therapy;
therefore, identification of factors capable of governing their ex vivo expansion
become essential. In this study we demonstrate that human adipose-derived stem
cells (ASCs) express all components of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/BMP
receptor signaling pathway and respond to BMP4 inducing upregulated expression of
its specific target genes Id1-Id4. Moreover, ASCs grown in a medium reduced in
serum produce endogenous BMP4 that could affect autocrinely ASC growth. On the
contrary, dorsomorphin, an inhibitor of BMP signaling pathway, decreases cell
numbers yielded from ASC cultures in correlation with increased apoptosis and
decreased cycling cells. Therefore, BMP4 emerges as a possible factor for ex vivo
expanding human ASCs. Our results demonstrate that, as other morphogens, BMP4
effects on human MSCs are dose dependent. High doses significantly increased
apoptosis and drastically reduced cell proliferation, whereas low doses of BMP4
(0.01-0.1<U+2009>ng/mL) significantly increase culture cell content, reduce the number
of apoptotic cells, and increase that of cycling cells. Further, treatment of
human ASCs with low doses of BMP4 does not modify expression of Nanog and Oct4,
two transcription factors involved in self-renewal and pluripotency of stem cells
or avoid their osteogenic or osteoblastic differentiation capacities when
cultured in adequate inducing media, as shown by the induction of specific gene
expression (CEBP, PPAR<U+03B3>, and RUNX2). Our results therefore support BMP4 as a
promising factor for expanding human adipose tissue-derived MSCs maintaining
their properties of stemness and multipotency.

PMID: 20846028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Dec;49(12):1143-51. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20822.

BARD1 homozygous deletion, a possible alternative to BRCA1 mutation in basal
breast cancer.

Sabatier R(1), Adélaïde J, Finetti P, Ferrari A, Huiart L, Sobol H, Chaffanet M, 
Birnbaum D, Bertucci F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, INSERM/UMR891, Marseille, France.

Hereditary breast cancers (BCs) are incompletely explained by BRCA genes
abnormalities, as ~70% of them are not associated with known genetic alterations.
Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) of tumors provides an
opportunity for identifying new BC susceptibility genes. By analyzing our
database of high-resolution aCGH profiles of 330 BCs, we identified a case with
homozygous deletion of the entire BARD1 gene. The BARD1-deleted case displayed a 
familial history of BC and other clinico-pathological features of BRCAness, and a
17% probability of BRCA1/2 mutation. Analysis of constitutional DNA showed a
BARD1 germline heterozygous deletion without BRCA1/2 mutation. Gene expression
analysis using DNA microarrays classified the tumor as basal-like, with very low 
BARD1 and ID4 expression, but high expression of BRCA1, RAD51, PARP1, CHEK1, and 
FANCA. The tumor displayed a BRCA1-mutated expression profile. This is the first 
report of a non-BRCA1/2-mutated BC with somatic homozygous and germ-line
heterozygous deletion of the entire BARD1 gene. This observation suggests that
BARD1 might be a BC susceptibility gene that follows the Knudson rule.
Identification of BARD1 deletion could have clinical applications including
screening for hereditary forms. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20842729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Cancer. 2010 Jun 1;1:1-5.

Increased inhibitor of differentiation 4 (id4) expression in glioblastoma: a
tissue microarray study.

Zeng W(1), Rushing EJ, Hartmann DP, Azumi N.

Author information: 
(1)1. Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: The inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding protein family (Id1-4)
is involved in cell cycle control, tumorigenesis and angiogenesis through the
negative regulation of helix-loop-helix transcription factors. Of these proteins,
Id4 is known to play an important role in neural stem cell differentiation, and
deregulation has been implicated in glial neoplasia. However, the expression and 
significance of Id4 in astrocytomas has not been fully addressed. Herein we
report the differential expression of Id4 in astrocytomas of various grades using
tissue microarrays (TMA) and immunohistochemistry (IHC).
DESIGN: The GBM TMA was constructed from 53 archival cases at Georgetown
University Hospital and a TMA with normal brain controls and grades II-III
astrocytoma was obtained from Cybrdi (Rockville, MD). TMA sections were stained
with Id4 antibody and the slides were scored according to the percentage of
staining astrocytic nuclei (<9% -, 10-50% +, >51% ++). The Fisher Exact test was 
used to test for statistical significance.
RESULTS: Nuclear staining for Id4 was seen in 73.58% GBMs, 25% grade III, and
12.5% grade II astrocytomas; staining was absent in normal brain tissue. There
was a statistically significant difference between GBM and grades II, III
astrocytoma (p <0.01). Significant Id4 expression was not detected in normal
brain.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms the frequent upregulation of Id4 expression in
GBM, which lends support to its role in tumorigenesis, possibly in the
transformation of low to high-grade astrocytoma (i.e. GBM). Further studies are
warranted to determine the precise role of Id4 in glial neoplasia and its
potential use in targeted therapy for GBM.

PMCID: PMC2931346
PMID: 20842217  [PubMed]


145. Reproduction. 2010 Oct;140(4):551-8. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0211. Epub 2010 Jul 16.

Bone morphogenetic protein 2 inhibits FSH responsiveness in hen granulosa cells.

Haugen MJ(1), Johnson AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556, USA.

Prior to follicle selection into the preovulatory hierarchy, hen granulosa cells 
from prehierarchal follicles remain undifferentiated, as defined in part by the
virtual absence of LHR mRNA expression and inability to produce progesterone. It 
has previously been proposed that prior to follicle selection, granulosa cells
are actively maintained in an undifferentiated state by epidermal growth factor
receptor ligands (EGFRL) signaling via the MAP kinase/extracellular regulated
kinase pathway. Moreover, there is recent evidence that EGFRL/MAP kinase
signaling modulates FSH receptor (FSHR) transcription, in part, via inhibitor of 
differentiation/DNA-binding (ID) proteins. In the present studies with
undifferentiated granulosa, recombinant human (rh) bone morphogenetic protein 2
(BMP2) induced the phosphorylation of SMAD1/5/8, and blocked transforming growth 
factor ß and FSH-induced FSHR expression and progesterone production.
Significantly, BMP2 rapidly induced mRNAs encoding betacellulin and EGF, plus ID 
proteins (ID1, ID3, and ID4). Alternatively, the bioactivity of BMPs can be
modulated by one or more BMP antagonists, including noggin (NOG). NOG mRNA is
expressed by both hen granulosa and theca tissues from prehierarchal follicles.
Pretreatment of cultured granulosa with rh NOG reversed both the stimulatory
effects of BMP2 on ID1, ID3, and ID4 expression and the inhibitory effects of
BMP2 on FSHR mRNA levels and progesterone production. Collectively, these data
provide evidence that prior to follicle selection, BMP2 signaling contributes
toward maintaining granulosa cells in an undifferentiated state. The actions of
BMP2 are, at least in part, mediated indirectly via enhanced EGFRL expression and
ERBB receptor-mediated MAP kinase signaling, and can be modulated by the
autocrine/paracrine production of NOG.

PMID: 20639315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul 8;6(7):e1001019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001019.

Id4, a new candidate gene for senile osteoporosis, acts as a molecular switch
promoting osteoblast differentiation.

Tokuzawa Y(1), Yagi K, Yamashita Y, Nakachi Y, Nikaido I, Bono H, Ninomiya Y,
Kanesaki-Yatsuka Y, Akita M, Motegi H, Wakana S, Noda T, Sablitzky F, Arai S,
Kurokawa R, Fukuda T, Katagiri T, Schönbach C, Suda T, Mizuno Y, Okazaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics and Systems Medicine, Research Center for
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Hidaka, Saitama, Japan.

Excessive accumulation of bone marrow adipocytes observed in senile osteoporosis 
or age-related osteopenia is caused by the unbalanced differentiation of MSCs
into bone marrow adipocytes or osteoblasts. Several transcription factors are
known to regulate the balance between adipocyte and osteoblast differentiation.
However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate the balance between adipocyte and
osteoblast differentiation in the bone marrow have yet to be elucidated. To
identify candidate genes associated with senile osteoporosis, we performed
genome-wide expression analyses of differentiating osteoblasts and adipocytes.
Among transcription factors that were enriched in the early phase of
differentiation, Id4 was identified as a key molecule affecting the
differentiation of both cell types. Experiments using bone marrow-derived stromal
cell line ST2 and Id4-deficient mice showed that lack of Id4 drastically reduces 
osteoblast differentiation and drives differentiation toward adipocytes. On the
other hand knockdown of Id4 in adipogenic-induced ST2 cells increased the
expression of Ppargamma2, a master regulator of adipocyte differentiation.
Similar results were observed in bone marrow cells of femur and tibia of
Id4-deficient mice. However the effect of Id4 on Ppargamma2 and adipocyte
differentiation is unlikely to be of direct nature. The mechanism of Id4
promoting osteoblast differentiation is associated with the Id4-mediated release 
of Hes1 from Hes1-Hey2 complexes. Hes1 increases the stability and
transcriptional activity of Runx2, a key molecule of osteoblast differentiation, 
which results in an enhanced osteoblast-specific gene expression. The new role of
Id4 in promoting osteoblast differentiation renders it a target for preventing
the onset of senile osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC2900302
PMID: 20628571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Anim Genet. 2010 Oct;41(5):558-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2010.02065.x.

Partial genomic structure, mutation analysis and mapping of the porcine inhibitor
of DNA binding genes ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4.

Stratil A(1), Horák P, Filkuková J, Van Poucke M, Bartenschlager H, Peelman LJ,
Geldermann H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech 
Republic, Libechov, Czech Republic. stratil@iapg.cas.cz

PMID: 20477796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 30;285(31):24164-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.128744. Epub
2010 May 11.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) regulation of adipocyte differentiation and
adipose tissue formation in mice.

Murad JM(1), Place CS, Ran C, Hekmatyar SK, Watson NP, Kauppinen RA, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cotton Cancer Center and Department of Pediatrics, Dartmouth Medical
School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) is a helix-loop-helix protein that
heterodimerizes with basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors inhibiting
their function. ID4 expression is important for adipogenic differentiation of the
3T3-L1 cell line, and inhibition of ID4 is associated with a concomitant decrease
in CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma mRNA and protein expression. Mice with a homozygous deletion of
Id4 (Id4(-/-)) have reduced body fat and gain much less weight compared with
wild-type littermates when placed on diets with high fat content. Mouse embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) isolated from Id4(-/-) mice have reduced adipogenic potential 
when compared with wild-type MEFs. In agreement with changes in morphological
differentiation, the levels of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma were also reduced in MEFs from
Id4(-/-) mice. Our results demonstrate the importance of ID4 in adipocyte
differentiation and the implications of this regulation for adipose tissue
formation.

PMCID: PMC2911309
PMID: 20460371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 1;29(26):3793-802. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.147. Epub 2010 May
10.

Inhibitor of DNA binding-4 promotes angiogenesis and growth of glioblastoma
multiforme by elevating matrix GLA levels.

Kuzontkoski PM(1), Mulligan-Kehoe MJ, Harris BT, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical
School, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

Inhibitor of differentiation-4 is highly expressed in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM). We report a novel pro-angiogenic function for inhibitor of
differentiation-4 in the growth of glioblastoma xenografts. Tumor-derived cell
cultures expressing elevated levels of ID4 produced enlarged xenografts in
immunosuppressed mice that were better vascularized than corresponding control
tumors and expressed elevated matrix GLA protein (MGP) that mediated enhanced
tumor angiogenesis. Inhibition of MGP resulted in smaller and less vascularized
xenografts. Our finding shows a novel function for ID4 in tumor angiogenesis, and
identifies ID4 and MGP as possible therapeutic targets for GBM.

PMID: 20453881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gene. 2010 Aug 15;462(1-2):8-17. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.04.006. Epub 2010 Apr
28.

Gene expression profiling of primary human articular chondrocytes in high-density
micromasses reveals patterns of recovery, maintenance, re- and dedifferentiation.

Dehne T(1), Schenk R, Perka C, Morawietz L, Pruss A, Sittinger M, Kaps C, Ringe
J.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering Laboratory and Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative
Therapies, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Tucholskystrasse 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
tilo.dehne@charite.de

The high-density micromass culture has been widely applied to study chondrocyte
cell physiology and pathophysiological mechanisms. Since an integrated image has 
not been established so far, we analyzed the phenotypic alterations of human
articular chondrocytes in this model on the broad molecular level. Freshly
isolated chondrocytes were assembled as micromasses and maintained up to 6 weeks 
in medium containing human serum. Formation of cartilaginous extracellular matrix
(ECM) was evaluated by histological and immunohistochemical staining. At 0, 3 and
6 weeks, chondrocyte micromasses were subjected to gene expression analysis using
oligonucleotide microarrays and real-time RT-PCR. Micromasses developed a
cartilaginous ECM rich in proteoglycans and type II collagen. On gene expression 
level, time-dependent expression patterns was observed. The induction of genes
associated with cartilage-specific ECM (COL2A1 and COL11A1) and developmental
signaling (GDF5, GDF10, ID1, ID4 and FGFR1-3) indicated redifferentiation within 
the first 3 weeks. The repression of genes related to stress response (HSPA1A and
HSPA4), apoptotic events (HYOU1, NFKBIA and TRAF1), and degradation (MMP1, MMP10 
and MMP12) suggested a recovery of chondrocytes. Constant expression of other
chondrogenic (ACAN, FN1 and MGP) and hypertrophic markers (COL10A1, ALPL, PTHR1
and PTHR2) indicated a pattern of phenotypic maintenance. Simultaneously, the
expression of chondrogenic growth (BMP6, TGFA, FGF1 and FGF2) and transcription
factors (SOX9, EGR1, HES1 and TGIF1), and other cartilage ECM-related genes (COMP
and PRG4) was consistently repressed and expression of collagens related to
dedifferentiation (COL1A1 and COL3A1) was steadily induced indicating a
progressing loss of cartilage phenotype. Likewise, a steady increase of genes
associated with proliferation (GAS6, SERPINF1, VEGFB and VEGFC) and apoptosis
(DRAM, DPAK1, HSPB, GPX1, NGFRAP1 and TIA1) was observed. Sequence and interplay 
of identified expression patterns suggest that chondrocyte micromass cultures
maintain a differentiated phenotype up to 3 weeks in vitro and might be useful
for studying chondrocyte biology, pathophysiology and differentiation.
Cultivation longer than 6 weeks leads to progressing dedifferentiation of
chondrocytes that should be considered on long-term evaluations.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Recent Pat DNA Gene Seq. 2010 Jun;4(2):86-93.

Recent patents and advances in genomic biomarker discovery for colorectal
cancers.

Quyun C(1), Ye Z, Lin SC, Lin B.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Division, Zhejiang-California International Nanosystems
Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang University, 268 Kaixuan Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
310029, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in the world. Early
diagnosis of colorectal cancer is the key to reducing the death rate of CRC
patients. Predicting the response to current therapeutic modalities of CRC will
also have a great impact on patient care. This review summarizes recent advances 
and patents in biomarker discovery in CRC under five major categories; including 
genomic changes, expression changes, mutations, epigenetic changes and microRNAs.
The interesting patents include: 1) a patent for a method to differentiate normal
exfoliated cells from cancer cells based on whether they were subjected to
apoptosis and DNA degradation; 2) A model (PM-33 multiple molecular marker model)
based on expression changes of up-regulation of the MDM2, DUSP6, and NFl genes
down-regulation of the RNF4, MMD and EIF2S3 genes, which achieved an 88%
sensitivity, and an 82% specificity for CRC diagnosis; 3) gene mutations in PTEN,
KRAS, PIK3CA for predicting the response to anti-EGFR therapies, a common drug
used for CRC treatment; 4) patents on epigenetic changes of ITGA4, SEPT9, ALX4,
TFAP2E FOXL2, SARM1, ID4 etc. and many key miRNAs. Finally, future directions in 
the fields were commented on or suggested, including the combination of multiple 
categories of biomarkers and pathway central or network-based biomarker panels.

PMID: 20426761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Apr;18(2):421-6.

[Cloning of ID4 gene expression regulation promoter and subcloning of recombinant
ID4 promoter luciferase reporter].

[Article in Chinese]

Li W(1), Huang Y, Yang B, Chi XH, Liu LH, Zhang F, Yan JW, Lu XC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun 130021, Jilin Province, China.

The present study was aimed to clone ID4 gene promoter and upstream regulatory
region, and to construct a series of recombinant promoter-luciferase reporter for
exploring the mechanism of ID4 gene expression regulation.METHODS AND RESULTS:
the upstream 5' flanking sequence of 2242 bp from transcriptional start site
(TSS) and downstream 5' non-coding region of 212 bp on ID4 gene were searched out
and downloaded from human genome databank of NCBI using whole length of ID4 gene 
cDNA as a probe; On-line promoter analysis softwares, including TESS and Genomax,
were employed to analyze the characteristics of ID4 gene promoter and upstream
regulatory elements. Then, based on the analytic results, PCR primers were
designed and synthesized. Segmental amplification method was adopted to obtain
two fragments of 1829 bp and 784 bp. The two fragments were inserted into the
plasmid pGEM-T, transformed into TOP10 competent E. coli., and positive
recombinants were screened respectively. Subsequently, restriction enzymes
KpnI/NheI and KpnI/EcoRI were used to digest the above-mentioned two plasmids
pGEM-T and pGL3, and ligation was completed by T4 DNA ligase. After
transformation to TOP10 competent E. coli. and screening of positive colonies,
the basic recombinant ID4 gene promoter-pGL3 was successfully constructed.
KpnI/NheI double digestion and sequencing showed that the target fragment was 2
459 bp and consistent with the corresponding sequence of GenBank; Using the 2459 
bp fragment as a template, 5 pairs of primers with identical 3' terminus and
different 5' terminus were designed and synthesized for half-nest PCR
amplification. 5 fragments with an interval of approximate 400 bp each other,
i.e. 2112 bp, 1703 bp, 1290 bp, 784 bp and 496 bp, were produced and inserted
into pGEM-T after recovery and purification for transformation to TOP10 competent
E. coli. and screening of positive colonies. After that, KpnI/NheI was used to
digest the above-mentioned five pGEM-T recombinant plasmids and pGL3 basic
vector, and the ligation was completed by T4 DNA ligase. After transformation to 
TOP10 competent E. coli. and screening for positive colonies, 5 subcloned
recombinants of ID4 gene promoter and pGL3 Basic vector cells were constructed.
In conclusion, 2.5 kb ID4 gene promoter with upstream expression regulatory
sequence was successfully cloned and a series of ID4 promoter subclone-pGL3-Basic
recombinant were constructed for further researches on activity, expression
regulation and function of ID4 promoter.

PMID: 20416180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cancer Res. 2010 May 1;70(9):3823-32. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3048. Epub
2010 Apr 13.

Id2 promotes tumor cell migration and invasion through transcriptional repression
of semaphorin 3F.

Coma S(1), Amin DN, Shimizu A, Lasorella A, Iavarone A, Klagsbrun M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Id proteins (Id1 to Id4) are helix-loop-helix transcription factors that promote 
metastasis. It was found that Semaphorin 3F (SEMA3F), a potent inhibitor of
metastasis, was repressed by Id2. High metastatic human tumor cell lines had
relatively high amounts of Id2 and low SEMA3F levels compared with their low
metastatic counterparts. No correlation between metastatic potential and
expression of the other Id family members was observed. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of Id2 in low metastatic tumor cells downregulated SEMA3F and, as a
consequence, enhanced their ability to migrate and invade, two requisite steps of
metastasis in vivo. Id2 overexpression was driven by the c-myc oncoprotein.
SEMA3F was a direct target gene of the E47/Id2 pathway. Two E-box sites, which
bind E protein transcription factors including E47, were identified in the
promoter region of the SEMA3F gene. E47 directly activated SEMA3F promoter
activity and expression and promoted SEMA3F biological activities, including
filamentous actin depolymerization, inactivation of RhoA, and inhibition of cell 
migration. Silencing of SEMA3F inhibited the E47-induced SEMA3F expression and
biological activities, confirming that these E47-induced effects were SEMA3F
dependent. E47 did not induce expression of the other members of the SEMA3
family. Id2, a dominant-negative inhibitor of E proteins, abrogated the
E47-induced SEMA3F expression and biological activities. Thus, high metastatic
tumor cells overexpress c-myc, leading to upregulation of Id2 expression; the
aberrantly elevated amount of Id2 represses SEMA3F expression and, as a
consequence, enhances the ability of tumor cells to migrate and invade.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2862101
PMID: 20388805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2010 May;34(5):840-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1530-0277.2010.01156.x. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Genome-wide association study of alcohol dependence implicates a region on
chromosome 11.

Edenberg HJ(1), Koller DL, Xuei X, Wetherill L, McClintick JN, Almasy L, Bierut
LJ, Bucholz KK, Goate A, Aliev F, Dick D, Hesselbrock V, Hinrichs A, Kramer J,
Kuperman S, Nurnberger JI Jr, Rice JP, Schuckit MA, Taylor R, Todd Webb B,
Tischfield JA, Porjesz B, Foroud T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, 46202-5122, USA. edenberg@iupui.edu <edenberg@iupui.edu>

BACKGROUND: Alcohol dependence is a complex disease, and although linkage and
candidate gene studies have identified several genes associated with the risk for
alcoholism, these explain only a portion of the risk.
METHODS: We carried out a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on a case-control 
sample drawn from the families in the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of
Alcoholism. The cases all met diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fourth
Edition; controls all consumed alcohol but were not dependent on alcohol or
illicit drugs. To prioritize among the strongest candidates, we genotyped most of
the top 199 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (p < or = 2.1 x 10(-4)) in a
sample of alcohol-dependent families and performed pedigree-based association
analysis. We also examined whether the genes harboring the top SNPs were
expressed in human brain or were differentially expressed in the presence of
ethanol in lymphoblastoid cells.
RESULTS: Although no single SNP met genome-wide criteria for significance, there 
were several clusters of SNPs that provided mutual support. Combining evidence
from the case-control study, the follow-up in families, and gene expression
provided strongest support for the association of a cluster of genes on
chromosome 11 (SLC22A18, PHLDA2, NAP1L4, SNORA54, CARS, and OSBPL5) with alcohol 
dependence. Several SNPs nominated as candidates in earlier GWAS studies
replicated in ours, including CPE, DNASE2B, SLC10A2, ARL6IP5, ID4, GATA4, SYNE1, 
and ADCY3.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified several promising associations that warrant
further examination in independent samples.

PMCID: PMC2884073
PMID: 20201924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Jan 14;11:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-2.

Elevated endogenous expression of the dominant negative basic helix-loop-helix
protein ID1 correlates with significant centrosome abnormalities in human tumor
cells.

Manthey C(1), Mern DS, Gutmann A, Zielinski AJ, Herz C, Lassmann S, Hasskarl J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: ID proteins are dominant negative inhibitors of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors that have multiple functions during
development and cellular differentiation. Ectopic (over-)expression of ID1
extends the lifespan of primary human epithelial cells. High expression levels of
ID1 have been detected in multiple human malignancies, and in some have been
correlated with unfavorable clinical prognosis. ID1 protein is localized at the
centrosomes and forced (over-)expression of ID1 results in errors during
centrosome duplication.
RESULTS: Here we analyzed the steady state expression levels of the four
ID-proteins in 18 tumor cell lines and assessed the number of centrosome
abnormalities. While expression of ID1, ID2, and ID3 was detected, we failed to
detect protein expression of ID4. Expression of ID1 correlated with increased
supernumerary centrosomes in most cell lines analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report that shows that not only ectopic expression
in tissue culture but endogenous levels of ID1 modulate centrosome numbers. Thus,
our findings support the hypothesis that ID1 interferes with centrosome
homeostasis, most likely contributing to genomic instability and associated tumor
aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC2818612
PMID: 20070914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Blood. 2010 Feb 25;115(8):1490-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-235986. Epub 2009
Dec 30.

Immunoglobulin heavy chain locus chromosomal translocations in B-cell precursor
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: rare clinical curios or potent genetic drivers?

Dyer MJ(1), Akasaka T, Capasso M, Dusanjh P, Lee YF, Karran EL, Nagel I, Vater I,
Cario G, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Toxicology Unit and Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine,
University of Leicester, Lancaster Road, Leicester, United Kingdom.
mjsd1@le.ac.uk

Chromosomal translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus
define common subgroups of B-cell lymphoma but are rare in B-cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL). Recent fluorescent in situ hybridization and
molecular cloning studies have identified several novel IGH translocations
involving genes that play important roles in normal hemopoiesis, including the
cytokine receptor genes CRLF2 and EPOR, all members of the CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein gene family, as well as genes not normally expressed in hemopoietic cells
including inhibitor of DNA binding 4. IGH translocation results in deregulated
target gene expression because of juxtaposition with IGH transcriptional
enhancers. However, many genes targeted by IGH translocations are also more
commonly deregulated in BCP-ALL as a consequence of other genetic or epigenetic
mechanisms. For example, interstitial genomic deletions also result in
deregulated CRLF2 expression, whereas EPOR expression is deregulated as a
consequence of the ETV6-RUNX1 fusion. The possible clinical importance of many of
the various IGH translocations in BCP-ALL remains to be determined from
prospective studies, but CRLF2 expression is associated with a poor prognosis.
Despite their rarity, IGH chromosomal translocations in BCP-ALL therefore define 
not only new mechanisms of B-cell transformation but also clinically important
subgroups of disease and suggest new targeted therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 20042721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1247-56. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0914. Epub 2009 Dec 
23.

Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) genes are expressed in the steroidogenic cells 
of the ovine ovary and are differentially regulated by members of the
transforming growth factor-beta family.

Hogg K(1), Etherington SL, Young JM, McNeilly AS, Duncan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. k.hogg@sms.ed.ac.uk

Inhibitor of differentiation (Id) proteins act during embryogenesis and
development to repress gene transcription required for lineage commitment, while 
promoting cell growth. Growth factors belonging to the TGFbeta superfamily of
signaling molecules, notably the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and activin, 
can regulate Id expression in these tissues. Id expression and function in adult 
physiology is less well determined, and we hypothesized a role for Id proteins in
the adult mammalian ovary. Immunohistochemistry for Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 in the
sheep ovary revealed consistent expression in granulosa and thecal cells of
ovarian follicles throughout development. In atretic follicles, Id proteins were 
selectively down-regulated in thecal cells (P < 0.0001). Additionally, Id1 was
universally up-regulated in the cumulus cells adjacent to the oocyte.
Immunohistochemistry for phospho (p)-smad 1/5/8 signaling components (stimulated 
by BMPs) showed a punctate pattern of expression whereas p-smad 2/3 (stimulated
by activin) was ubiquitously expressed in follicles. Neither pathway, however,
displayed differential staining in line with Id1 cumulus-specific expression,
suggesting a more complex relationship between Id1 expression and TGFbeta
signaling in these cells. Nevertheless, in vitro, stimulation of ovine granulosa 
cells with BMP6 or activin A led to a respective increase and decrease in Id1 (P 
< 0.0001), Id2 (P < 0.0001), Id3 (P < 0.0001), and Id4 (P < 0.05) transcripts,
and Id1 gene expression was further manipulated by the oocyte-secreted factors
BMP15 and growth differentiation factor 9 (P < 0.001). These data confirm that
TGFbeta signaling can regulate Id gene expression in the sheep ovarian follicle
and suggest a functional role for the Id family in the mammalian ovary.

PMCID: PMC2971462
PMID: 20032053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Jun 23;89(24):1714-6.

[Experimental identification of drugs with function of targeted up-regulating ID4
expression: bioinformatics-based prediction and preliminary validation].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang B(1), Lu XC, Liu LH, Zhu HL, Chi XH, Yao SQ, Lou FD, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen new candidate molecular-targeted anti-leukemia compounds
with potential functions of targeted up-regulating ID4 gene expression.
METHODS: Promoter region of ID4 gene including the upstream - 3000 bp sequence of
transcriptional start site and message RNA sequence were fished out. Online
promoter analysis tools of TESS and Genomax were used to search possible sequence
of transcriptional start site and message RNA sequence were fished out. Online
promoter analysis tools of TESS and Genomax were used to search possible
cis-acting structure from human transcription factor database. The activity of
related drugs with potential effects upon ID4 gene expression was analyzed using 
SAGE database. GEO database was applied to search the gene expression profiling
regulated by ID4 gene. Finally, similar analysis between gene expression
profiling by ID4 and genome-wide profiling regulated by 163 known drugs or active
compounds was manipulated to screen the drugs and candidate compounds with
similar gene expression profiling with ID4 gene. MOLT4 cell line was treated with
the above candidate active compounds to investigate the ID4 gene expression by
RT-PCR assay.
RESULTS: ID4 gene had a type II promoter with a typical TATA box in upstream -45 
bp of transcription start site. The 1300 bp-length promoter of ID4 gene contained
a few cis-acting structures classified into two function types, i. e. positive
regulatory type, including transcription factors Spl and c-Myb, cAMP,
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and estrogen receptor (ER), and negative regulatory 
type, including Wilms tumor-1 (WT1) and early growth response-2 (EGR2). The
similarity of gene expression profiling was identified between cAMP and ID4 gene.
ID4 gene expression was induced in MOLT4 cell line after treatment with calcium
dibutyryladenosine cyclophosphate at the concentration of 0.1 mmol/L.
CONCLUSION: The comprehensive bioinformatic analysis, based upon the combination 
of regulatory sequence prediction of promoter, similarity analysis of gene
expression profiling and literature review, can be considered as a practical tool
in screening the candidate drugs with the activity of targeted regulating
functional genes. Calcium dibutyryladenosine cyclophosphate can induce ID4 gene
expression in leukemic cells.

PMID: 19957534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Arch Toxicol. 2010 Mar;84(3):191-203. doi: 10.1007/s00204-009-0486-z.

Gene expression profiling in the lung tissue of cynomolgus monkeys in response to
repeated exposure to welding fumes.

Heo JD(1), Oh JH, Lee K, Kim CY, Song CW, Yoon S, Han JS, Yu IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Inhalation Toxicology, KIT Jeongeup Campus, 1051, Shinjeong-dong, 
Jeongeup, Jeollabuk-do, Korea.

Many in the welding industry suffer from bronchitis, lung function changes, metal
fume fever, and diseases related to respiratory damage. These phenomena are
associated with welding fumes; however, the mechanism behind these findings
remains to be elucidated. In this study, the lungs of cynomolgus monkeys were
exposed to MMA-SS welding fumes for 229 days and allowed to recover for 153 days.
After the exposure and recovery period, gene expression profiles were
investigated using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human U133 plus 2.0. In total, it was 
confirmed that 1,116 genes were up-or downregulated (over 2-fold changes, P\0.01)
for the T1 (31.4 ± 2.8 mg/m3) and T2 (62.5 ± 2.7 mg/m3) dose groups.
Differentially expressed genes in the exposure and recovery groups were analyzed,
based on hierarchical clustering, and were imported into Ingenuity Pathways
Analysis to analyze the biological and toxicological functions. Functional
analysis identified genes involved in immunological disease in both groups.
Additionally, differentially expressed genes in common between monkeys and rats
following welding fume exposure were compared using microarray data, and the gene
expression of selected genes was verified by real-time PCR. Genes such as CHI3L1,
RARRES1, and CTSB were up-regulated and genes such as CYP26B1, ID4, and NRGN were
down-regulated in both monkeys and rats following welding fume exposure. This is 
the first comprehensive gene expression profiling conducted for welding fume
exposure in monkeys, and these expressed genes are expected to be useful in
helping to understand transcriptional changes in monkey lungs after welding fume 
exposure.

PMCID: PMC2820669
PMID: 19936710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Leuk Res. 2010 May;34(5):598-604. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.09.031. Epub 2009
Oct 23.

ID4 methylation predicts high risk of leukemic transformation in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Wang H(1), Wang XQ, Xu XP, Lin GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Huashan Hospital of Fudan University, 12 Wulumuqi
Road Central, 200040 Shanghai, China.

Epigenetic gene silencing due to promoter methylation is observed in human
cancers like acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Little is known about aberrant
methylation in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), a heterogeneous clonal stem cell
disorder with a approximately 30% risk of transformation into secondary AML.
Recent evidence demonstrated that ID4, a negative regulator of transcription, may
act as a tumor-suppressor gene. To clarify the role of ID4 in MDS, we employed
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to examine the methylation status of ID4 in 144
adult de novo MDS patients. We found that ID4 methylation was present in 35.4%
(n=51) of these MDS patients and methylaiton was correlated significantly with
World Health Organization (WHO) subtypes and International Prognostic Scoring
System (IPSS) risk groups. Patients with advanced stages of WHO subtypes (45.8%
vs. 21.3%, P=0.002) and higher risk IPSS subgroups (45.7% vs. 26.0%, P=0.014)
exhibited a significantly higher frequency of ID4 methylation. The median
survival of patients with ID4 methylation was shorter than patients without ID4
methylation (12.2 months vs. 26.9 months, P=0.005). Multivariate analysis
indicated that ID4 methylation status was the independent factor that impacted
leukemia-free survival (LFS). Disease in patients with ID4 methylation progressed
more rapidly than those without ID4 methylation (P=0.047, HR=2.11). Our results
suggest that ID4 may be a therapeutic target in MDS.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19853913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Oct;16(10):1086-93. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1669. Epub 2009
Sep 27.

The execution of the transcriptional axis mutant p53, E2F1 and ID4 promotes tumor
neo-angiogenesis.

Fontemaggi G(1), Dell'Orso S, Trisciuoglio D, Shay T, Melucci E, Fazi F,
Terrenato I, Mottolese M, Muti P, Domany E, Del Bufalo D, Strano S, Blandino G.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Oncogenomics Unit, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

ID4 (inhibitor of DNA binding 4) is a member of a family of proteins that
function as dominant-negative regulators of basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors. Growing evidence links ID proteins to cell proliferation,
differentiation and tumorigenesis. Here we identify ID4 as a transcriptional
target of gain-of-function p53 mutants R175H, R273H and R280K. Depletion of
mutant p53 protein severely impairs ID4 expression in proliferating tumor cells. 
The protein complex mutant p53-E2F1 assembles on specific regions of the ID4
promoter and positively controls ID4 expression. The ID4 protein binds to and
stabilizes mRNAs encoding pro-angiogenic factors IL8 and GRO-alpha. This results 
in the increase of the angiogenic potential of cancer cells expressing mutant
p53. These findings highlight the transcriptional axis mutant p53, E2F1 and ID4
as a still undefined molecular mechanism contributing to tumor neo-angiogenesis.

PMID: 19783986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Carcinog. 2010 Jan;49(1):94-103. doi: 10.1002/mc.20581.

Aberrant DNA methylation occurs in colon neoplasms arising in the azoxymethane
colon cancer model.

Borinstein SC(1), Conerly M, Dzieciatkowski S, Biswas S, Washington MK, Trobridge
P, Henikoff S, Grady WM.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Mouse models of intestinal tumors have advanced our understanding of the role of 
gene mutations in colorectal malignancy. However, the utility of these systems
for studying the role of epigenetic alterations in intestinal neoplasms remains
to be defined. Consequently, we assessed the role of aberrant DNA methylation in 
the azoxymethane (AOM) rodent model of colon cancer. AOM induced tumors display
global DNA hypomethylation, which is similar to human colorectal cancer. We next 
assessed the methylation status of a panel of candidate genes previously shown to
be aberrantly methylated in human cancer or in mouse models of malignant
neoplasms. This analysis revealed different patterns of DNA methylation that were
gene specific. Zik1 and Gja9 demonstrated cancer-specific aberrant DNA
methylation, whereas, Cdkn2a/p16, Igfbp3, Mgmt, Id4, and Cxcr4 were methylated in
both the AOM tumors and normal colon mucosa. No aberrant methylation of Dapk1 or 
Mlt1 was detected in the neoplasms, but normal colon mucosa samples displayed
methylation of these genes. Finally, p19(Arf), Tslc1, Hltf, and Mlh1 were
unmethylated in both the AOM tumors and normal colon mucosa. Thus, aberrant DNA
methylation does occur in AOM tumors, although the frequency of aberrantly
methylated genes appears to be less common than in human colorectal cancer.
Additional studies are necessary to further characterize the patterns of
aberrantly methylated genes in AOM tumors.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2875385
PMID: 19777566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Brain Nerve. 2009 Jul;61(7):741-51.

[Common mechanism underlying oligodendrocyte development and
oligodendrogliomagenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Laboratory for Cell Lineage
Modulation, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

A number of extrinsic factors and intracellular mechanisms have been revealed to 
be involved in oligodendrocyte development. For instance, sonic hedgehog induces 
the expression of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, Olig1 and 
Olig2, and a homeobox transcription factor Nkx2.2, both of which induce neural
stem cells (NSCs) to differentiate into oligodendrocyte precursor cells when the 
factors work together. In contrast, Notch and bone morphogenic proteins (BMP)
block oligodendrocyte differentiation by inducing the expression of the
transcription inhibitors Hes5 and Id4, respectively. Moreover, it was shown that 
other extrinsic and intrinsic factors, including platelet derived growth factor, 
thyroid hormone (TH), TH receptors, p53, and Wnt, are also involved in the
development, positively or negatively. It has been thought that
oligodendroglioma, one of brain tumors, is generated from oligodendrocyte lineage
cells as the tumor cells share characteristics of oligodendrocyte, such as the
honeycomb structure, and the expression of oligodendrocyte-related factors,
including Olig2 and NG2 proteoglycan. However, recent progress in the field
revealed that oligodendroglioma might be generated from NSCs and astrocytes as
well as oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Therefore, it is crucial to investigate
the cell-of-origin of oligodendroglioma and to identify target genes and markers 
for the therapy. In this review, I summarize the mechanism of oligodendrocyte
development and present how the oligodendrocyte research can help to understand
and to investigate the mechanism of oligodendroglioma development.

PMID: 19618851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Jun;17(3):618-20.

[Preliminary study on difference of Id4 gene methylation in various types of
myelodysplastic syndromes].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Bo J, Dou LP, Jing Y, Wang SH, Wang QS, Li HH, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the difference of Id4 gene promoter
methylation in patients with different subtypes of myelodysplastic syndromes
(MDS). By using MS-PCR method, the methylation status of Id4 gene was detected in
50 patients with different subtypes of MDS. Id4 methylation was also detected in 
bone marrow samples from patients with iron deficiency anemia which served as
control. The results showed that Id4 gene was unmethylated in all of bone marrow 
samples from controls. In various subtypes of MDS patients, the rate of Id4 gene 
methylation was different. No Id4 methylation was found in 6 cases of RA, 2 cases
of RARS and 4 cases of MDS-U. Id4 methylations was found in 2 out of 18 patients 
with RCMD. Id4 methylation in 3 out of 12 patients with RAEBI and other 3 out 8
patients with RAEBII were found. In groups with blast ratio lower or higher than 
5%, the incidence of Id4 gene methylation were 6.7% and 30% respectively, so that
there was significant difference. In tentative conclusion, Id4 gene methylation
possibly is found in MDS patients with higher ratio of blast cells.

PMID: 19549375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Korean Med Sci. 2009 Jun;24(3):493-7. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2009.24.3.493. Epub
2009 Jun 18.

Differential methylation pattern of ID4, SFRP1, and SHP1 between acute myeloid
leukemia and chronic myeloid leukemia.

Uhm KO(1), Lee ES, Lee YM, Park JS, Kim SJ, Kim BS, Kim HS, Park SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Anatomy, Brain Korea 21 Biomedical 
Sciences, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

To gain insight into the differential mechanism of gene promoter hypermethylation
in acute and chronic leukemia, we identified the methylation status on one part
of 5'CpG rich region of 8 genes, DAB2IP, DLC-1, H-cadherin, ID4, Integrin alpha4,
RUNX3, SFRP1, and SHP1 in bone marrows from acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. Also, we compared the methylation status
of genes in AML and CML using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). The frequencies of 
DNA methylation of ID4, SFRP1, and SHP1 were higher in AML patients compared to
those in CML patients. In contrast, no statistical difference between AML and CML
was detected for other genes such as DLC-1, DAB2IP, H-cadherin, Integrin alpha4, 
and RUNX3. Taken together, these results suggest that these
methylation-controlled genes may have different roles in AML and CML, and thus,
may act as a biological marker of AML.

PMCID: PMC2698198
PMID: 19543515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jun 7;9:173. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-173.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4) is a potential tumor suppressor in prostate 
cancer.

Carey JP(1), Asirvatham AJ, Galm O, Ghogomu TA, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutics
Development, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA. j_carey84@msn.com

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (Id4), a member of the Id gene family 
is also a dominant negative regulator of basic helix loop helix (bHLH)
transcription factors. Some of the functions of Id4 appear to be unique as
compared to its other family members Id1, Id2 and Id3. Loss of Id4 gene
expression in many cancers in association with promoter hypermethylation has led 
to the proposal that Id4 may act as a tumor suppressor. In this study we provide 
functional evidence that Id4 indeed acts as a tumor suppressor and is part of a
cancer associated epigenetic re-programming.
METHODS: Data mining was used to demonstrate Id4 expression in prostate cancer.
Methylation specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP) analysis was performed to
understand molecular mechanisms associated with Id4 expression in prostate cancer
cell lines. The effect of ectopic Id4 expression in DU145 cells was determined by
cell cycle analysis (3H thymidine incorporation and FACS), expression of androgen
receptor, p53 and cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors p27 and p21 by a combination
of RT-PCR, real time-PCR, western blot and immuno-cytochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Id4 expression was down-regulated in prostate cancer. Id4 expression was
also down-regulated in prostate cancer line DU145 due to promoter
hyper-methylation. Ectopic Id4 expression in DU145 prostate cancer cell line led 
to increased apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation due in part by an S-phase
arrest. In addition to S-phase arrest, ectopic Id4 expression in PC3 cells also
resulted in prolonged G2/M phase. At the molecular level these changes were
associated with increased androgen receptor (AR), p21, p27 and p53 expression in 
DU145 cells.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that Id4 acts directly as a tumor suppressor by
influencing a hierarchy of cellular processes at multiple levels that leads to a 
decreased cell proliferation and change in morphology that is possibly mediated
through induction of previously silenced tumor suppressors.

PMCID: PMC2700118
PMID: 19500415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jun 15;8(12):1964-5. Epub 2009 Jun 2.

Role of E6/E7 onco-proteins of high-risk human papillomaviruses in human
colorectal carcinogenesis.

Ricciardi R(1), Ghabreau L, Yasmeen A, Darnel AD, Akil N, Al Moustafa AE.

Author information: 
(1)Segal Cancer Centre, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer
B. Davis-Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

PMID: 19411835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Apr;17(2):455-8.

[Investigation on MS-PCR as a method for detecting minimal residual disease in
acute leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Li HH, Bo J, Jing Y, Wang SH, Wang QS, Dou LP, Sun JF, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of monitoring minimal
residual disease (MRD) of leukemia with methylation specified-polymerase chain
reaction (MS-PCR). The HL-60 cells with Id4 gene complete methylation and Hek937 
cells with Id4 gene complete unmethylation were mixed in accordance with
different ratios of cells and were divided into 3 groups: group A (10% HL-60 +
90% Hek937), group B (1% HL-60 + 99% Hek937) and group C (0.1% HL-60 + 99.9%
Hek937). The MS-PCR technique was used to detect the methylation status of Id4
gene in different ratios of leukemia cells. The results indicated that the
methylation specific amplification of Id4 gene with 155 bp was observed in HL-60 
cells showing complete methylation of Id4 gene; while the unmethylation specific 
amplication of Id4 gene with 156 bp was found in Hek937 cells, showing complete
unmethylation. The methylation specific amplification of Id4 gene with 155 bp and
unmethylation specific amplification of Id4 gene with 156 bp were simultaneously 
detected in A, B and C groups, which showed the expression of Id4 gene
methylation. In conclusion, the MS-PCR technique can detect the Id4 gene
methylation in leukemia cell sample containing 0.1% of HL-60 cells, moreover the 
Id4 gene methylation in various leukemia cells shows no significant difference,
thereby use of MS-PCR to detect the Id4 methylation level may be a potential
approach for monitoring of MRD. Id4 gene promoter methylation is a candidate of
biomarker for MRD detection in acute leukemias.

PMID: 19379587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Differentiation. 2009 Jun;77(5):462-72. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2009.02.002. Epub
2009 Apr 5.

Suppression of chondrogenesis by Id helix-loop-helix proteins in murine embryonic
orofacial tissue.

Mukhopadhyay P(1), Rezzoug F, Webb CL, Pisano MM, Greene RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville Birth Defects Center, Department of Molecular
Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, University of Louisville, 501 S. Preston
Street, Suite 301, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Inhibitors of differentiation (Id) proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors lacking a DNA-binding domain. Id proteins modulate cell
proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation in embryonic/fetal tissue.
Perturbation of any of these processes in cells of the developing orofacial
region results in orofacial anomalies. Chondrogenesis, a process integral to
normal orofacial ontogenesis, is known to be modulated, in part, by Id proteins. 
In the present study, the mRNA and protein expression patterns of Id1, Id2, Id3
and Id4 were examined in developing murine orofacial tissue in vivo, as well as
in murine embryonic maxillary mesenchymal cells in vitro. The functional role of 
Ids during chondrogenesis was also explored in vitro. Results reveal that cells
derived from developing murine orofacial tissue (1) express Id1, Id2, Id3 and Id4
mRNAs and proteins on each of gestational days 12-14, (2) express all four Id
proteins in a developmentally regulated manner, (3) undergo chondrogenesis and
express genes encoding various chondrogenic marker proteins (e.g. Runx2, Type X
collagen, Sox9) when cultured under micromass conditions and (4) can have their
chondrogenic potential regulated via alteration of Id protein function through
overexpression of a basic HLH factor. In summary, results from the current report
reveal for the first time the expression of all four Id proteins in cells derived
from developing murine orofacial tissue, and demonstrate a functional role for
the Ids in regulating the ability of these cells to undergo chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2694226
PMID: 19349107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Oncol Rep. 2009 Apr;21(4):1067-73.

Methylation of CLDN6, FBN2, RBP1, RBP4, TFPI2, and TMEFF2 in esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma.

Tsunoda S(1), Smith E, De Young NJ, Wang X, Tian ZQ, Liu JF, Jamieson GG, Drew
PA.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Surgery, The University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005,
Australia. tsunoda@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

In the development and progression of cancer, tumor suppressor genes may be
silenced by mechanisms such as methylation. Thus the discovery of new genes
silenced by methylation may uncover new tumor suppressor genes, and improve our
understanding of cancer biology. In this study we investigated the methylation of
19 genes in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Methylation was measured in 10 of
these genes in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines: CDH13, CLDN6,
C16orf62, FBN2, FNBP1, ID4, RBP1, RBP4, TFPI2 and TMEFF2. To determine if there
was a correlation between DNA methylation and gene silencing, each cell line was 
cultured with or without the demethylating drug 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (aza-dC). 
For 6 genes (CLDN6, FBN2, RBP1, RBP4, TFPI2 and TMEFF2) there was an association 
between reduction of methylation and increase in mRNA expression in the
demethylated cell lines. The frequency of the methylation of these 6 genes in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma resection specimens was also investigated. All
6 genes showed more frequent methylation in the tumor than the matched proximal
resection margin of uninvolved esophagus. There was a significant difference in
the frequency of methylation and in the extent of the methylation between the
cancer and the margin tissues for CLDN6, FBN2, TFPI2 and TMEFF2 (P=0.0007,
P=0.0048 P=0.0002 and P<0.0001, respectively). This is the first report of gene
silencing by methylation of CLDN6, FBN2, RBP4, TFPI2 and TMEFF2 in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

PMID: 19288010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;17(1):151-4.

[Significance of Id4 gene methylation in monitoring efficacy of allo-PBSCT for
treatment of acute leukemias].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Li HH, Bo J, Jing Y, Gao CJ, Wang QS, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

This study was purposed to investigate the significance of Id4 gene methylation
in monitoring the efficacy of allo-PBSCT for treatment of acute leukemias. MS-PCR
method was used to detect Id4 gene methylation in bone marrow samples from 29
patients with acute leukemia before and at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months after
allo-PBSCT. The results showed that the Id4 gene was methylated in 18 patients
before allo-PBSCT, out of which Id4 gene methylation in 8 patients could be
detected sustainedly after allo-PBSCT, whereas among remaining 11 patients with
Id4 gene unmethylation before PBSCT, the Id4 gene of only one case was found to
be methylated after PBSCT. Out of 9 patients with Id4 gene methylation after
allo-PBSCT, 4 had relapse during the follow-up. 20 patients with Id4 gene
unmethylation after allo-PBSCT were in continuously complete remission status.
Id4 gene methylation was found more frequently between 6 months and 1 year after 
allo-PBSCT. It is concluded that detecting Id4 gene methylation is important for 
the AL patients who underwent allo-PBSCT. Choosing the patients with Id4 gene
unmethylaiton to receive allo-PBSCT may help to reduce relapse rate. After
allo-PBSCT, Id4 gene methylation status can be regarded as an indicator for
predicting prognosis of acute leukemias.

PMID: 19236768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Curr Biol. 2009 Feb 24;19(4):297-304. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.12.052. Epub 2009
Feb 12.

A role for Id2 in regulating photic entrainment of the mammalian circadian
system.

Duffield GE(1), Watson NP, Mantani A, Peirson SN, Robles-Murguia M, Loros JJ,
Israel MA, Dunlap JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
duffield.2@nd.edu

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2009 Apr 14;19(7):R298-300.

Inhibitor of DNA binding genes (Id1-Id4) encode helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcriptional repressors associated with development and tumorigenesis [1, 2], 
but little is known concerning the function(s) of these genes in normal adult
animals. Id2 was identified in DNA microarray screens for rhythmically expressed 
genes [3-5], and further analysis revealed a circadian pattern of expression of
all four Id genes in multiple tissues including the suprachiasmatic nucleus. To
explore an in vivo function, we generated and characterized deletion mutations of
Id2 and of Id4. Id2(-/-) mice exhibit abnormally rapid entrainment and an
increase in the magnitude of the phase shift of the pacemaker. A significant
proportion of mice also exhibit disrupted rhythms when maintained under constant 
darkness. Conversely, Id4(-/-) mice did not exhibit a noticeable circadian
phenotype. In vitro studies using an mPer1 and an AVP promoter reporter revealed 
the potential for ID1, ID2, and ID3 proteins to interact with the canonical basic
HLH clock proteins BMAL1 and CLOCK. These data suggest that the Id genes may be
important for entrainment and operation of the mammalian circadian system,
potentially acting through BMAL1 and CLOCK targets.

PMCID: PMC2648875
PMID: 19217292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;16(6):1418-20.

[Methylation of Id4 gene promoter in 4 malignant hematopoietic cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Wang QS, Li HH, Jing Y, Bo J, Wang SH, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

This study was purposed to investigate the status of Id4 gene promoter
methylation in malignant hematologic cell lines. MS-PCR methods were used to
detect the status of Id4 gene methylation in K562, HL-60, Ramous and CA46.
Meanwhile bone marrow cells in healthy individuals and Hek937, a benign renal
cell line, were involved as control. The results showed that Id4 gene kept
unmethylated in bone marrow cells from healthy individuals and Hek937 cells,
while Id4 gene was methylated in all of K562, HL-60, Ramous and CA46 cell lines. 
It is concluded that different from healthy bone marrow cells and non-malignant
cell line Hek937, Id4 gene was methylated in leukemia and lymphoma cell lines
including K562, HL-60, Ramous and CA46. The change of Id4 gene methylation is
thought to be associated with occurrence of hematologic malignancies.

PMID: 19099656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2009 Sep 1;163(1-2):12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2008.11.012. 
Epub 2008 Nov 27.

Dynamics of avian ovarian follicle development: cellular mechanisms of granulosa 
cell differentiation.

Johnson AL(1), Woods DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Notre Dame, P.O. Box 369,
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. johnson.128@nd.edu

In vertebrate species that ovulate one or a limited number of ovarian follicles
per reproductive cycle, the cellular processes by which follicle selection
(cyclic recruitment) is mediated and final differentiation is initiated remain
largely unknown. In the hen ovary, the selection of a single follicle into the
preovulatory hierarchy on an approximate daily basis occurs from a small cohort
of prehierarchal follicles measuring approximately 6- to 8-mm in diameter. Given 
that the granulosa layer undergoes a dramatic alteration in phenotype subsequent 
to follicle selection, of particular interest are the cell signaling and
associated transcriptional mechanisms that regulate this transition. Recent
studies suggest that granulosa cells from prehierarchal follicles are normally
maintained in an undifferentiated state by inhibitory MAP kinase (MAPK) signaling
mediated by epidermal growth factor receptor ligands (EGFRLs). One of the
earliest markers for differentiating granulosa cells is elevated expression of
FSH receptor (fshr) mRNA and enhanced FSH-induced cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) production. EGFRL/MAPK signaling is proposed to inhibit fshr transcription
via its ability to induce Inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding (Id) protein
isoforms, Id1, Id3 and Id4. Subsequent to follicle selection, cAMP-induced Id2
expression is considered both sufficient and necessary for fshr transcription.
Two working models are proposed which predict that enhanced FSHR expression and
the progression of granulosa cell differentiation occurs as a result of a decline
in MAPK signaling from within granulosa cells (internal model for
differentiation) and/or elevated cAMP signaling promoted by an endocrine,
neuroendocrine or neuronal factor (external model).

PMID: 19059411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Oct;16(5):990-2.

[Preliminary study on Id4 as a reporter for all patients before relapse].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Li HH, Dou LP, Jing Y, Wang QS, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

This study was purposed to investigate the feasibility of inhibitor of DNA
banding 4 (Id4) as a reporter for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients
before their clinical relapse. Id4 promoter at methylation status was detected by
MS-PCR in bone marrow samples from the ALL patients who had been in their
complete remission (CR) for 6 to 8 months with follow-up period of at least three
months. The results showed that Id4 methylation were found in 20 out of all 32
patients (62.5%). The remainder 12 patients were fourd Id4 unmethylated, 1 case
out of whom relapsed within the next 3-month of follow-up (8.33%), while 10 out
of 20 patients (50%) with Id4 methylation relapsed within the same follow-up
period. Existence of high risk factors at de novo diagnosis didn't correlated
with the Id4 methylation status. In conclusion, Id4 could be regard as a reporter
for ALL patients before their relapse.

PMID: 18928580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cancer. 2008 Oct 2;7:75. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-75.

Similarity of aberrant DNA methylation in Barrett's esophagus and esophageal
adenocarcinoma.

Smith E(1), De Young NJ, Pavey SJ, Hayward NK, Nancarrow DJ, Whiteman DC,
Smithers BM, Ruszkiewicz AR, Clouston AD, Gotley DC, Devitt PG, Jamieson GG, Drew
PA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing and Midwifery, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South
Australia 5042, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's esophagus (BE) is the metaplastic replacement of squamous
with columnar epithelium in the esophagus, as a result of reflux. It is the major
risk factor for the development of esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). Methylation
of CpG dinucleotides of normally unmethylated genes is associated with silencing 
of their expression, and is common in EAC. This study was designed to determine
at what stage, in the progression from BE to EAC, methylation of key genes
occurs.
RESULTS: We examined nine genes (APC, CDKN2A, ID4, MGMT, RBP1, RUNX3, SFRP1,
TIMP3, and TMEFF2), frequently methylated in multiple cancer types, in a panel of
squamous (19 biopsies from patients without BE or EAC, 16 from patients with BE, 
21 from patients with EAC), BE (40 metaplastic, seven high grade dysplastic) and 
37 EAC tissues. The methylation frequency, the percentage of samples that had any
extent of methylation, for each of the nine genes in the EAC (95%, 59%, 76%, 57%,
70%, 73%, 95%, 74% and 83% respectively) was significantly higher than in any of 
the squamous groups. The methylation frequency for each of the nine genes in the 
metaplastic BE (95%, 28%, 78%, 48%, 58%, 48%, 93%, 88% and 75% respectively) was 
significantly higher than in the squamous samples except for CDKN2A and RBP1. The
methylation frequency did not differ between BE and EAC samples, except for
CDKN2A and RUNX3 which were significantly higher in EAC. The methylation extent
was an estimate of both the number of methylated alleles and the density of
methylation on these alleles. This was significantly greater in EAC than in
metaplastic BE for all genes except APC, MGMT and TIMP3. There was no significant
difference in methylation extent for any gene between high grade dysplastic BE
and EAC.
CONCLUSION: We found significant methylation in metaplastic BE, which for seven
of the nine genes studied did not differ in frequency from that found in EAC.
This is also the first report of gene silencing by methylation of ID4 in BE or
EAC. This study suggests that metaplastic BE is a highly abnormal tissue, more
similar to cancer tissue than to normal epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2567345
PMID: 18831746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Pathologe. 2008 Nov;29 Suppl 2:319-27. doi: 10.1007/s00292-008-1038-7.

[Promoter methylation of ID4. A marker for recurrence-free survival in human
breast cancer].

[Article in German]

Noetzel E(1), Veeck J, Horn F, Hartmann A, Knüchel R, Dahl E.

Author information: 
(1)Arbeitsgruppe Molekulare Onkologie, Institut für Pathologie,
Universitätsklinikum Aachen.

The aim of this study was to unravel the role of the transcription factor
inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) in human breast carcinogenesis in more detail,
especially the impact of ID4 promoter methylation on disease progression.
Demethylating treatment of breast cancer cell lines was associated with ID4
reexpression. ID4 promoter methylation was frequently observed in primary breast 
cancer samples (68.9%, 117/170). We found a very tight correlation (p<0.001)
between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 mRNA expression in these
specimens. For breast tissue as the first tumour entity analyzed in detail, we
could show a direct correlation between ID4 promoter methylation and loss of ID4 
expression on both the mRNA and protein level. Interestingly, ID4 promoter
methylation was a factor for unfavourable recurrence-free survival (p=0.036) and 
increased the patient's risk for lymph node metastases (p=0.030). Our data
suggest that ID4 is a potential tumour suppressor gene in human breast tissues
that undergoes epigenetic silencing during carcinogenesis, leading to an
increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a 
prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.

PMID: 18807039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Sep;117(1):31-44. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0170-7.
Epub 2008 Sep 12.

TIMP-1 overexpression promotes tumorigenesis of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
and alters expression of a subset of cancer promoting genes in vivo distinct from
those observed in vitro.

Bigelow RL(1), Williams BJ, Carroll JL, Daves LK, Cardelli JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Louisiana State University Health
Science Center-Shreveport, 71130, USA.

TIMP-1 (Tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1) is typically associated
with inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) induced invasion. However,
TIMP-1 is overexpressed in many malignancies and is associated with poor
prognosis in breast cancer. The mechanisms by which TIMP-1 promotes tumorigenesis
are unclear. Reduced levels of TIMP-1 mediated by shRNA in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells had no effect on cellular physiology in vitro or tumor growth in
SCID mice compared to vector control MDA-MB-231 cells. However, overexpression of
TIMP-1 in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in inhibition of cell invasion and enhanced
phosphorylation of p38 MAPK and AKT in vitro. Additionally, treatment of parental
MDA-MB-231 cells with purified TIMP-1 protein led to activation of p38 MAPK and
MKK 3/6. cDNA array analysis demonstrated that high expression of TIMP-1 in
MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in alterations in expression of approximately 200
genes, 1.5 fold or greater compared to vector control cells (P < 0.1). Real-time 
RT-PCR confirmed changes in expression of several genes associated with cancer
progression including DAPK1, FGFR4 and MAPK13. In vivo, high TIMP-1 expression
induced tumor growth in SCID mice compared to vector control cells and increased 
tumor vessel density. Affymetrix array analysis of vector control and TIMP-1
MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumors revealed that TIMP-1 altered expression of
approximately 600 genes in vivo, including MMP1, MMP13, S100A14, S100P, Rab25 and
ID4. These combined observations suggest that the effects of TIMP-1 differ
significantly in a 2-D environment compared to the 3-D environment and that
TIMP-1 stimulates tumor growth.

PMID: 18787947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Oncol Res. 2008;17(4):151-7.

Aberrant promoter CpG islands methylation of tumor suppressor genes in
cholangiocarcinoma.

Uhm KO(1), Lee ES, Lee YM, Kim HS, Park YN, Park SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Anatomy, Brain Korea 21 Biomedical 
Sciences, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, 136-705, Korea.

Aberrant DNA methylation of 5'-CpG islands located within gene promoters has been
identified as a mechanism for transcriptional inactivation of tumor suppressor
genes. To ascertain the mechanism of gene promoter hypermethylation in
cholangiocarcinoma (CC), we investigated promoter methylation status of the
candidate genes ID4, DLC-1, and SFRP1 in 41 CCs, 19 adjacent nontumor tissues,
and 15 normal liver tissues using methylation-specific PCR (MSP). The frequencies
of DNA methylation were: 57.5% (23 of 40) for ID4, 14.3% (5 of 35) for DLC-1, and
63.4% (26 of 41) for SFRP1, respectively. In contrast, a low frequency of
methylation was detected in nontumor tissues. In addition, hypermethylated status
of these genes was detected in three kinds of CC cell lines. Moreover, the
downregulated expression of these genes in these cells was restored by treatment 
with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor. Taken together,
these results suggest that aberrant DNA methylation may contribute to the
tumorigenesis of cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 18773859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6236-50. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0768. Epub 2008 Aug
7.

Transcriptional response of the murine mammary gland to acute progesterone
exposure.

Fernandez-Valdivia R(1), Mukherjee A, Creighton CJ, Buser AC, DeMayo FJ, Edwards 
DP, Lydon JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Room M732A, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas, 77030, USA.

Our mechanistic understanding of progesterone's involvement in murine mammary
morphogenesis and tumorigenesis is dependent on defining effector pathways
responsible for transducing the progesterone signal into a morphogenetic
response. Toward this goal, microarray methods were applied to the murine mammary
gland to identify novel downstream gene targets of progesterone. Consistent with 
a tissue undergoing epithelial expansion, mining of the progesterone-responsive
transcriptome revealed the up-regulation of functional gene classes involved in
epithelial proliferation and survival. Reassuringly, signaling pathways
previously reported to be responsive to progesterone were also identified. Mining
this informational resource for rapidly induced genes, we identified "inhibitor
of differentiation 4" (Id4) as a new molecular target acutely induced by
progesterone exposure. Mammary Id4 is transiently induced during early pregnancy 
and colocalizes with progesterone receptor (PR) expression, suggesting that Id4
mediates the early events of PR-dependent mammary morphogenesis. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay detecting direct recruitment of ligand occupied PR to
the Id4 promoter supports this proposal. Given that Id4 is a member of the Id
family of transcriptional regulators that have been linked to the maintenance of 
proliferative status and tumorigenesis, the establishment of a mechanistic link
between PR signaling and Id4 promises to furnish a wider conceptual framework
with which to advance our understanding of normal and abnormal mammary epithelial
responses to progestins. In sum, the progesterone-responsive transcriptome
described herein not only reinforces the importance of progesterone in mammary
epithelial expansion but also represents an invaluable information resource with 
which to identify novel signaling paradigms for mammary PR action.

PMCID: PMC2613059
PMID: 18687774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Genes Dev. 2008 Aug 1;22(15):2028-33. doi: 10.1101/gad.1668708.

Inhibitor of differentiation 4 drives brain tumor-initiating cell genesis through
cyclin E and notch signaling.

Jeon HM(1), Jin X, Lee JS, Oh SY, Sohn YW, Park HJ, Joo KM, Park WY, Nam DH,
DePinho RA, Chin L, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea.

Cellular origins and genetic factors governing the genesis and maintenance of
glioblastomas (GBM) are not well understood. Here, we report a pathogenetic role 
of the developmental regulator Id4 (inhibitor of differentiation 4) in GBM. In
primary murine Ink4a/Arf(-/-) astrocytes, and human glioma cells, we provide
evidence that enforced Id4 can drive malignant transformation by stimulating
increased cyclin E to produce a hyperproliferative profile and by increased
Jagged1 expression with Notch1 activation to drive astrocytes into a neural
stem-like cell state. Thus, Id4 plays an integral role in the transformation of
astrocytes via its combined actions on two-key cell cycle and differentiation
regulatory molecules.

PMCID: PMC2492750
PMID: 18676808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Oct 1;105(2):487-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21844.

Intricate gene regulatory networks of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins support
regulation of bone-tissue related genes during osteoblast differentiation.

Zhang Y(1), Hassan MQ, Li ZY, Stein JL, Lian JB, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors are key regulators of neurogenesis, 
myogenesis and osteogenesis. Here the relative contributions of multiple classes 
of HLH factors to the expression of bone related genes during osteoblast
maturation were compared. We examined the expression of a panel of HLH proteins
(e.g., Twist1/2, USF1/2, c-Myc, Id1 approximately 4, E12/47, Stra13) and one Zn
finger protein (Snail which recognizes a subset of E-boxes), during osteoblast
differentiation and their functional contributions to bone phenotypic gene
regulation. While expression of Twist1, Stra13, E12/47 and Snail transcripts
remains relatively constant, expression of Twist2 as well as the inhibitory
factors Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 decreases and USF1 is up-regulated during
osteoblastic differentiation of MC3T3 cells. Forced expression of selected HLH
transcription factors shows that Myc, Snail and USF factors increase expression
of the bone markers osteocalcin (OC) and/or alkaline phosphatase (AP), while
E12/47, Twist and Id factors decrease their expression. None of these factors
affect Runx2 gene expression. Interestingly, Snail enhances expression of
osteoblast markers, while Twist1 and Twist2 factors are cross-regulated and
inhibit bone specific gene expression and other HLH proteins (e.g., Id)
indirectly. Thus, our data suggest that the integrated activities of negative and
positive E-box related regulatory factors control osteoblast differentiation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2612593
PMID: 18655182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jul 15;7(14):2167-78. Epub 2008 May 11.

Nurse cell of Trichinella spp. as a model of long-term cell cycle arrest.

Dabrowska M(1), Skoneczny M, Zielinski Z, Rode W.

Author information: 
(1)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, 
Poland. m.dabrowska@nencki.gov.pl

Nurse cell (NC), formed from skeletal muscle cells upon infection with parasitic 
nematode trichina, presents a rare system of long-term suspension in the cell
cycle. Signaling pathways and general biological functions of Trichinella
spiralis NC, inferred from network analysis of competitive expression microarray 
data (NC vs. C2C12 myoblasts and myotubes), performed in Ingenuity Pathways
Analysis (IPA) software and confirmed by Real-Time PCR, are presented. Assuming
4N DNA content in NC nuclei, its cell cycle arrest is identified herein as a
hypermitogenic of G(1)-like type, accompanied by induction of senescence,
underpinned by increased expression of p15, p16 and p57 cell cycle inhibitors, as
well as overexpression of senescence-associated, beta-galactosidase and numerous 
secretory factors. Growth factor signaling, with predominant role of EGF,
cytokine signaling and G-protein-coupled receptor signaling, are suggested as
dominant NC signal transduction pathways. Fos, FosB, STAT6, CREBL2, ID4 and
retinoic acid dependent nuclear receptors appear to be the main factors
determining NC specific gene transcription. Antigen presentation, complement
signaling and beta-amyloid processing pathways are also identified as operating
in NC. In general, NC pathology is found to pertain to cancer, as well as other, 
including immunological and neurological, disorders.

PMID: 18635964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Int J Oncol. 2008 Jul;33(1):185-93.

Cdc42 is highly expressed in colorectal adenocarcinoma and downregulates ID4
through an epigenetic mechanism.

Gómez Del Pulgar T(1), Valdés-Mora F, Bandrés E, Pérez-Palacios R, Espina C,
Cejas P, García-Cabezas MA, Nistal M, Casado E, González-Barón M,
García-Foncillas J, Lacal JC.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain.

Cdc42, a member of Rho GTPases family, is involved in the regulation of several
cellular functions, such as rearrangement of actin cytoskeleton, membrane
trafficking, cell-cycle progression, and transcriptional regulation. Aberrant
expression or activity of Cdc42 has been reported in several tumours. Here, the
specific role of Cdc42 in development and progression of colorectal cancer was
analyzed through microarrays technology. A comparative analysis of Cdc42
overexpressing cells versus cells with decreased Cdc42 levels through siRNA
revealed that Cdc42 overexpression down-regulated the potential tumour suppressor
gene ID4. Results were validated by quantitative RT-PCR and the methylation
status of the specific promoter, analyzed. Methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite
sequencing PCR analysis revealed that Cdc42 induced the methylation of the CpG
island of the ID4 promoter. Colorectal adenocarcinoma samples were compared with 
the corresponding adjacent normal tissue of the same patient in order to
determine specific gene expression levels. The downregulation of ID4 by Cdc42 was
also found of relevance in colorectal adenocarcinoma biopsies. Cdc42 was found to
be overexpressed with high incidence (60%) in colorectal cancer samples, and this
expression was associated with silencing of ID4 with statistical significance
(p<0.05). Cdc42 may have a role in the development of colon cancer. Furthermore, 
inhibition of Cdc42 activity may have a direct impact in the management of
colorectal cancer.

PMID: 18575765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Jun;16(3):476-8.

[Significance of id4 promoter methylation in monitoring AML patients with
completely remission].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Wang QS, Li HH, Bo J, Dou LP, Jing Y, Wang SH, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

The study was purposed to investigate the significance of id4 gene promoter
methylation in monitoring AML patients with complete remission (CR). Methylation 
specific-PCR (MS-PCR) were used to detect the status of promoter methylation of
id4 gene in bone marrow samples from AML patients with CR who had accepted
induction with DA or IA and 4 to 5 consolidation chemotherapy with Ara-C. The
results showed that in the all 32 patients, 15 were found to show id4 promoter
methylation and 7 out of the 15 were found relapsed or tendency to relapse in the
following-up period. While all the 17 patients with id4 unmethylation were still 
in their CR status in the same period. In conclusion, id4 promoter methylation
might be a predictor for relapse of AML patients with CR in certain degree.

PMID: 18549611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. BMC Cancer. 2008 May 30;8:154. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-154.

Promoter methylation-associated loss of ID4 expression is a marker of tumour
recurrence in human breast cancer.

Noetzel E(1), Veeck J, Niederacher D, Galm O, Horn F, Hartmann A, Knüchel R, Dahl
E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of the
RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany. enoetzel@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: Inhibitor of DNA binding/Inhibitor of differentiation 4 (ID4) is a
critical factor for cell proliferation and differentiation in normal vertebrate
development. ID4 has regulative functions for differentiation and growth of the
developing brain. The role of ID1, ID2 and ID3 are expected to be oncogenic due
to their overexpression in pancreatic cancer and colorectal adenocarcinomas,
respectively. Aside from these findings, loss of ID3 expression was demonstrated 
in ovarian cancer. The aim of the present study was to reveal the factual role of
ID4 in carcinogenesis in more detail, since its role for the pathogenesis of
human breast cancer has been discussed controversially, assigning both oncogenic 
and tumour suppressive functions.
METHODS: ID4 promoter methylation, ID4 mRNA expression and ID4 protein expression
were analysed in primary human breast cancer specimens using methylation-specific
PCR (MSP) (n=170), semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR (n=46) and
immunhistochemistry (n=3), respectively. In order to demonstrate a functional
association of ID4 promoter methylation with its gene silencing, we performed DNA
demethylation analysis with four human breast cell lines using MSP and
semiquantitative realtime RT-PCR. In addition, we performed correlations of ID4
promoter methylation with ID4 mRNA and ID4 protein expression in matched samples 
of breast tumour and corresponding normal tissue. We carried out statistical
analyses in order to find correlations between ID4 promoter methylation and
clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: Frequent ID4 promoter methylation was observed in primary breast cancer 
samples (69%, 117/170). We found a tight correlation (P<0.0001) between ID4
promoter methylation and loss of ID4 expression in primary breast cancer 3
specimens. Demethylating treatment with breast cancer cell lines was associated
with clear ID4 mRNA re-expression. Tumours with ID4 promoter methylation showed
distinct loss of ID4 expression on both transcription and protein level.
Interestingly, ID4 promoter methylation was a factor for unfavourable
recurrence-free survival (P=0.036) and increased risk for lymph node metastasis
(P=0.030).
CONCLUSION: ID4 is indeed a novel tumour suppressor gene in normal human breast
tissue and is epigenetically silenced during cancer development, indicating
increased risk for tumour relapse. Thus, ID4 methylation status could serve as a 
prognostic biomarker in human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2435120
PMID: 18513385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Lett. 2008 Aug 8;266(2):238-48. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.02.069. Epub
2008 May 21.

2'-Deoxy-N4-[2-(4-nitrophenyl)ethoxycarbonyl]-5-azacytidine: a novel inhibitor of
DNA methyltransferase that requires activation by human carboxylesterase 1.

Byun HM(1), Choi SH, Laird PW, Trinh B, Siddiqui MA, Marquez VE, Yang AS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Southern California/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Room 6428, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

2'-Deoxy-N4-[2-(4-nitrophenyl)ethoxycarbonyl]-5-azacytidine (NPEOC-DAC),
decitabine with a modification of the N4 position of the azacitidine ring can be 
used to inhibit DNA methyltransferase. This modification protects the azacitidine
ring and can be cleaved by carboxylesterase to release decitabine. NPEOC-DAC was 
23-fold less potent at low doses (<10microM) than decitabine at inhibiting DNA
methylation, and was also associated with a 3-day delay in its effect. However,
at doses > or = 10microM NPEOC-DAC was more effective at inhibiting DNA
methylation. Theses differences between decitabine and NPEOC-DAC are dependent on
the cleavage of the carboxylester bond, and could be potentially exploited
pharmacologically.

PMCID: PMC2528876
PMID: 18499340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1653-61. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21574.

Id2, Id3, and Id4 proteins show dynamic changes in expression during vibrissae
follicle development.

Hammond NL(1), Jahoda CA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, University of Durham, South
Road, Durham, United Kingdom.

Id proteins are involved in the transcriptional control of many fundamental
biological processes, including differentiation and lineage commitment. We
studied Id2, Id3, and Id4 protein expression during different stages of rat
vibrissa follicle development using immunohistochemistry. Id2 was highly
expressed in the cytoplasm of specialized cells in the basal epidermis and outer 
root sheath during early stages of follicle development. These cells were
identified as Merkel cells (MCs) by means of double-immunolabeling with
synaptophysin and cytokeratin-20, and persisted in neonatal follicles. Id3
immunofluorescence was characterized by membrane-associated expression in basal
epithelial cells of follicles early in development. Subsequently follicle
epithelial cells switched to have strong nuclear labeling, also a feature of
newly forming dermal papilla cells. Id4 expression was primarily associated with 
innervation of the developing follicle musculature. These observations illustrate
dynamic expression patterns of Id2 and Id3 proteins in developing follicles and
specifically link Id2 expression to Merkel cell specification.

PMID: 18498089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 27;283(26):18187-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803330200. Epub 2008
May 2.

Active gene repression by the Egr2.NAB complex during peripheral nerve
myelination.

Mager GM(1), Ward RM, Srinivasan R, Jang SW, Wrabetz L, Svaren J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology Training Program, Department of
Comparative Biosciences, Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The Egr2/Krox20 transactivator is required for activation of many
myelin-associated genes during peripheral nerve myelination by Schwann cells.
However, recent work has indicated that Egr2 not only activates genes required
for peripheral nerve myelination but may also be involved in gene repression. The
NAB (NGFI-A/Egr-binding) corepressors interact with Egr2 and are required for
proper coordination of myelin formation. Therefore, NAB proteins could mediate
repression of some Egr2 target genes, although direct repression by Egr2 or NAB
proteins during myelination has not been demonstrated. To define the
physiological role of NAB corepression in gene repression by Egr2, we tested
whether the Egr2.NAB complex directly repressed specific target genes. A screen
for NAB-regulated genes identified several (including Id2, Id4, and Rad) that
declined during the course of peripheral nerve myelination. In vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of the myelinating sciatic nerve was used to show
developmental association of both Egr2 and NAB2 on the Id2, Id4, and Rad
promoters as they were repressed during the myelination process. In addition,
NAB2 represses transcription by interaction with the chromodomain helicase
DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4) subunit of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase
chromatin remodeling complex, and we demonstrate that CHD4 occupies NAB-repressed
promoters in a developmentally regulated manner in vivo. These results illustrate
a novel aspect of genetic regulation of peripheral nerve myelination by showing
that Egr2 directly represses genes during myelination in conjunction with NAB
corepressors. Furthermore, repression of Id2 was found to augment activation of
Mpz (myelin protein zero) expression.

PMCID: PMC2440619
PMID: 18456662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Apr;16(2):322-4.

[Significance of id4 gene promoter methylation detection in lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Jing Y, Bo J, Wang SH, Wang QS, Li HH, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the significance of id4 gene promotor
methylation detection in NHL patients. MS-PCR method was used to detect the
status of id4 gene methylation in health donors and newly diagnosed NHL patients.
The results indicated that the id4 gene was unmethylated in bone marrow samples
from health donors. Among 18 newly diagnosed NHL patients, including one NHL
patient with bone marrow cells involved, 4 patients were found in id4 gene
methylation by MS-PCR. The 14 patients with id4 gene unmethylation were in their 
stable status and no bone marrow involvement were found by bone marrow biopsy
during the 8-month follow-up. During the follow-up, the patient with both bone
marrow involvement and id4 gene methylation turned to leukemia, in 2 out of the 3
patients with id4 gene methylation but without bone marrow involvement at
diagnosis, the bone marrow involvement was found at last. It is concluded that
the id4 gene methylation may be an indicator for MRD in NHL patients without bone
marrow involvement.

PMID: 18426657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 15;14(8):2318-25. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4716.

Increased expression of Id family proteins in small cell lung cancer and its
prognostic significance.

Kamalian L(1), Gosney JR, Forootan SS, Foster CS, Bao ZZ, Beesley C, Ke Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, School of Cancer Studies, Faculty of Medicine,
the University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To study the molecular pathology of human small cell lung cancer (SCLC),
molecular biology approaches were used to identify genes involved in malignant
progression of the cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microquantity differential display was used initially to
identify genes expressed differentially between normal and malignant cell lines. 
The differences were verified by Western blot. Immunohistochemical analysis was
done on paired normal and malignant lung tissues and on tissues taken by biopsy
to assess the expression status of candidate genes and their prognostic
significance.
RESULTS: Inhibitor of DNA/differentiation (Id)1 gene was up-regulated in SCLC
cells. Levels of Id1 in 8 of 10 cell lines were increased by 1.7- to 21.4-fold
when compared with the benign cells. A similar increase was also found in levels 
of Id2 and Id3. On 26 pairs of lung tissues, all four Id proteins were
significantly (Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, P < 0.001-0.005) overexpressed in
cytoplasm of the malignant cells. In nuclei of SCLC cells, Id1 expression was
significantly reduced, whereas the levels of Id2, Id3, and Id4 were significantly
(Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test, P < 0.001) increased. Immunohistochemical staining on
biopsy specimens showed that the increased expression of Id2 in cytoplasm of
cancer cells, not the other three proteins, was significantly associated with the
increased survival of SCLC patients.
CONCLUSION: Changed expression profiles of Id proteins may play important roles
in malignant progression of SCLC, and the increased Id2 in cytoplasm is a novel
prognostic factor to predict the patient outcomes.

PMID: 18413820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Endocrinology. 2008 Jun;149(6):3187-95. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1659. Epub 2008 Mar 
6.

Role for inhibitor of differentiation/deoxyribonucleic acid-binding (Id) proteins
in granulosa cell differentiation.

Johnson AL(1), Haugen MJ, Woods DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame,
Indiana 46556, USA. johnson.128@nd.edu

Recent studies in the hen ovary have linked the initiation of granulosa cell
differentiation at follicle selection to the alleviation of inhibitory MAPK
signaling. The present studies assessed a role for individual inhibitor of
differentiation (Id) protein isoforms as modulators of key transcriptional events
occurring within granulosa cells at or immediately subsequent to differentiation.
Findings from freshly collected granulosa cells collected at different stages of 
follicle development demonstrated a negative association between expression
levels for Id2 mRNA compared with levels of Id1, Id3, and Id4. Elevated levels of
Id2 are related to a differentiating/differentiated phenotype, whereas elevated
Id1, Id3, and Id4 are associated with an undifferentiated phenotype. This
negative relationship extends to cell signal transduction, because factors that
promote inhibitory MAPK signaling (TGF-alpha and betacellulin) block expression
of Id2 mRNA but increase levels of Id1, Id3, and Id4. Furthermore, overexpression
of Gallus Id2 in cultured granulosa was found to significantly decrease levels of
Id1, Id3, and Id4 mRNA but facilitate FSHR mRNA expression and, importantly,
initiate LHR mRNA expression plus LH-induced progesterone production. Finally,
knockdown studies using small interfering RNA specific for Id2 revealed reduced
expression of FSHR and LHR mRNA and attenuated FSH- and LH-induced levels of StAR
and p450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme mRNA plus progesterone
production. Collectively, these data demonstrate that Id2 expression is both
sufficient and necessary for increasing LHR expression and, as a result,
promoting gonadotropin-induced differentiation in hen granulosa cells subsequent 
to follicle selection.

PMID: 18325989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Med Clin (Barc). 2008 Jan 26;130(2):47-50.

[Value of cardiorespiratory analysis in the diagnosis of breathing sleep
disorders in patients with chronic renal failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Jurado Gámez B(1), Martín-Malo A, Fernández Marín MC, Muñoz L, Aljama P.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neumología, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, España.
bjg01co@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Prevalence of sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (SAHS) in
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) is high and the polygraphy has not been validated 
as diagnostic technique in this group of patients. The objective of this study
was to evaluate if only the cardiorespiratory analysis is valid for the diagnosis
of SAHS.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: 48 patients with ESRD were studied consecutively with
all-night polysomnography. We compared the desaturation index of SaO2 > or = 4%
(DI4), sleep time spent with SaO2 < 90% (T90) and the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) 
per hour of sleep with the results of the cardiorespiratory analysis.
RESULTS: We included 35 men and 13 women, age: 54 (16) years and IMC: 27.1.
Eighteen patients were diagnosed of SAHS (37.5%). The cardiorespiratory analysis 
obtained a sensibility of 77.7%, specifity of 100%, positive predictive value was
100% and negative predictive was 88%. The polysomnography showed an AHI: 16
(17.2), while the cardiorespiratory analysis was 11 (13.2). There were a good
correlation (r = 0.970) and concordance scores (CCI = 0.967; p < 0.001). The
cardiorespiratory analysis, respect the polysomnography, also obtained a good
correlation and concordance for ID4 (10 [11.8] vs 15 [15.5]) and for T90 (1 [2.9]
vs 2 [4.7]; p < 0.001). In the COR curve, the best cut-off point of the
cardiorespiratory analysis was an AIH = 7.2.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with ESRD, the cardiorespiratory analysis, is valid for 
the diagnosis and correctly detect the SaO2 at night, both being key parameters
for the diagnostic and treatment of SAHS. The polygraphy could be an alternative 
diagnostic test in the SAHS, although it has to be definitively validated.

PMID: 18221672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Dec;15(6):1156-60.

[Methylation of Id4 gene promoter in acute leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Wang QS, Dou LP, Bo J, Li HH, Jing Y, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

This study was purpose to investigate the difference of Id4 gene promoter
methylation between healthy individuals and acute leukemia patients. MS-PCR
methods were used to detect the status of Id4 gene methylation in healthy
individuals and acute leukemia patients. The results showed that Id4 gene was
unmethylated in bone marrow samples from healthy individuals. In new diagnosed
AML and ALL patients, the rate of Id4 gene methylation was 84% and 86%
respectively. Id4 gene methylation was found in all 8 cases of relapsed acute
leukemias. In 14 ALL-CR patients with Id4 gene methylation, 8 patients relapsed
within 12 months, while in 9 ALL-CR patients with Id4 gene unmethylation only 1
patient relapsed within 12 months. In AML-CR patients, the 12-months relapse rate
in patients with Id4 gene methylation was 62.5%, while it was 10% in Id4 gene
unmethylation patients, there was significant difference between them. The rate
of Id4 gene methylation in ALL-CR patients was 64.3%, while it was 28.6% in
AML-CR patients, there was significant difference between them. In the all 39 new
diagnosed AL patients, Id4 gene methylation could be detected in 33 patients. In 
all 8 relapsed AL patients Id4 gene methylation was found, out of 58 AL-CR cases,
24 patients was found with Id4 gene methylation. It is concluded that as compared
with healthy individuals, Id4 gene in acute leukemia patients was methylated in
different degrees. The percentage of Id4 gene methylation in AL-CR group is lower
than that in AL-non remission group. The change of Id4 gene methylation is
thought to be associated with occurrence of acute leukemia.

PMID: 18088456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Dev Neurosci. 2008;30(1-3):24-32.

Role of intermediate progenitor cells in cerebral cortex development.

Pontious A(1), Kowalczyk T, Englund C, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Intermediate progenitor cells (IPCs) are a type of neurogenic transient
amplifying cells in the developing cerebral cortex. IPCs divide symmetrically at 
basal (abventricular) positions in the neuroepithelium to produce pairs of new
neurons or, in amplifying divisions, pairs of new IPCs. In contrast, radial unit 
progenitors (neuroepithelial cells and radial glia) divide at the apical
(ventricular) surface and produce only single neurons or single IPCs by
asymmetric division, or self-amplify by symmetric division. Histologically, IPCs 
are most prominent during the middle and late stages of neurogenesis, when they
accumulate in the subventricular zone, a progenitor compartment linked to the
genesis of upper neocortical layers (II-IV). Nevertheless, IPCs are present
throughout cortical neurogenesis and produce neurons for all layers. In mice,
changes in the abundance of IPCs caused by mutations of Pax6, Ngn2, Id4 and other
genes are associated with parallel changes in cortical thickness but not surface 
area. In gyrencephalic brains, IPCs may play broader roles in determining not
only laminar thickness, but also cortical surface area and gyral patterns. We
propose that regulation of IPC genesis and amplification across developmental
stages and regional subdivisions modulates laminar neurogenesis and contributes
to the cytoarchitectonic differentiation of cortical areas.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18075251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Br J Cancer. 2007 Nov 19;97(10):1409-15. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Id-1 and Id-2 are markers for metastasis and prognosis in oesophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.

Yuen HF(1), Chan YP, Chan KK, Chu YY, Wong ML, Law SY, Srivastava G, Wong YC,
Wang X, Chan KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

Id protein family consists of four members namely Id-1 to Id-4. Different from
other basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors, they lack the DNA binding
domain. Id proteins have been shown to be dysregulated in many different cancer
types and their prognostic value has also been demonstrated. Recently, Id-1 has
been shown to be upregulated in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
However, the prognostic implications of Id proteins in ESCC have not been
reported. We examined the expression of the Id proteins in ESCC cell lines and
clinical ESCC specimens and found that Id protein expressions were dysregulated
in both the ESCC cell lines and specimens. By correlating the expression levels
of Id proteins and the clinicopathological data of our patient cohort, we found
that M1 stage tumours had significantly higher nuclear Id-1 expression (P=0.012) 
while high nuclear Id-1 expression could predict development of distant
metastasis within 1 year of oesophagectomy (P=0.005). In addition, high levels of
Id-2 expression in both cytoplasmic and nuclear regions predicted longer patient 
survival (P=0.041). Multivariate analysis showed that high-level expression of
Id-2 in both cytoplasmic and nuclear regions and lower level of nuclear Id-1
expression were independent favourable predictors of survival in our ESCC
patients. Our results suggest that Id-1 may promote distant metastasis in ESCC,
and both Id-1 and Id-2 may be used for prognostication for ESCC patients.

PMCID: PMC2360242
PMID: 18000500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(21):e144. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

A ligation assay for multiplex analysis of CpG methylation using
bisulfite-treated DNA.

Dahl C(1), Guldberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomics and Danish Centre for Translational Breast Cancer
Research, Institute of Cancer Biology, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands is causally linked with a number of 
inherited syndromes and most sporadic cancers, and may provide valuable
diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. In this report, we describe an approach to 
simultaneous analysis of multiple CpG islands, where methylation-specific
oligonucleotide probes are joined by ligation and subsequently amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) when hybridized in juxtaposition on
bisulfite-treated DNA. Specificity of the ligation reaction is achieved by (i)
using probes containing CpGpCpG (for methylated sequences) or CpApCpA (for
unmethylated sequences) at the 3' ends, (ii) including three or more probes for
each target, and (iii) using a thermostable DNA ligase. The external probes carry
universal tails to allow amplification of multiple ligation products using a
common primer pair. As proof-of-principle applications, we established duplex
assays to examine the FMR1 promoter in individuals with fragile-X syndrome and
the SNRPN promoter in individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome or Angelman
syndrome, and a multiplex assay to simultaneously detect hypermethylation of
seven genes (ID4, APC, RASSF1A, CDH1, ESR1, HIN1 and TWIST1) in breast cancer
cell lines and tissues. These data show that ligation of oligonucleotide probes
hybridized to bisulfite-treated DNA is a simple and cost-effective approach to
analysis of CpG methylation.

PMCID: PMC2175362
PMID: 17998253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):387-91. Epub 2007 Oct 16.

t(6;14)(p22;q32): a new recurrent IGH@ translocation involving ID4 in B-cell
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL).

Russell LJ(1), Akasaka T, Majid A, Sugimoto KJ, Loraine Karran E, Nagel I, Harder
L, Claviez A, Gesk S, Moorman AV, Ross F, Mazzullo H, Strefford JC, Siebert R,
Dyer MJ, Harrison CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Group, Cancer Sciences Division, University of
Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus (IGH@) at
chromosome band 14q32 are common in mature B-cell neoplasms, but are rare in
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL). Here, we report the
translocation, t(6;14)(p22;q32), involving IGH@ as a novel recurrent
translocation in 13 BCP-ALL patients. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and
long-distance inverse polymerase chain reaction (PCR) identified ID4 as the
partner gene. Breakpoints were scattered over a 19kb region centromeric of ID4.
Quantitative real-time PCR showed up-regulation of ID4 mRNA. All patients had
deletions of CDKN2A and PAX5 located on the short arm of chromosome 9, frequently
as a result of an isochromosome, i(9)(q10) (9/13, 69%). This study defines a new 
subgroup of BCP-ALL characterized by ID4 over-expression and CDKN2A and PAX5
deletions. Preliminary survival data suggest that this subgroup may be associated
with a good response to therapy.

PMID: 17940204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Stem Cells. 2007 Dec;25(12):3204-14. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Bone morphogenetic protein signaling and olig1/2 interact to regulate the
differentiation and maturation of adult oligodendrocyte precursor cells.

Cheng X(1), Wang Y, He Q, Qiu M, Whittemore SR, Cao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center, Department of Neurological
Surgery, MDR 616, 511 South Floyd Street, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

Promotion of remyelination is an important therapeutic strategy for the treatment
of the demyelinating neurological disorders. Adult oligodendrocyte precursor
cells (OPCs), which normally reside quiescently in the adult central nervous
system (CNS), become activated and proliferative after demyelinating lesions.
However, the extent of endogenous remyelination is limited because of the failure
of adult OPCs to mature into myelinating oligodendrocytes (OLs) in the
demyelinated CNS. Understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate the
differentiation of adult OPCs could lead to new therapeutic strategies to treat
these disorders. In this study, we established a stable culture of adult spinal
cord OPCs and developed a reliable in vitro protocol to induce their sequential
differentiation. Adult OPCs expressed bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) type Ia,
Ib, and II receptor subunits, which are required for BMP signal transduction.
BMP2 and 4 promoted dose-dependent astrocyte differentiation of adult OPCs with
concurrent suppression of OL differentiation. Treatment of OPCs with BMP2 and 4
increased ID4 expression and decreased the expression of olig1 and olig2.
Overexpression of olig1 or olig2 blocked the astrocyte differentiation of adult
OPCs induced by BMP2 and 4. Furthermore, overexpression of both olig1 and olig2, 
but not olig1 or olig2 alone, rescued OL differentiation from inhibition by BMP2 
and 4. Our results demonstrated that downregulation of olig1 and olig2 is an
important mechanism by which BMP2 and 4 inhibit OL differentiation of adult OPCs.
These data suggest that blocking BMP signaling combined with olig1/2
overexpression could be a useful therapeutic strategy to enhance endogenous
remyelination and facilitate functional recovery in CNS demyelinated disorders.
Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this
article.

PMCID: PMC2742907
PMID: 17872503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Neuron. 2007 Jul 19;55(2):217-30.

The transcription factor Yin Yang 1 is essential for oligodendrocyte progenitor
differentiation.

He Y(1), Dupree J, Wang J, Sandoval J, Li J, Liu H, Shi Y, Nave KA,
Casaccia-Bonnefil P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, R. Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The progression of progenitors to oligodendrocytes requires proliferative arrest 
and the activation of a transcriptional program of differentiation. While
regulation of cell cycle exit has been extensively characterized, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for the initiation of differentiation remain ill-defined. 
Here, we identify the transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) as a critical
regulator of oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation. Conditional ablation of 
yy1 in the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo induces a phenotype characterized by
defective myelination, ataxia, and tremor. At the cellular level, lack of yy1
arrests differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitors after they exit from the
cell cycle. At the molecular level, YY1 acts as a lineage-specific repressor of
transcriptional inhibitors of myelin gene expression (Tcf4 and Id4), by
recruiting histone deacetylase-1 to their promoters during oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Thus, we identify YY1 as an essential component of the
transcriptional network regulating the transition of oligodendrocyte progenitors 
from cell cycle exit to differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2034312
PMID: 17640524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;15(3):594-8.

[Bioinformatics scan analysis for predicting drug targeted modulation on ID4 gene
expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu XC(1), Chi XH, Lou FD, Zhu HL, Fan H, Li SX, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Hematology, Department of Hematolody, PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

Low expression of ID4 gene is tightly related with carcinogenesis and high
expression shows a definite anti-leukemia effect, though little expression in
some leukemia cells. The main purpose of this preliminary work was to analyze the
construction of ID4 gene promoter and to predict the cis elements in the ID4
promoter region by scanning the drug candidate with bioinformatics method. All
these work are the primary part for finding effective drugs in the treatment of
leukemia via the way of ID4 expression regulation. According to the data in
GenBank and Internet platform, the 5'-untranslated sequence just upstream of ID4 
ORF was virtually cloned. TESS, Genomatix and GenBank databank were used to
analyze the cis elements in this area. RSA was used to find the distribution
patterns for all these possible elements. SAGE and GEO datasets were used to find
active substances which have the effect on the ID4 expression. The rsults
indicated that ID4 had a type II promoter with a typical TATA box-45 bp upstream 
the transcriptional original site. There were a lot of various cis elements in
the 5'-untranslated region upstream, including both positive element candidates
such as Sp1, c-Myb, abaA, GR, ER, Zeste and C/EBPalpha and negative element
candidates such as CCAAT-binding factor, GCF, WT1-KTS, HiNF-C and EGR2. It is
concluded that estrogen, dexamethasone, thyroid hormone and follicle stimulating 
hormone may participate in the regulation of ID4 gene expression in both positive
and negative manners.

PMID: 17605873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2007 Apr;47(1):15-8.

Frequent DNA methylation but not mutation of the ID4 gene in malignant lymphoma.

Hagiwara K(1), Nagai H, Li Y, Ohashi H, Hotta T, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center for Blood Diseases, National Hospital Organization
Nagoya Medical Center, Nagoya, Japan.

ID4 is a member of the inhibitor of DNA binding (ID) family, and inhibits the
binding of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors to DNA. In some malignant
tumors, ID4 is inactivated by promoter hypermethylation, and is thought to be a
candidate tumor suppressor gene (TSG). We have found that the promoter region of 
the ID4 gene is frequently methylated in lymphoid cell lines (100%, 9/9), primary
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (95%, 19/20), and follicular lymphoma (100%,
10/10). Somatic mutation of the ID4 gene was also examined, and no mutations were
found. These findings suggest that the ID4 gene might be inactivated by DNA
hypermethylation, and may function as a TSG in malignant lymphoma.

PMID: 17510533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cell Tissue Res. 2007 Apr;328(1):207-21. Epub 2006 Nov 25.

Global gene expression analysis in fetal mouse ovaries with and without meiosis
and comparison of selected genes with meiosis in the testis.

Olesen C(1), Nyeng P, Kalisz M, Jensen TH, Møller M, Tommerup N, Byskov AG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Center for Children, Women and
Reproduction, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
c-olesen@mail.tele.dk

In order to identify novel genes involved in early meiosis and early ovarian
development in the mouse, we used microarray technology to compare
transcriptional activity in ovaries without meiotic germ cells at embryonic age
11.5 (E11.5) and E13.5 ovaries with meiosis. Overall, 182 genes were
differentially expressed; 134 were known genes and 48 were functionally
uncharacterized. A comparison of our data with the literature associated, for the
first time, at least eight of the known genes with female meiosis/germ cell
differentiation (Aldh1a1, C2pa, Tex12, Stk31, Lig3, Id4, Recql, Piwil2). These
genes had previously only been described in spermatogenesis. The microarray also 
detected an abundance of vesicle-related genes of which four were upregulated
(Syngr2, Stxbp1, Ric-8, SytIX) and one (Myo1c) was downregulated in E13.5
ovaries. Detailed analysis showed that the temporal expression of SytIX also
coincided with the first meiotic wave in the pubertal testis. This is the first
time that SytIX has been reported in non-neuronal tissue. Finally, we examined
the expression of one of the uncharacterized genes and found it to be
gonad-specific in adulthood. We named this novel transcript "Gonad-expressed
transcript 1" (Get-1). In situ hybridization showed that Get-1 was expressed in
meiotic germ cells in both fetal ovaries and mature testis. Get-1 is therefore a 
novel gene in both male and female meiosis.

PMID: 17431699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. BMC Genomics. 2007 Mar 12;8:70.

Gene expression profiling of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone
marrow during expansion and osteoblast differentiation.

Kulterer B(1), Friedl G, Jandrositz A, Sanchez-Cabo F, Prokesch A, Paar C,
Scheideler M, Windhager R, Preisegger KH, Trajanoski Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics and Christian-Doppler Laboratory for
Genomics and Bioinformatics, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria.
birgit.kulterer@gmx.at <birgit.kulterer@gmx.at>

BACKGROUND: Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) with the capacity to differentiate
into osteoblasts provide potential for the development of novel treatment
strategies, such as improved healing of large bone defects. However, their low
frequency in bone marrow necessitate ex vivo expansion for further clinical
application. In this study we asked if MSC are developing in an aberrant or
unwanted way during ex vivo long-term cultivation and if artificial cultivation
conditions exert any influence on their stem cell maintenance. To address this
question we first developed human oligonucleotide microarrays with 30.000
elements and then performed large-scale expression profiling of long-term
expanded MSC and MSC during differentiation into osteoblasts.
RESULTS: The results showed that MSC did not alter their osteogenic
differentiation capacity, surface marker profile, and the expression profiles of 
MSC during expansion. Microarray analysis of MSC during osteogenic
differentiation identified three candidate genes for further examination and
functional analysis: ID4, CRYAB, and SORT1. Additionally, we were able to
reconstruct the three developmental phases during osteoblast differentiation:
proliferation, matrix maturation, and mineralization, and illustrate the
activation of the SMAD signaling pathways by TGF-beta2 and BMPs.
CONCLUSION: With a variety of assays we could show that MSC represent a cell
population which can be expanded for therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC1829400
PMID: 17352823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jun;211(3):728-35.

BMP-2 promotes differentiation of osteoblasts and chondroblasts in
Runx2-deficient cell lines.

Liu T(1), Gao Y, Sakamoto K, Minamizato T, Furukawa K, Tsukazaki T, Shibata Y,
Bessho K, Komori T, Yamaguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oral Pathology, Department of Oral Restitution, Graduate School of 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying the differentiation of
osteoblasts and chondroblasts, we established a clonal cell lines, RD-C6, from
Runx2-deficient mouse embryos. RD-C6 cells expressed almost undetectable levels
of phenotypes related to osteoblast and chondroblast differentiation at basal
culture condition, whereas treatment with recombinant human bone morphogenetic
protein-2 (rhBMP-2) or transduction of BMP-2 by adenovirus effectively induced
this cell line to express mRNA related to the differentiation of osteoblasts and 
chondroblasts including alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and osterix.
Transduction of Runx2 also induced the expression of these mRNA in RD-C6 cells.
BMP-2 transduction increased expression levels of mRNA for Msx2 and Dlx5, but
Runx2 transduction induced no significant increases in expression levels of these
mRNA. Microarray analysis using RD-C6 cells with or without rhBMP-2 treatment
demonstrated that BMP-2 upregulated 66 genes including 13 transcription-related
molecules such as Id1, Id2, Id4, Hey1, Smad6, Smad7, and Msx2. To confirm bone
and cartilage formation ability of RD-C6 cells, we transplanted RD-C6 cells into 
the peritoneal cavity of athymic mice using diffusion chambers with rhBMP-2.
RD-C6 cells generated unmineralized cartilage but not bone. These results
indicate that BMP-2 induces Runx2-deficient cells to express markers related to
osteoblast and chondroblast differentiation using a Runx2-independent pathway,
but it failed to induce these cells to differentiate into bone-forming
osteoblasts and mature chondrocytes.

PMID: 17226753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Toxicol Sci. 2006 Dec;31(5):537-8.

DNA microarray analysis of transcriptional responses of human neuroblastoma
IMR-32 cells to methylmercury.

Hwang GW(1), Naganuma A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Biochemical Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

We used DNA microarrays to monitor the transcriptional responses of IMR-32
neuroblastoma cells to methylmercury. Methylmercury increased levels of
expression of seven genes, including genes for ETV5 and ID4, and reduced those of
two genes.

PMID: 17202766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Neurobiol Aging. 2008 Mar;29(3):452-63. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Epigenetic memory loss in aging oligodendrocytes in the corpus callosum.

Shen S(1), Liu A, Li J, Wolubah C, Casaccia-Bonnefil P.

Author information: 
(1)Department Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 
UMDNJ, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

In this study, we address the hypothesis that aging modifies the intrinsic
properties of oligodendrocytes, the myelin-forming cells of the brain. According 
to our model, an "epigenetic memory" is stored in the chromatin of the
oligodendrocyte lineage cells and is responsible for the maintenance of a mature 
phenotype, characterized by low levels of expression of transcriptional
inhibitors. We report here an age-related decline of histone deacetylation and
methylation, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the establishment and
maintenance of this "epigenetic memory" of the differentiated state. We further
show that lack of histone methylation and increased acetylation in mature
oligodendrocytes are associated with global changes in gene expression, that
include the re-expression of bHLH inhibitors (i.e. Hes5 and Id4) and precursor
markers (i.e. Sox2). These changes characteristic of the "aging" oligodendrocytes
can be recapitulated in vitro, by treating primary oligodendrocyte cultures with 
histone deacetylase inhibitors. Thus, we conclude that the "epigenetic memory
loss" detected in white matter tracts of older mice induces global changes of
gene expression that modify the intrinsic properties of aged oligodendrocytes and
may functionally modulate the responsiveness of these cells to external stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2323437
PMID: 17182153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Jul;45(7):576-8.

[The significance of DNA-binding inhibitor 4 promoter methylation status in acute
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Yu L, Wang QS, Li HH, Bo J, Dou LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between promoter methylation of
inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (Id4) gene and acute leukemia.
METHODS: We detected the status of promoter methylation of Id4 gene in peripheral
blood, peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSC) and bone marrow samples 
from health donors, bone marrow cells from leukemia patients and leukemia cell
lines with MS-PCR methods.
RESULTS: The frequency of Id4 promoter methylation was 21/25 in acute myeloid
leukemia (84%), 12/14 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (86%), 8/8 in relapse acute
leukemias and 2/2 in leukemia cell lines whereas no methylation was detected in
peripheral blood, PBSC and bone marrow samples from healthy donors. In addition, 
Hek937 cell line was unmethylated.
CONCLUSION: Id4 promoter methylation was detected only in acute leukemia patients
and leukemia cell lines and it might play a role in leukemia genesis.

PMID: 17074115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 29;26(14):2126-32. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

BRCA1 dysfunction in sporadic basal-like breast cancer.

Turner NC(1), Reis-Filho JS, Russell AM, Springall RJ, Ryder K, Steele D, Savage 
K, Gillett CE, Schmitt FC, Ashworth A, Tutt AN.

Author information: 
(1)Chester Beatty Laboratories, The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre,
Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

Basal-like breast cancers form a distinct subtype of breast cancer characterized 
by the expression of markers expressed in normal basal/myoepithelial cells.
Breast cancers arising in carriers of germline BRCA1 mutations are predominately 
of basal-like type, suggesting that BRCA1 dysfunction may play a role in the
pathogenesis of sporadic basal-like cancers. We analysed 37 sporadic breast
cancers expressing the basal marker cytokeratin 5/6, and age- and grade-matched
controls, for downregulation of BRCA1. Although BRCA1 promoter methylation was no
more common in basal-like cancers (basal 14% vs controls 11%, P=0.72), BRCA1
messenger RNA expression was twofold lower in basal-like breast cancers compared 
to matched controls (P=0.008). ID4, a negative regulator of BRCA1, was expressed 
at 9.1-fold higher levels in basal-like breast cancer (P<0.0001), suggesting a
potential mechanism of BRCA1 downregulation. BRCA1 downregulation correlated with
the presence of multiple basal markers, revealing heterogeneity in the basal-like
phenotype. Finally, we found that 63% of metaplastic breast cancers, a rare type 
of basal-like cancers, had BRCA1 methylation, in comparison to 12% of controls
(P<0.0001). The high prevalence of BRCA1 dysfunction identified in this study
could be exploited in the development of novel approaches to targeted treatment
of basal-like breast cancer.

PMID: 17016441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 May;27(5):298-301.

[Id4 gene methylation for detection of minimal residual disease in acute
leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao Y(1), Yu L, Wang QS, Li HH, Bo J, Wang SH, Jin HJ, Lou FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the possibility of Id4 gene promoter methylation as a
biomarker for minimal residual disease (MRD) detection in acute leukemia.
METHODS: Methylation specific-PCR technique was used to detect Id4 gene
methylation in samples with different percentages of leukemia cells from leukemia
cell line and bone marrows from leukemia patients in complete remission (CR).
RESULTS: Id4 gene methylation could be detected in samples containing 1% or lower
leukemia cells. Frequency of Id4 gene methylation in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) patients in CR was 64.3% being higher than that in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) patients in CR. In 14 ALL patients with Id4 gene methylation, 8 relapsed in
12 months, while only one relapsed in 9 patients without Id4 gene methylation. In
8 AML patients with Id4 gene methylation, 5 relapsed in 12 months, while two
relapsed in 20 AML patients with Id4 gene methylation.
CONCLUSION: Id4 gene promoter methylation is a candidate of biomarker for MRD
detection in acute leukemias.

PMID: 16875575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Hum Pathol. 2006 Aug;37(8):1032-41. Epub 2006 May 22.

Id4 messenger RNA and estrogen receptor expression: inverse correlation in human 
normal breast epithelium and carcinoma.

de Candia P(1), Akram M, Benezra R, Brogi E.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) 4 is a member of the Id family of proteins
(Id1-Id4), which function as dominant-negative regulators of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors. Id factors are involved in numerous cell 
processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, and tumorigenesis. We
assessed the expression of Id4 messenger RNA (mRNA) in invasive mammary carcinoma
from 31 patients, as well as in 21 cases of ductal carcinoma in situ, in 9 lymph 
node metastases, and in the morphologically normal epithelium adjacent to the
carcinoma from the same subjects. In addition, we evaluated Id4 mRNA in atypical 
ductal hyperplasia from 5 other women and in normal breast tissue from yet
another 5 women with no history of breast malignancy or atypia. The distribution 
of Id4 signal was assessed in relation to that of estrogen receptor (ER) in all
samples and correlated with the Her-2 status of the carcinomas. Id4 mRNA was
present in the normal ER-negative mammary epithelium in all cases; in contrast,
the ER-positive cells present in the normal breast were Id4 negative. Id4 mRNA
was not detected in atypical ductal hyperplasia, in 22 of the 23 cases of ductal 
carcinoma in situ, and in 27 of the 31 invasive carcinomas (P = .0008), all of
which were ER positive. Conversely, 3 of the 31 invasive carcinomas were Id4
positive and ER negative. Only 1 ER-positive invasive carcinoma showed focal
reactivity for Id4. The expression of Id4 in metastatic carcinoma paralleled that
of the primary tumor. No correlation was apparent between Id4 and Her-2. Our data
show that Id4 is constitutively expressed in the normal human mammary epithelium 
but is suppressed in ER-positive breast carcinomas and preneoplastic lesions. In 
contrast, ER-negative carcinomas appear to be Id4 positive. These results support
a possible role of Id4 as a tumor suppressor factor in the human breast and
suggest that the expression of Id4 in the mammary ductal epithelium may be
regulated by estrogen. Further investigations are required to define the
functions of Id4 in the human normal breast and in mammary neoplasia.

PMID: 16867866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Glia. 2006 Sep;54(4):285-96.

Multiple roles of Id4 in developmental myelination: predicted outcomes and
unexpected findings.

Marin-Husstege M(1), He Y, Li J, Kondo T, Sablitzky F, Casaccia-Bonnefil P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Myelination in the central nervous system is a complex process requiring the
integration of oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation and the coordinate
expression of myelin genes. This study addresses the role of the helix-loop-helix
protein Id4 in these two events. Overexpression of Id4 in oligodendrocyte
progenitors prevents differentiation and consequently decreases the endogenous
expression of all myelin genes. Conversely, progenitors lacking Id4 display
precocious differentiation both in vitro and in vivo, and this phenotype is
partially compensated by increased apoptosis. Besides this role, Id4 also has the
ability to decrease the activity of specific myelin promoters, since Id4
overexpression decreases the activity of luciferase reporter genes driven by the 
ceramide galactosyltransferase (CGT) or myelin basic protein (MBP) promoter, but 
not by a myelin proteolipid protein (PLP) promoter. Consistent with these
results, the expression levels of MBP and CGT are greater in neonatal Id4 null
mice when compared with wild-type siblings and correlate with the early detection
of MBP immunoreactive myelinated fibers. In contrast, the levels of other myelin 
proteins, such as PLP and myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG) are decreased in
the Id4 null mice. MAG expression is localized to the soma rather than the fibers
of immunoreactive cells in the neonatal brain and compensated at later
developmental stages. These data support the role of Id4 as oligodendrocyte
differentiation inhibitor with the ability to differentially regulate the
expression and subcellular distribution of myelin gene products.

PMID: 16862533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nature. 2006 Jul 27;442(7101):471-4. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Degradation of Id2 by the anaphase-promoting complex couples cell cycle exit and 
axonal growth.

Lasorella A(1), Stegmüller J, Guardavaccaro D, Liu G, Carro MS, Rothschild G, de 
la Torre-Ubieta L, Pagano M, Bonni A, Iavarone A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia 
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Jul 27;442(7101):365-6.

In the developing nervous system, Id2 (inhibitor of DNA binding 2, also known as 
inhibitor of differentiation 2) enhances cell proliferation, promotes tumour
progression and inhibits the activity of neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors. The anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome and its activator
Cdh1 (APC/C(Cdh1)) restrains axonal growth but the targets of APC/C(Cdh1) in
neurons are unknown. Id2 and other members of the Id family are very unstable
proteins that are eliminated as cells enter the quiescent state, but how they are
targeted for degradation has remained elusive. Here we show that Id2 interacts
with the core subunits of APC/C and Cdh1 in primary neurons. APC/C(Cdh1) targets 
Id2 for degradation through a destruction box motif (D box) that is conserved in 
Id1 and Id4. Depletion of Cdh1 stabilizes Id proteins in neurons, whereas Id2
D-box mutants are impaired for Cdh1 binding and remain stable in cells that exit 
from the cell cycle and contain active APC/C(Cdh1). Mutants of the Id2 D box
enhance axonal growth in cerebellar granule neurons in vitro and in the context
of the cerebellar cortex, and overcome the myelin inhibitory signals for growth. 
Conversely, activation of bHLH transcription factors induces a cluster of genes
with potent axonal inhibitory functions including the gene coding for the Nogo
receptor, a key transducer of myelin inhibition. Degradation of Id2 in neurons
permits the accumulation of the Nogo receptor, thereby linking APC/C(Cdh1)
activity with bHLH target genes for the inhibition of axonal growth. These
findings indicate that deregulated Id activity might be useful to reprogramme
quiescent neurons into the axonal growth mode.

PMID: 16810178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Pept Sci. 2006 Aug;12(8):550-8.

Synthesis and conformational analysis of Id2 protein fragments: impact of chain
length and point mutations on the structural HLH motif.

Colombo N(1), Cabrele C.

Author information: 
(1)Fakultät für Chemie und Pharmazie, Universität Regensburg, Universitätsstrasse
31, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

The Id proteins are negative regulators of several basic-helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors, including the ubiquitous E factors and the tissue-specific
myogenin-regulating factors. Id1 through Id4 contain highly identical HLH domains
but different N- and C-terminal extensions. Beside the heterodimerization with
the parent HLH factors, Id2 was shown to additionally interact with the
retinoblastoma protein and to be overexpressed in neuroblastoma. Thus, Id2
represents an interesting target for cancer therapy based on the inhibition of
protein-protein interactions. Here we present the synthesis and circular
dichroism (CD) analysis of peptides derived from point mutations and
N-/C-terminal truncations of Id2. The helix character of the HLH domain (residues
36-76) was reduced upon substitution of Met39/-62 and Cys42 with Nle and Ser,
respectively, suggesting a structural role of these side chains. The largest
sequence that could be obtained by stepwise solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS) 
with Fmoc strategy spanned the entire HLH motif (with Cys42 replaced by Ser) and 
part of the C-terminus (residues 77-110). This 75-residue long fragment was less 
helical than the isolated HLH domain and had propensity to aggregate, which was
correlated with the presence of the flanking residues C-terminal to helix-2. By
CD analysis of an equimolar mixture of the sequence 36-110 with the N-terminus
1-35, noncovalent interactions between the two peptides were detected, which,
however, changed upon aging. In contrast, the mixture of the HLH sequence 36-76
with the N-terminus was characterized by a stabilized helix structure that was
maintained also upon aging. Presumably, the N-terminal region interacted with the
folded HLH motif in a specific manner, whereas only unspecific, weak contacts
occurred with the partly unfolded HLH domain and/or the immediate flanking
residues 77-110.

Copyright (c) 2006 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16733829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jun 15;15(12):2003-14. Epub 2006 May 8.

Inhibitors of differentiation (ID1, ID2, ID3 and ID4) genes are neuronal targets 
of MeCP2 that are elevated in Rett syndrome.

Peddada S(1), Yasui DH, LaSalle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Rowe Program in Human Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of California, CA 95616, USA.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder caused by
mutations in MECP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2. MeCP2 is a
transcriptional repressor elevated in mature neurons and is predicted to be
required for neuronal maturation by regulating multiple target genes. Identifying
primary gene targets in either Mecp2-deficient mice or human RTT brain has proven
to be difficult, perhaps because of the transient requirement for MeCP2 during
neuronal maturation. In order to experimentally control the timing of MeCP2
expression and deficiency during neuronal maturation, human SH-SY5Y cells
undergoing mature neuronal differentiation were transfected with methylated MeCP2
oligonucleotide decoy to disrupt the binding of MeCP2 to endogenous targets.
Genome-wide expression microarray analysis identified all four known members of
the inhibitors of differentiation or inhibitors of DNA-binding (ID1, ID2, ID3 and
ID4) subfamily of helix-loop-helix genes as novel neuronal targets of MeCP2.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed binding of MeCP2 near or within 
the promoters of ID1, ID2 and ID3, and quantitative RT-PCR confirmed increased
expression of all four Id genes in Mecp2-deficient mouse brain. All four ID
proteins were significantly increased in Mecp2-deficient mouse and human RTT
brain using immunofluorescence and laser scanning cytometric analyses. Because of
their involvement in cell differentiation and neural development, ID genes are
ideal primary targets for MeCP2 regulation of neuronal maturation that may
explain the molecular pathogenesis of RTT.

PMCID: PMC1931415
PMID: 16682435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cancer Biol Ther. 2006 May;5(5):505-10. Epub 2006 May 13.

Tumoral expression of BRCA1, estrogen receptor alpha and ID4 protein in patients 
with sporadic breast cancer.

Roldán G(1), Delgado L, Musé IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Clinical Hospital of the University of
Uruguay, Uruguay. gloriaro@cancerboard.ab.ca

INTRODUCTION: BRCA1 expression is downregulated in a third of sporadic breast
cancers (SBC). Most of the tumors in which BRCA1 function is diminished do not
express estrogen receptor alpha (ER). Recent studies suggest that the inhibitor
of DNA binding (ID)-4 could participate in the hormonal regulation of BRCA1
expression.
OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship between tumoral expression of BRCA1, ER and 
ID4 in SBCs.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty patients with pathologic confirmation of SBC were
included in this study. The mRNA expression of BRCA1, ER and ID4, determined by
reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), was correlated with
the expression of gliceraldehid-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (GAPDH). The results
were analyzed using two-sided nonparametric tests (Chi-square and Spearman's rank
correlation test) with alpha < 0.05.
RESULTS: Most of the tumors that expressed BRCA1 mRNA were ER-positive (p <
0.0001). In addition, a positive correlation was observed between the level of
expression of these mRNAs (rs = 0.75 95% CI = 0.57-0.86; p < 0.0001). An inverse 
association was observed between the mRNA expression of BRCA1 and ID4 (p = 0.024)
and a negative correlation between their levels of expression (rs = -0.35 95% CI 
-0.59 a -0.04; p = 0.028). Moreover, a negative correlation was stated between
the level mRNAs of ER and ID4 (rs = - 0.45 95% CI -0.66 a -0.16; p = 0.0039).
DISCUSSION: In this study we demonstrate an association between the tumoral
expression of BRCA1, ER and ID4 in patients with SBC. These results are in
concordance with previous studies, however, to our knowledge, no other reports
have described a relationship between the expression of ID4 and ER at the mRNA
level in human breast cancers. These results suggest that ID4 participates in the
molecular events that regulate BRCA1 and ER expression, suggesting its role as a 
tumor marker or potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 16582598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jul;19(7):931-41. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Id proteins expression in prostate cancer: high-level expression of Id-4 in
primary prostate cancer is associated with development of metastases.

Yuen HF(1), Chua CW, Chan YP, Wong YC, Wang X, Chan KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

A major cause of treatment failure for prostate cancer is the development of
androgen-independent metastatic disease. Id protein family, a group of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, has been shown to be involved in
carcinogenesis and a prognostic marker in several types of human cancers. In this
study, we examined the expressions of four Id proteins, Id-1, -2, -3 and -4, in
125 clinical prostate cancer specimens as well as 40 nodular hyperplasia
specimens by immunohistochemistry. The expressions of Id proteins were correlated
with Gleason grading and metastatic progress of the tumors. We found that Id
proteins were dysregulated in prostate cancer. Id-1 and -2 expressions were
elevated while Id-3 and -4 expressions were reduced in prostate cancers compared 
to nodular hyperplasia. Cytoplasmic staining of Id-1 (P=0.013) and nuclear
staining of Id-2 (P=0.001) and Id-4 (P<0.001) were positively correlated with
Gleason score. The results indicate that these Id proteins may play a positive
role in the development of prostate cancer. In contrast, Id-3 might have an
inverse relationship with prostate neoplastic transformation (P=0.002) and cancer
progression (P=0.022). We found that Id-4 nuclear overexpression in the primary
prostate cancers significantly increased the risks to the development of
metastasis in the patients (odds ratio=3.215, 95% confidence
interval=1.150-8.987, P=0.026). Our results suggest that in prostate cancer
patients, differential Id proteins expressions may be a useful marker for poor
prognosis, and Id-4 may be a potential prognostic marker for distant metastasis.

PMID: 16575399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Prostate. 2006 Jun 15;66(9):921-35.

Non-redundant inhibitor of differentiation (Id) gene expression and function in
human prostate epithelial cells.

Asirvatham AJ(1), Schmidt MA, Chaudhary J.

Author information: 
(1)Center For Reproductive Biology, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington, USA.

BACKGROUND: The four Id (inhibitor of differentiation) proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3,
and Id4) dimerize and neutralize the transcriptional activity of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins. The Id proteins negatively regulate
differentiation and promote proliferation hence the expression of specific
subsets of Id proteins is high in many different types of cancers. However, the
expression of all the Id isoforms and their potential function in specific cancer
cell types is not known. In this study, the expression and function of all four
Id isoforms in prostate cancer cell lines was investigated to gain a better
understanding of the role of each Id isoform in normal prostate epithelial and
prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: Id gene and protein expression was evaluated in the context of androgen 
response. The cellular function of Id isoforms was evaluated by targeted loss of 
function of Id genes.
RESULTS: The four Id isoforms are differentially expressed and regulated in
normal human prostate epithelial cells versus prostate cancer cell lines DU145
and LNCaP. Id4 is present only in AR positive cells (normal and LNCaP) and its
expression regulated by androgens. Loss of Id1 and Id3 expression by siRNA
results in loss of proliferation. Loss of Id2 had no effect on proliferation but 
increased apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: A complex equilibrium between Id isoforms determines the cell fate. 
Id1 and Id3 target cellular proliferation, Id2 targets apoptosis, and Id4 may act
as a potential tumor suppressor in prostate epithelial cells.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16541417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2252-6. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

A transgenic approach for RNA interference-based genetic screening in mice.

Peng S(1), York JP, Zhang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Genetic screening is the most powerful method through which to uncover gene
function. It has been applied very successfully in lower organisms but seldom
attempted in mammalian species because of their long generation time. In this
study, we exploit RNA interference (RNAi) for its potential use in genetic
screening in mice. We show that RNAi-induced gene knockdown can be generated
through introducing small hairpin RNA-expressing constructs into the mouse as
transgenes via conventional pronuclear injection. The knockdown effect can be
transmitted for many generations in these transgenic animals. In a small-scale
screening for developmental defects in the kidney, we uncovered a potential role 
of Id4 in the formation of the renal medulla. Our results demonstrate the
feasibility of using RNAi for genetic screening in mice.

PMCID: PMC1413752
PMID: 16461920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Brain Res. 2006 Feb 16;1073-1074:93-102. Epub 2006 Jan 27.

Localization of Id2 mRNA in the adult mouse brain.

Kitajima K(1), Takahashi R, Yokota Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Fukui,
23-3 Shimoaizuki, Matsuoka, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

Id proteins are negative regulators of basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors and are involved in cellular differentiation and proliferation. Four
members of the Id gene family exhibit closely related but distinct expression
patterns in various mammalian organs of not only embryos but also adults. Among
them, Id2 is known to be expressed in Purkinje cells and neurons in the cortical 
layers of the adult mouse brain, suggesting that Id2 is involved in some neural
functions in the adult. To get insight into the role of Id2 in the nervous
system, we investigated the localization of Id2 mRNA-expressing cells in the
adult mouse brain in detail by in situ hybridization with the radiolabeled
antisense probe and compared it with the localization of other Id gene family
members. The results indicated that Id2 mRNA is detected in more varied brain
regions than previously reported. These regions include the amygdaloid complex,
caudate putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra pars reticulata,
suprachiasmatic nucleus, and the anterior part of the subventricular zone. These 
results suggest the possibility that Id2 plays a role in the neural activity and 
cognitive functions. On the other hand, Id1 was barely detectable. Although
moderate or low expression of Id3 was observed diffusely, high expression was
observed in some specific regions including the molecular layer of the dentate
gyrus and the external capsule. Id4 mRNA was detected in the regions such as the 
caudate putamen and the lateral amygdaloid nucleus. Thus, the expression pattern 
of Id2 is distinct from those of other Id gene family members.

PMID: 16443197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Exp Hematol. 2006 Jan;34(1):72-81.

BMP-6 inhibits human bone marrow B lymphopoiesis--upregulation of Id1 and Id3.

Kersten C(1), Dosen G, Myklebust JH, Sivertsen EA, Hystad ME, Smeland EB, Rian E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway. christian.kersten@sshf.no

OBJECTIVE: In mammals, factors produced by bone marrow (BM) stromal cells are
instrumental in orchestrating the developmental process of B lymphocytes. Bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are multifunctional cytokines previously found to
regulate hematopoietic stem cells. In the present study, we have explored the
role of BMP-6 in human B progenitor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In vitro B lymphopoiesis of CD10(+) B progenitor cells
from human BM was evaluated in the presence or absence of BMP-6 in short- or
long-term coculture on MS-5 stromal cells, by tracking CFSE-labeled CD10(+) B
progenitor cells or by quantification of CD19(+) cells. DNA synthesis in the
pre-B cell line Nalm-6 was measured by (3)H-thymidine incorporation.
BMP-6-induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 was determined by Western blot
analysis, whereas elevation of Id1-Id4 mRNA levels and basal BMP-6 mRNA levels
were measured by real-time and conventional RT-PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: By in vitro coculture of CD10(+) B progenitor cells or monoculture of
Nalm-6 cells, we found that BMP-6 inhibited B lymphopoiesis by impeding cell
proliferation. Furthermore, in CD10(+) B progenitors as well as in Nalm-6 cells, 
BMP-6 rapidly induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, followed by an upregulation
of Id1 and Id3 mRNA levels. Finally, we demonstrated that human bone marrow
stromal cells express BMP-6 mRNA whereas B progenitor cells did not.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that BMP-6, produced by the BM, may participate to
fine-tune the balance between proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation in
human B progenitor cells during BM B lymphopoiesis.

PMID: 16413393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Androl. 2006 Mar-Apr;27(2):212-24. Epub 2005 Nov 22.

Expression, localization, and regulation of inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)
proteins in the rat epididymis.

Carroll M(1), Hamzeh M, Robaire B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

The epididymis is the site in which spermatozoa are matured and stored. Regional 
differences along the epididymis are essential for the establishment of the
microenvironment required for germ cell maturation. Inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)
proteins are transcription factors that modulate the functions of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors and act by binding to and
sequestering bHLH proteins; the latter act to regulate cellular proliferation and
differentiation. The objectives of this study were to determine the mRNA
expression and the immunocytolocalization of Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 in the
epididymis of adult rats and to determine the Id3 protein expression profile in
orchidectomized and in aged animals. We found that, at the mRNA level, Id
proteins are expressed in a unique, region-specific manner along the epididymis. 
Id1 immunoreactivity is specific to myoid cells; the presence of Id2 is observed 
in clear cells, myoid cells, and in the apical region of principal cells. Id3
immunoreactivity is essentially confined to the nuclei of principal cells and
myoid cells, whereas Id4 is observed mainly in myoid and narrow cells. Thus, Ids 
are localized to different cell types and are differentially expressed, at both
the mRNA and protein levels, along the epididymis. Expression of Id3 is
differentially regulated in response to orchidectomy along the epididymis. The
fact that these regulators of gene expression are expressed in this manner may
provide some insight into the differential expression of other genes that lead to
region-specific differences along the epididymis, a hallmark of this tissue.

PMID: 16304207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neurosci. 2005 Sep 7;25(36):8311-21.

Combinatorial profiles of oligodendrocyte-selective classes of transcriptional
regulators differentially modulate myelin basic protein gene expression.

Gokhan S(1), Marin-Husstege M, Yung SY, Fontanez D, Casaccia-Bonnefil P, Mehler
MF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Disorders and Neural Regeneration, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Recent studies suggest that specific neural basic helix-loop-helix (HLH; i.e.,
Olig1 and Olig2, Mash1), associated inhibitory HLH (i.e., Id2 and Id4),
high-mobility group domain (i.e., Sox10), and homeodomain (i.e., Nkx2.2)
transcription factors are involved in oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage specification 
and progressive stages of maturation including myelination. However, the
developmental interplay among these lineage-selective determinants, in a cell-
and maturational stage-specific context, has not yet been defined. We show here
in vivo and in vitro developmental expression profiles for these distinct classes
of transcriptional regulators of OLs. We show that progressive stages of OL
lineage maturation are characterized by dynamic changes in the subcellular
distribution of these transcription factors and by different permutations of
combinatorial transcriptional codes. Transient transfections of these precise
combinatorial codes with a luciferase reporter gene driven by the myelin basic
protein promoter define how changes in the molecular composition of these
transcriptional complexes modulate myelin gene expression. Our overall findings
suggest that the dynamic interplay between developmental stage-specific classes
of transcriptional activators and associated inhibitory factors orchestrate
myelin gene expression during terminal maturation of the mammalian CNS.

PMID: 16148239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Histopathology. 2005 Sep;47(3):303-9.

Id helix-loop-helix proteins are differentially expressed in gestational
trophoblastic disease.

Xue WC(1), Feng HC, Chan KY, Chiu PM, Ngan HY, Khoo US, Tsao SW, Chan KW, Cheung 
AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China.

AIMS: To assess the expression of Id proteins in trophoblastic tissues and to
correlate this with clinical parameters, proliferative and apoptotic indices as
well as to related oncogene expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry for Id1, Id2, Id3 and Id4 was performed
on 83 trophoblastic tissues including 17 normal first-trimester placentas, seven 
term placentas, 47 hydatidiform moles (HM), and 12 spontaneous miscarriages. The 
four Id proteins were predominantly expressed in the villous and implantation
site intermediate trophoblast. Expression of Id1 in HM was significantly higher
than that in normal placenta (P = 0.0006) and spontaneous miscarriage (P =
0.0001) but did not correlate with subsequent development of gestational
trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). Id1 expression correlated with the proliferation
index as assessed by MCM7 (P = 0.003) and Ki67 (P = 0.017) and with the apoptotic
activity assessed by TUNEL (P = 0.001) and M30 CytoDeath antibody (P = 0.013).
Moreover, the expression of Id1 correlated with the expression of p53 (P =
0.004), p21(WAF1) (/CIP1) (P = 0.003) but not with p16 (P = 0.107).
CONCLUSIONS: Id proteins may play a role in the regulation of proliferative and
apoptotic activity in trophoblastic tissue and are potentially useful in
differentiating molar and non-molar gestation, but are not helpful in predicting 
GTN.

PMID: 16115231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Int J Cancer. 2006 Feb 15;118(4):899-906.

Differential expression of TGFbeta-stimulated clone 22 in normal prostate and
prostate cancer.

Rentsch CA(1), Cecchini MG, Schwaninger R, Germann M, Markwalder R, Heller M, van
der Pluijm G, Thalmann GN, Wetterwald A.

Author information: 
(1)Urology Research Laboratory, Departments of Urology and Clinical Research,
University of Bern, Switzerland.

The transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) superfamily and its downstream
effector genes are key regulators of epithelial homeostasis. Altered expression
of these genes may be associated with malignant transformation of the prostate
gland. The cDNA array analysis of differential expression of the TGFbeta
superfamily and functionally related genes between patient-matched noncancerous
prostate (NP) and prostate cancer (PC) bulk tissue specimens highlighted two
genes, namely TGFbeta-stimulated clone-22 (TSC-22) and Id4. Verification of their
mRNA expression by real-time PCR in patient-matched NP and PC bulk tissue, in
laser-captured pure epithelial and cancer cells and in NP and PC cell lines
confirmed TSC-22 underexpression, but not Id4 overexpression, in PC and in human 
PC cell lines. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that TSC-22 protein expression
in NP is restricted to the basal cells and colocalizes with the basal cell marker
cytokeratin 5. In contrast, all matched PC samples lack TSC-22 immunoreactivity. 
Likewise, PC cell lines do not show detectable TSC-22 protein expression as shown
by immunoblotting. TSC-22 should be considered as a novel basal cell marker,
potentially useful for studying lineage determination within the epithelial
compartment of the prostate. Conversely, lack of TSC-22 seems to be a hallmark of
malignant transformation of the prostate epithelium. Accordingly, TSC-22
immunohistochemistry may prove to be a diagnostic tool for discriminating benign 
lesions from malignant ones of the prostate. The suggested tumour suppressor
function of TSC-22 warrants further investigation on its role in prostate
carcinogenesis and on the TSC-22 pathway as a candidate therapeutic target in PC.

PMID: 16106424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Thyroid. 2005 Jun;15(6):522-30.

Id1 gene expression and regulation in human thyroid tissue.

Kebebew E(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, Department of Surgery and UCSF
Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
kebebewe@surgery.ucsf.edu

The Id genes encode helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription proteins that lack a DNA
binding basic domain. Id proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) function as dominant
negative regulators of basic HLH transcription factors by forming inactive
heterodimers. Recent studies suggest that the Id proteins participate in the
regulation of cell growth, differentiation, tumorigenesis and angiogenesis in a
variety of cell types. This report summarizes studies done in our laboratory on
the expression and regulation of the Id1 gene in human thyroid tissue, the result
of activation of the major mitogen signal transduction pathways on Id1 gene
expression, and the effect of the Id1 gene on thyroid cancer cell growth and
differentiation.

PMID: 16029118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. BMC Clin Pathol. 2005 Jul 15;5:6.

Id4 and FABP7 are preferentially expressed in cells with astrocytic features in
oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas.

Liang Y(1), Bollen AW, Nicholas MK, Gupta N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Brain Tumor Research Center, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. liangy01@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Oligodendroglioma (ODG) and oligoastrocytoma (OAC) are diffusely
infiltrating primary brain tumors whose pathogenesis remains unclear. We
previously identified a group of genes whose expression was inversely correlated 
with survival in a cohort of patients with glioblastoma (GBM), and some of these 
genes are also reportedly expressed in ODG and OAC. We examined the expression
patterns and localization of these survival-associated genes in ODG and OAC in
order to analyze their possible roles in the oncogenesis of these two tumor
types.
METHODS: We used UniGene libraries derived from GBM and ODG specimens to examine 
the expression levels of the transcripts for each of the 50 GBM
survival-associated genes. We used immunohistochemistry and cDNA microarrays to
examine expression of selected survival-associated genes and Id4, a gene believed
to control the timing of oligodendrocyte development. The expression of FABP7 and
Id4 and the survival of patients with ODG and OAC were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Transcripts of most survival-associated genes as well as Id4 were
present in both GBM and ODG tumors, whereas protein expression of Id4 and one of 
the survival-associated genes, brain-type fatty acid-binding protein (FABP7), was
present in cells with astrocytic features, including reactive and neoplastic
astrocytes, but not in neoplastic oligodendrocytes. Id4 was co-expressed with
FABP7 in microgemistocytes in ODG and in neoplastic astrocytes in OAC. Id4 and
FABP7 expression, however, did not correlate with the clinical outcome of
patients with ODG or OAC tumors.
CONCLUSION: Expression of Id4 and some of our previously identified GBM
survival-associated genes is present in developing or mature oligodendrocytes.
However, protein expression of Id4 and FABP7 in GBM, ODG, and OAC suggests that
this group of functionally important genes might demonstrate two patterns of
expression in these glioma subtypes: one group is universally expressed in glioma
cells, and the other group of genes is expressed primarily in neoplastic
astrocytes but not in neoplastic oligodendrocytes. Differential protein
expression of these two groups of genes in ODG and OAC may be related to the
cellular origins and the histological features of the neoplastic cells.

PMCID: PMC1182359
PMID: 16018821  [PubMed]


228. Oncogene. 2005 Jul 7;24(29):4721-7.

Aberrant hypermethylation of ID4 gene promoter region increases risk of lymph
node metastasis in T1 breast cancer.

Umetani N(1), Mori T, Koyanagi K, Shinozaki M, Kim J, Giuliano AE, Hoon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica,
CA 90404, USA.

ID4 gene is a member of the inhibitor of DNA-binding (ID) family, which inhibits 
DNA binding of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors. Certain human
primary breast cancers reportedly have low or no expression of ID4 protein, but
its role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression is unknown. To determine its
possible role, we examined epigenetic inactivation of ID4 gene by promoter
hypermethylation in human breast cell lines and T1 breast cancer tissues.
Methylation status of ID4 promoter CpG island was assessed by
methylation-specific PCR (MSP); ID4 mRNA level was assessed by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR. Of eight cell lines, two were fully methylated, four were
partially methylated, and two were not methylated. ID4 mRNA level was suppressed 
in fully methylated cell lines. ID4 hypermethylation was observed in 16 of 24
(67%) node-positive and seven of 36 (19%) node-negative T1 primary breast cancers
matched by patient age and tumor diameter. It was a significant risk factor for
nodal metastasis (OR 13.1, P=0.0004). ID4 mRNA level was suppressed in
hypermethylated cancer specimens (P=0.014). ID4 may play an important suppressive
role in tumor progression, and its silencing by hypermethylation may increase the
risk of regional lymph node metastasis.

PMID: 15897910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Biol. 2005 Apr 15;280(2):386-95.

Id4 is required for the correct timing of neural differentiation.

Bedford L(1), Walker R, Kondo T, van Crüchten I, King ER, Sablitzky F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, Queen's Medical Centre, School of Biology, The
University of Nottingham, UK.

Complex intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms determine neural cell fate during
development of the nervous system. Using Id4 deficient mice, we show that Id4 is 
required for normal development of the central nervous system (CNS), timing
neural differentiation in the developing forebrain. In the absence of Id4, the
ventricular zone of the neocortex, future hippocampus as well as lateral and
medial ganglionic eminences exhibited a 20-30% reduction in mitotic neural
precursor cells (NPCs). Although the number of apoptotic cells was significantly 
increased, the neocortex of Id4(-/-) embryos was consistently thicker due to
premature neuronal differentiation, which resulted in an increase in early-born
neurons in the adult Id4(-/-) cortex. Late-born cortical neurons and astrocytes
in the cortex, septum, hippocampus and caudate putamen of Id4(-/-) adult brains
were decreased, however, likely due to the depletion of the NPC pool.
Consequently, adult Id4(-/-) brains were smaller and exhibited enlarged
ventricles. In vitro analysis of neurosphere cultures revealed that proliferation
of Id4-deficient NPCs was impaired and that BMP2-mediated astrocyte
differentiation was accelerated in the absence of Id4. Together, these in vivo
and in vitro data suggest a crucial role for Id4 in regulating NPC proliferation 
and differentiation.

PMID: 15882580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biopolymers. 2005;80(6):762-74.

Synthesis and conformational properties of protein fragments based on the Id
family of DNA-binding and cell-differentiation inhibitors.

Kiewitz SD(1), Cabrele C.

Author information: 
(1)Fakultät für Chemie und Pharmazie, Universität Regensburg, Universitätsstr.
31, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Id proteins are dominant negative regulators of the helix-loop-helix (HLH)
transcription factors and are important during development, especially by
preventing cell differentiation while inducing cell proliferation. In contrast,
they are poorly expressed in healthy adults but are found in several tumor types.
The Id HLH motif is responsible for the inhibitory activity, whereas not much is 
known about the role of the N- and C-termini. In the presented work, synthetic
peptides reproducing the HLH, the N-terminal region, and the C-terminal region of
the Id proteins were characterized by CD. The four HLH sequences built highly
stable helical conformations, whereas the N- and C-termini were unstructured,
with the exception of an alanine-rich fragment preceding the Id4 HLH motif.
Deletion of the loop connecting the two helices led to helix destabilization for 
all four Id HLH peptides. In addition, modifications of the amino acid
composition within the hydrophobic face of the helices of the Id1 HLH peptide
induced conformational changes, mostly associated with loss of helix content.
Moreover, a fragment containing the helix-2 and the C-terminus of the Id1 protein
did not show any helical character. Therefore, both the helix propensity and
stability of the HLH domain were shown to be strongly dependent on favorable
interhelical contacts. In contrast, it is suggested that the regions beyond this 
domain could rather play a destabilizing role, for example, by increasing the
flexibility of the folded protein.

Copyright 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15880794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Cancer. 2005 May 5;4(1):16.

Amplification and overexpression of the ID4 gene at 6p22.3 in bladder cancer.

Wu Q(1), Hoffmann MJ, Hartmann FH, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
wu_qiong@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Amplifications at 6p22.3 are prevalent in advanced stage bladder
cancer (TCC). Previous studies have identified SOX4, CDKAL, and E2F3 as targets
of this amplification and therefore potential oncogenes, but the more telomeric
DEK gene too has been reported as overexpressed and amplified. We have therefore 
investigated whether the intermediate region harboring the oncogene candidate ID4
is also part of the amplicon.
RESULTS: Expression of E2F3, DEK, and ID4 was investigated by real-time RT-PCR in
28 TCC compared to 6 normal bladder tissues and in 15 TCC cell lines compared to 
cultured normal urothelial cells. Expression of E2F3 as well as DEK increased on 
average in tumor vs. normal tissues (3-fold and 2.5-fold, resp.), but only the
increase for E2F3 was statistically significant (p = 0.039). ID4 overexpression
was observed in selected specimens. Each of the three genes was overexpressed in 
several cell lines, up to 150-fold (ID4), 30-fold (E2F3), and 9-fold (DEK), but
these increases were not correlated to each other. Instead, moderate (DEK) to
excellent (ID4) correlations were observed with copy number increases of
microsatellites near each gene. Microsatellite copy number increases were highly 
heterogeneous across the investigated several Mb region revealing at least three 
subregions of amplification.
CONCLUSION: Extending previous reports, our data indicate that the 6p22.3
amplicon in TCC is highly heterogeneous and targets several genes in a variable
fashion. Among these, expression of E2F3 and DEK appear to be generally increased
in TCC, with additional increases caused by amplifications. In contrast,
over-expression of ID4, which is normally predominantly expressed in testes and
brain, appears to depend more strictly on gene amplification. Accordingly, the
effect of amplifications at 6p22.3 in bladder cancer is expected to be
non-uniform, thereby contributing to the highly variable biological and clinical 
behavior of advanced stage tumors. ID4 is a potential oncogene in a small subset 
of bladder cancers.

PMCID: PMC1131921
PMID: 15876350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Nat Genet. 2005 Mar;37(3):265-74. Epub 2005 Feb 20.

Global assessment of promoter methylation in a mouse model of cancer identifies
ID4 as a putative tumor-suppressor gene in human leukemia.

Yu L(1), Liu C, Vandeusen J, Becknell B, Dai Z, Wu YZ, Raval A, Liu TH, Ding W,
Mao C, Liu S, Smith LT, Lee S, Rassenti L, Marcucci G, Byrd J, Caligiuri MA,
Plass C.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2005 Mar;37(3):211-2.

DNA methylation is associated with malignant transformation, but limitations
imposed by genetic variability, tumor heterogeneity, availability of paired
normal tissues and methodologies for global assessment of DNA methylation have
limited progress in understanding the extent of epigenetic events in the
initiation and progression of human cancer and in identifying genes that undergo 
methylation during cancer. We developed a mouse model of T/natural killer acute
lymphoblastic leukemia that is always preceded by polyclonal lymphocyte expansion
to determine how aberrant promoter DNA methylation and consequent gene silencing 
might be contributing to leukemic transformation. We used restriction landmark
genomic scanning with this mouse model of preleukemia reproducibly progressing to
leukemia to show that specific genomic methylation is associated with only the
leukemic phase and is not random. We also identified Idb4 as a putative
tumor-suppressor gene that is methylated in most mouse and human leukemias but in
only a minority of other human cancers.

PMID: 15723065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biol Reprod. 2005 May;72(5):1205-17. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

The helix-loop-helix inhibitor of differentiation (ID) proteins induce
post-mitotic terminally differentiated Sertoli cells to re-enter the cell cycle
and proliferate.

Chaudhary J(1), Sadler-Riggleman I, Ague JM, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman,Washington 99164-4231, USA.

Prior to puberty the Sertoli cells undergo active cell proliferation, and at the 
onset of puberty they become a terminally differentiated postmitotic cell
population that support spermatogenesis. The molecular mechanisms involved in the
postmitotic block of pubertal and adult Sertoli cells are unknown. The four known
helix-loop-helix ID proteins (i.e., Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) are considered
dominant negative regulators of cellular differentiation pathways and act as
positive regulators of cellular proliferation. ID proteins are expressed at low
levels by postpubertal Sertoli cells and are transiently induced by serum. The
hypothesis tested was that ID proteins can induce a terminally differentiated
postmitotic Sertoli cell to reenter the cell cycle if they are constitutively
expressed. To test this hypothesis, ID1 and ID2 were stably integrated and
individually overexpressed in postmitotic rat Sertoli cells. Overexpression of
ID1 or ID2 allowed postmitotic Sertoli cells to reenter the cell cycle and
undergo mitosis. The cells continued to proliferate even after 300 cell
doublings. The functional markers of Sertoli cell differentiation such as
transferrin, inhibin alpha, Sert1, and androgen binding protein (ABP) continued
to be expressed by the proliferating Sertoli cells, but at lower levels. FSH
receptor expression was lost in the proliferating Sertoli cell-Id lines. Some
Sertoli cell genes, such as cyclic protein 2 (cathepsin L) and Sry-related HMG
box protein-11 (Sox11) increase in expression. At no stage of proliferation did
the cells exhibit senescence. The expression profile as determined with a
microarray protocol of the Sertoli cell-Id lines suggested an overall increase in
cell cycle genes and a decrease in growth inhibitory genes. These results
demonstrate that overexpression of ID1 and ID2 genes in a postmitotic, terminally
differentiated cell type have the capacity to induce reentry into the cell cycle.
The observations are discussed in regards to potential future applications in
model systems of terminally differentiated cell types such as neurons or
myocytes.

PMID: 15647457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Dec;89(12):6105-11.

Id1 gene expression is up-regulated in hyperplastic and neoplastic thyroid tissue
and regulates growth and differentiation in thyroid cancer cells.

Kebebew E(1), Peng M, Treseler PA, Clark OH, Duh QY, Ginzinger D, Miner R.

Author information: 
(1)San Francisco Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143-1674, USA. kebebewe@surgery.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Oct;90(10):5906-7.

The Id (inhibitor of DNA binding) proteins are a family of helix-loop-helix (HLH)
proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) that lack the basic domain necessary for DNA
binding. The Id1 protein enhances cell proliferation and inhibits cellular
differentiation in a variety of cell types. We have previously demonstrated that 
the Id1 gene is up-regulated in papillary and medullary thyroid cancers. In this 
study we characterized the expression and distribution of the Id1 protein in
normal, hyperplastic, and neoplastic human thyroid tissue. We also evaluated the 
effect of the Id1 gene on thyroid cancer cell growth and markers of thyroid cell 
differentiation. We used semiquantitative immunohistochemistry to characterize
Id1 protein expression in normal, hyperplastic (multinodular goiter and Graves'
disease), and neoplastic thyroid tissue from 103 patients. Normal thyroid tissue 
had the lowest level of Id1 protein expression (P < 0.0001). Anaplastic thyroid
cancer had the highest level (vs. benign and malignant thyroid tissues, P <
0.01). Id1 protein expression was higher in malignant thyroid tissue than in
hyperplastic thyroid tissue (P < 0.02). We found no significant association
between the level of Id1 protein expression and patient age, sex,
tumor-node-metastasis stage, tumor size, primary tumor vs. lymph node metastasis,
primary tumor vs. recurrent tumors, and extent of tumor differentiation.
Inhibiting Id1 mRNA expression in thyroid cancer cell lines using Id1 antisense
oligonucleotides resulted in growth inhibition (P < 0.03) and decreased
thyroglobulin and sodium-iodine symporter mRNA expression (P < 0.02). In
conclusion, Id1 is overexpressed in hyperplastic and neoplastic thyroid tissue
and directly regulates the growth of thyroid cancer cells of follicular cell
origin, but is not a marker of aggressive phenotype in differentiated thyroid
cancer.

PMID: 15579766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 15;10(22):7475-83.

Epigenetic inactivation of ID4 in colorectal carcinomas correlates with poor
differentiation and unfavorable prognosis.

Umetani N(1), Takeuchi H, Fujimoto A, Shinozaki M, Bilchik AJ, Hoon DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, and Division of Gastrointestinal Oncology,
John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica, California 90404, USA.

PURPOSE: ID4 gene is a member of the inhibitor of DNA binding (ID) family
proteins that inhibit DNA binding of basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors. The epigenetic inactivation of ID4 gene on colorectal cancer (CRC)
development and its clinical significance was assessed.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In CRC cell lines, ID4 methylation status of the promoter
region was assessed by methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite sequencing. The
mRNA expression level was assessed by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-PCR. The methylation status of 9 normal epithelia, 13 adenomas, 92 
primary CRCs, and 26 liver metastases was assessed by methylation-specific PCR.
ID4 protein expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry analysis of tissue
specimen.
RESULTS: CRC cell lines were shown to be hypermethylated, and mRNA expression was
suppressed and could be restored by 5-aza-cytidine treatment. In clinical
specimens from normal epithelia, adenomas, primary CRCs, and liver metastases,
the frequency of ID4 hypermethylation was 0 of 9 (0%), 0 of 13 (0%), 49 of 92
(53%), and 19 of 26 (73%), respectively, with a significant elevation according
to CRC pathological progression. Methylation status of primary CRCs significantly
correlated with histopathological tumor grade (P = 0.028). Immunohistochemistry
analysis showed ID4 expression of normal colon epithelia, adenomas, and
unmethylated primary CRCs but not hypermethylated CRC specimens. Among 76
American Joint Committee on Cancer stage I to IV patients who had undergone
curative surgical resection, overall survival was significantly poorer in
patients with hypermethylated ID4 bearing tumors (P = 0.0066).
CONCLUSIONS: ID4 gene is a potential tumor suppressor gene for which methylation 
status may play an important role in the CRC progression.

PMID: 15569977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Adv Cancer Res. 2004;92:81-94.

A role for Id proteins in mammary gland physiology and tumorigenesis.

de Candia P(1), Benera R, Solit DB.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Program in Cell Biology and Department
of Medicine, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Id helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are regulators of cell growth and
differentiation in embryonic and adult tissues. They are members of the basic HLH
family of transcription factors but lack a DNA binding domain. By binding to
basic HLH transcription factors, Id proteins regulate gene expression. Id1 and
Id3 have extensive sequence homology and similar patterns of expression during
embryogenesis and in adult tissues. They are also expressed at high levels in the
endothelial cells of tumor-infiltrating blood vessels, and breast tumors
spontaneously arising in MMTV-neu mice demonstrate impaired angiogenesis when
growing in an Id1- and/or Id3-deficient background. These lesions are typically
cystic with a small rim of viable tumor cells surrounding an acellular necrotic
core. Id2 plays a critical role in breast differentiation and lactation. Id4
regulates BRCA1 expression and may be involved in hormone-dependent regulation of
BRCA1 homeostasis. Thus, all four members of the Id protein family play pivotal
roles in distinct aspects of normal and malignant breast biology, the subject of 
this review.

PMID: 15530557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 2004 Nov;131(21):5441-8. Epub 2004 Oct 6.

Id4 regulates neural progenitor proliferation and differentiation in vivo.

Yun K(1), Mantani A, Garel S, Rubenstein J, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Genetics and the Norris Cotton Cancer Center,
Dartmouth Medical School, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, 1 Medical Center
Drive, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

The mechanisms that determine whether a precursor cell re-enters the cell cycle
or exits and differentiates are crucial in determining the types and numbers of
cells that constitute a particular organ. Here, we report that Id4 is required
for normal brain size, and regulates lateral expansion of the proliferative zone 
in the developing cortex and hippocampus. In its absence, proliferation of stem
cells in the ventricular zone (VZ) is compromised. In early cortical progenitors,
Id4 is required for the normal G1-S transition. By contrast, at later ages,
ectopically positioned proliferating cells are found in the mantle zone of the
Id4-/- cortex. These observations, together with evidence for the premature
differentiation of early cortical stem cells, indicate that Id4 has a unique and 
complex function in regulating neural stem cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMID: 15469968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Mol Biol. 2004 Oct 15;343(2):361-70.

Ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Id1 and Id3 is mediated by the COP9
signalosome.

Berse M(1), Bounpheng M, Huang X, Christy B, Pollmann C, Dubiel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Molecular Biology, Charité,
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Monbijoustrasse 2, D-10117, Germany.

Recently, evidence is accumulating pointing to a function of the COP9 signalosome
(CSN) in regulation of ubiquitination by specific ubiquitin ligases. Here, we
demonstrate by mammalian two-hybrid analysis that the transcriptional regulators 
and substrates of the ubiquitin system Id1 and Id3, but not Id2 and Id4, bind to 
the CSN subunit CSN5. Pull-down experiments revealed that Id3 physically
interacts with the CSN complex. Additional far Western and pull-down studies with
Id3 support our two-hybrid data and show that the transcription regulator can
bind to CSN5 and CSN7. Recombinant Id3 is not phosphorylated by the
CSN-associated kinases CK2 and PKD. However, it inhibits c-Jun and CSN2
phosphorylation by the isolated CSN complex and by the recombinant CK2. The
inhibitors of CSN associated kinases, curcumin and emodin, significantly induce
ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation of transiently expressed Id3 
in HeLa cells. Proteasome-dependent degradation of endogenous Id1 in HeLa cells
is also stimulated by treatment with curcumin or emodin. Ubiquitination of Id3 is
shown directly by cotransfection of HeLa cells with Id3 and His-ubiquitin cDNA.
Curcumin increased Id3-ubiquitin conjugate formation, as shown by Western
blotting and His-pull-downs. In addition, overexpression of CSN2 leads to
stabilization of Id3 protein. On the basis of these data, it is speculated that
CSN-mediated phosphorylation inhibits ubiquitination of Id1 and Id3.

PMID: 15451666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Development. 2004 Sep;131(17):4131-42. Epub 2004 Jul 27.

Interactions between ID and OLIG proteins mediate the inhibitory effects of BMP4 
on oligodendroglial differentiation.

Samanta J(1), Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine, Department of
Neurology, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling inhibits the generation of
oligodendroglia and enhances generation of astrocytes by neural progenitor cells 
both in vitro and in vivo. This study examined the mechanisms underlying the
effects of BMP signaling on glial lineage commitment. Treatment of cultured
neural progenitor cells with BMP4 induced expression of all four members of the
inhibitor of differentiation (ID) family of helix-loop-helix transcriptional
inhibitors and blocked oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage commitment. Overexpression of
Id4 or Id2 but not Id1 or Id3 in cultured progenitor cells reproduced both the
inhibitory effects of BMP4 treatment on OL lineage commitment and the stimulatory
effects on astrogliogenesis. Conversely, decreasing the levels of Id4 mRNA by RNA
interference enhanced OL differentiation and inhibited the effects of BMP4 on
glial lineage commitment. This suggests that induction of Id4 expression mediates
effects of BMP signaling. Bacterial two-hybrid and co-immunoprecipitation studies
demonstrated that ID4, and to a lesser extent ID2, complexed with the
basic-helix-loop-helix transcription (bHLH) factors OLIG1 and OLIG2, which are
required for the generation of OLs. By contrast, ID1 and ID3 did not complex with
the OLIG proteins. In addition, the OLIG and ID proteins both interacted with the
E2A proteins E12 and E47. Further, exposure of cultured progenitor cells to BMP4 
changed the intracellular localization of OLIG1 and OLIG2 from a predominantly
nuclear to a predominantly cytoplasmic localization. These observations suggest
that the induction of ID4 and ID2, and their sequestration of both OLIG proteins 
and E2A proteins mediate the inhibitory effects of BMP signaling on OL lineage
commitment and contribute to the generation of astrocytes.

PMID: 15280210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Anim Sci. 2004 Jan;82(1):32-40.

Evaluation of gene expression in pigs selected for enhanced reproduction using
differential display PCR: II. Anterior pituitary.

Bertani GR(1), Gladney CD, Johnson RK, Pomp D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Nebraska, Lincoln 68583-0908, USA.

The objective of this study was to identify differentially expressed genes in the
anterior pituitary (AP) of sows selected for enhanced reproductive phenotypes.
Selection in the Index (I) line was based on an index of ovulation rate and
embryo survival, whereas random selection was used in the Control (C) line.
Average numbers of fully formed piglets at birth were 12.5 +/- 1.5 and 9.9 +/-
2.0 for Line I and C sows used in this study, respectively. In order to induce
luteolysis and synchronize follicle development, sows were injected (i.m.) with 2
mL of prostaglandin F2alpha analog between d 12 and 14 of the estrous cycle.
Tissue was harvested 2 d (d2) or 4 d (d4) after injection, resulting in four
experimental groups: Cd2 (n = 6), Cd4 (n = 4), Id2 (n = 6), and Id4 (n = 7).
Differential display PCR (ddPCR) was used to search for transcriptional changes
between selection lines in the AP, using samples within line but pooled across
days. Northern hybridization was used to confirm ddPCR results. For ddPCR, two
pools were used from each line (C and I). Three genes were confirmed to be
differentially expressed between Lines I and C: G-beta like protein, ferritin
heavy-chain, and follicle stimulating hormone beta subunit, whereas many other
expressed sequence tags were observed to be differentially expressed but still
require confirmation. Our findings indicate that long-term selection to increase 
ovulation rate and decrease embryo mortality has altered transcriptional patterns
in the anterior pituitary, most likely as correlated responses.

PMID: 14753346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 15;264(2):339-51.

Cloning and characterization of Xenopus Id4 reveals differing roles for Id genes.

Liu KJ(1), Harland RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 401 Barker Hall, University of
California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

We have identified Xenopus Id4, a member of the Id (inhibitor of
differentiation/DNA binding) class of helix-loop-helix proteins. Id factors
dimerize with general bHLH factors, preventing their interaction with
tissue-specific bHLH factors, to inhibit premature differentiation. The presence 
of several Id proteins could reflect simple redundancy in function, or more
interestingly, might suggest different activities for these proteins. During
embryonic development, Xenopus Id4 is expressed in a number of neural tissues,
including Rohon-Beard neurons, olfactory placode, eye primordia, and the
trigeminal ganglia. It is also expressed in other organs, such as the pronephros 
and liver primordium. As embryogenesis progresses, it is expressed in the
migrating melanocytes and lateral line structures. We compare the expression of
Id4 mRNA with that of Id2 and Id3 and find that the Id genes are expressed in
complementary patterns during neurogenesis, myogenesis, kidney development, in
the tailbud, and in the migrating neural crest. To examine the regulation of Id
gene expression during Xenopus neural development, we show that expression of Id3
and Id4 can be induced by overexpression of BMP4 in the whole embryo and in
ectodermal explants. Expression of Id2, Id3, and Id4 in these explants is
unaffected by the expression of FGF-8 or a dominant-negative Ras (N17ras),
suggesting that Id genes are not regulated by the FGF signaling pathway in naive 
ectoderm. We also show that Notch signaling can activate Id2 and Id3 expression
in the whole embryo. In contrast, Id4 expression in the Rohon-Beard cells is
inhibited by activated Notch and increased by a dominant-negative Delta. This may
reflect an increase in Rohon-Beard cells in response to inhibition of Notch
signaling rather than transcriptional regulation of Id4. Finally, to compare the 
activities of Id2, Id3, and Id4, we use animal cap explants and in vivo
overexpression to show that Id proteins can differentially inhibit the activities
of neurogenin and neuroD, both neurogenic bHLH molecules and MyoD, a myogenic
bHLH protein. Id4 is able to inhibit the activity all these bHLH molecules, Id2
inhibits MyoD and neuroD, while Id3 blocks only neuroD activity in our assays.

PMID: 14651922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2003 Apr;8(2):225-39.

Helix-loop-helix proteins in mammary gland development and breast cancer.

Desprez PY(1), Sumida T, Coppé JP.

Author information: 
(1)California Pacific Medical Center, Cancer Research Institute, San Francisco,
California 94115, USA. pdesprez@cooper.cpmc.org

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors functions in
the coordinated regulation of gene expression, cell lineage commitment, and cell 
differentiation in most mammalian tissues. Helix-loop-helix Id (Inhibitor of DNA 
binding) proteins are distinct from bHLH transcription factors in that they lack 
the basic domain necessary for DNA binding. Id proteins thus function as dominant
negative regulators of bHLH transcription factors. The inhibition of bHLH factor 
activity by forced constitutive expression of Id proteins is closely associated
with the inhibition of differentiation in a number of different cell types,
including mammary epithelial cells. Moreover, recent literature suggests
important roles of HLH proteins in many normal and transformed tissues, including
mammary gland. Therefore, future directions for prognosis or therapeutic
treatments of breast cancer may be able to exploit bHLH and Id genes as useful
molecular targets. The purpose of this review is to summarize the evidence
implicating HLH proteins in the regulation of normal and transformed mammary
epithelial cell phenotypes.

PMID: 14635797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Am J Pathol. 2003 Dec;163(6):2495-502.

Id4 regulates mammary epithelial cell growth and differentiation and is
overexpressed in rat mammary gland carcinomas.

Shan L(1), Yu M, Qiu C, Snyderwine EG.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis,
National Cancer Institute Center for Cancer Research, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4262, USA.

Id4 belongs to a family of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins that impact cellular
growth and differentiation via regulation of basic HLH transcription factors.
Herein the rat Id4 gene was cloned (GenBank Accession No. AF468681). The
expression of rat Id4 was examined in rat mammary gland tumors induced by
2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP), a carcinogen found in the
human diet. By real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis, relative expression 
of Id4 mRNA in carcinomas, adenomas, and normal tissue was 27, 6, and 1,
respectively. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated statistically elevated
nuclear expression for Id4 protein in carcinomas in comparison to adenomas and
normal mammary gland. In carcinomas, Id4 nuclear expression was positively
correlated with proliferation, invasiveness, and tumor weight (Fisher Exact Test 
or Spearman Correlation, P < 0.05). The consequence of enforced expression of Id4
on mammary epithelial cell proliferation, differentiation, and growth in soft
agar was examined in HC11 cells, a well-characterized model for studying various 
aspects of mammary epithelial cell biology. After transient and stable
transfection of HC11 cells, Id4 overexpression increased cell proliferation and
inhibited lactogenic hormone-mediated differentiation as revealed by inhibition
of beta-casein promoter activity and beta-casein expression. In addition,
enforced expression of Id4 in HC11 cells induced a statistically significant
increase in colony growth in soft agar. The results implicate Id4 in rat mammary 
gland carcinogenesis and suggest that Id4 may contribute to carcinogenesis by
inhibiting mammary epithelial cell differentiation and stimulating mammary
epithelial cell growth.

PMCID: PMC1892385
PMID: 14633621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 9;22(44):6946-53.

Downregulation of ID4 by promoter hypermethylation in gastric adenocarcinoma.

Chan AS(1), Tsui WY, Chen X, Chu KM, Chan TL, Chan AS, Li R, So S, Yuen ST, Leung
SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Hong Kong.

Promoter hypermethylation has become apparent as a common mechanism of gene
silencing in cancer. Based on our published microarray expression data, we
noticed a prominent downregulation of ID4 in gastric adenocarcinoma. The dense 5'
CpG island covering the previously mapped upstream promoter of ID4 has prompted
us to relate its downregulation to promoter hypermethylation. ID proteins are
distinct members in the helix-loop-helix family of transcriptional regulators,
which modulate various key developmental processes. Emerging data have suggested 
the involvement of ID genes in tumorigenesis. In this study using bisulfite
genomic sequencing, we have found hypermethylation of ID4 promoter in most
gastric cancer cell lines and 30% of primary tumors. This correlated with
decreased level of ID4 expression. Restoration of ID4 expression in various
gastric cancer cell lines was achieved by treatment with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, which at times required the
synergistic action of the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, but not
with trichostatin A alone. Re-expression was accompanied by the corresponding ID4
promoter demethylation. Furthermore, we have found significant association of ID4
promoter methylation with hMLH1 promoter methylation (P=0.008) and microsatellite
instability (P=0.006). Overall, our results have shown that transcriptional
silencing of ID4 is related to the aberrant methylation of its promoter in
gastric cancer. The significant association of ID4 and hMLH1 promoter
hypermethylation suggested that ID4 may also be among the genes being targeted in
the CpG island methylator phenotype tumorigenic pathway.

PMID: 14534543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Haematologica. 2003 Sep;88(9):994-1001.

Id4 is deregulated by a t(6;14)(p22;q32) chromosomal translocation in a B-cell
lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Bellido M(1), Aventín A, Lasa A, Estivill C, Carnicer MJ, Pons C, Matías-Guiu X, 
Bordes R, Baiget M, Sierra J, Nomdedéu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratori d'Hematologia, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Avda Sant
Antoni M. Claret 167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Chromosome translocations resulting in gene
overexpression are commonly associated with lymphoid neoplasia. Enhancer elements
of the immunoglobulin or T-cell receptor (TCR) loci are abnormally located in the
vicinity of the entire coding sequences of genes which exert an influence on the 
normal maturation and differentiation program of lymphoid cells.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A patient who presented with a B-cell lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia had a t(6;14)(p22;q32). Cytogenetic and molecular findings
confirmed the involvement of IgH. Molecular cloning of the breakpoint revealed
that this was located near the coding sequence of the Id4 gene, a
helix-loop-helix (HLH) inhibitor protein. Alu-repeated sequences at the 6p22 end 
flanked a short stretch of 10 bases shared by the 6p22 and 14q32 ends, suggesting
that a deletion or a looping-Alu mediated mispairing mechanism may lead to this
chromosome translocation.
RESULTS: Northern blot and real-time polymerase chain reaction analyses showed
that the Id4 mRNA was abnormally overexpressed in this case. Only the two smaller
Id4 mRNA products were detected (1.6 and 1.1 kb). Immunohistochemical analysis of
Id4 protein was also assayed in a series of hematologic malignancies. Marked
overexpression was found in two cases of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemias and in
four B-cell lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia including one case with the
t(8;14) and another case with a p53 mutation.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The Id4 gene may behave as an oncogene in some
human leukemias, perhaps through its capacity to sequester specific B-cell
transcription factors. A genetic recombination between Alu-repeated sequences may
not be the exclusive mechanism of generating pathogenic chromosomal
translocations.

PMID: 12969807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Arch Bronconeumol. 2003 Feb;39(2):74-80.

[Sequential use of nocturnal pulse oximetry and respiratory polygraphy (AutoSet) 
for diagnosing sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome in high risk patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez García MA(1), Soler Cataluña JJ, Román Sánchez P.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neumología. Hospital General de Requena. Valencia. Spain.
med013413@nacom.es

OBJECTIVE: To construct an algorithm for the diagnosis of sleep apnea/hypopnea
syndrome (SAHS) based on the optimized sequential use of nocturnal pulse oximetry
and respiratory polygraphy (AutoSet, AS) in patients suspected of SAHS.
METHODS: Simultaneous performance of pulse oximetry and AS in 145 patients highly
suspected of SAHS (at least two of the following signs or symptoms: chronic
snoring, observations of repeated apneic events, and abnormal daytime
drowsiness). SAHS was diagnosed when the apnea/hypopnea index (AHI) was greater
than or equal to 10, based on AS findings. The diagnostic algorithm was obtained 
by calculating the prevalence of SAHS, calculating the best diagnostic cutoff
point for a desaturation index greater than or equal to 4% (ID4%) based on the
AHI; analyzing the positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value 
(NPV) for the cutoff and the correlation and agreement between ID4% and the AHI
depending on the presence and severity of SAHS.
RESULTS: The overall prevalence of SAHS was 83.4%. The best cutoff point was
obtained using ID4% greater than or equal to 10 (sensitivity 82%; specificity
83%). The PPV and NPV for the prevalence calculated were 0.95 and 0.29,
respectively. The correlation between ID4% and AHI was 0.84; overall agreement
was 0.93. For patients who did not have SAHS, the PPV was 0.49, and the NPV was
0.35; both gradually increased in cases of mild, moderate and severe SAHS (to
0.90 and 0.95, respectively, for severe SAHS). Using these data we created a
diagnostic algorithm according to which an ID4% greater than or equal to 30 for
nocturnal pulse oximetry (sensitivity 72%, specificity 100%) would indicate that 
AS testing would be unnecessary. An ID4% less than 30, on the other hand, would
lead to further testing (AS, or polysomnography in the event of a negative AS),
based on the high prevalence of SAHS in our series.
CONCLUSIONS: The sequential use of nocturnal pulse oximetry and AS allows
substantial savings of polysomnographic testing in groups at high risk of SAHS.

PMID: 12586047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Exp Dermatol. 2002 Dec;11(6):542-55.

Genes that are differentially expressed in rat vibrissa follicle germinative
epithelium in vivo show altered expression patterns after extended organ culture.

Whitehouse CJ(1), Huckle JW, Demarchez M, Reynolds AJ, Jahoda CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Durham, South Road, Durham,
UK.

Hair growth depends on maintenance of signalling between the dermal papilla and
the germinative epithelium (GE), from which the differentiated layers of the hair
fibre originate. Because no molecular studies have been reported which
concentrate specifically on GE cells either in vivo or in vitro, we prepared a
cDNA library enriched for messages which were highly expressed in GE cells to
identify genes that may be involved in hair growth control. Of 35 subtracted
library clones sequenced, 23 shared extensive homology with previously determined
cDNA sequences, including LEF-1 and id4. Hair follicle organ culture models are
often used to investigate the molecular basis of hair growth, although hair
growth arrest occurs relatively rapidly in vitro. As an indicator of their role
in follicle activities, we compared the expression of GE-specific clones in
different regions of freshly isolated vibrissa follicles, with the corresponding 
regions of growth arrested, cultured follicles. Changes in the expression of some
of these clones indicates that they could be related to fundamental cellular
activities in the follicle. A library enriched for GE-specific clones therefore
provides a useful source of candidate molecules for studies of follicular
epithelial cell behaviour, both in vivo and in vitro.

PMID: 12473062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Eur Respir J. 2002 Jun;19(6):1064-71.

Alterations in gene expression in hamster diaphragm after emphysema and lung
volume reduction surgery.

Reynders V(1), Marchand E, Gayan-Ramirez G, De Leyn P, Verhoeven G, Decramer M.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Muscle Research Unit, University Hospitals, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

The authors have demonstrated previously that emphysema and lung volume reduction
surgery (LVRS) resulted in a significant shift of type IIx/b to type IIa fibres
in the diaphragm of hamsters with elastase-induced emphysema. To explore the
mechanisms leading to this fibre switching, the mRNA expression of the myogenic
regulatory factors, the inhibitors of DNA binding proteins (Id-proteins) and
insulin-like growth factor-I were examined. Ribonucleic acid was extracted from
the diaphragm of control, emphysematous, emphysematous and sham operated and LVRS
hamsters and subjected to reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Compared to control, the ratio MyoD to myogenin declined with emphysema, sham and
even more after LVRS, due to a decrease in MyoD mRNA and an increase in myogenin 
mRNA. Similarly, compared to control, Id-1 protein mRNA levels decreased
significantly in sham and even more in LVRS. Id-2 protein mRNA levels decreased
in all groups, but reached statistical significance in LVRS only, compared to
control.IN CONCLUSION: 1) the reduced MyoD/myogenin ratio may be the mechanism of
the shift to a slower fibre type, 2) the decreased MyoD/myogenin ratio in lung
volume reduction surgery animals suggests that lung volume reduction surgery
enhances rather than decreases the load placed on the diaphragm and 3) the
observed down-regulation of the inhibiting factors may facilitate the diaphragm
adaptation to overload.

PMID: 12108858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 28;99(11):7560-5.

BRCA1 transcriptionally regulates genes involved in breast tumorigenesis.

Welcsh PL(1), Lee MK, Gonzalez-Hernandez RM, Black DJ, Mahadevappa M, Swisher EM,
Warrington JA, King MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Health
Sciences Room K-160, Seattle, WA 98195-7720, USA.

Loss of function of BRCA1 caused by inherited mutation and tissue-specific
somatic mutation leads to breast and ovarian cancer. Nearly all BRCA1 germ-line
mutations involve truncation or loss of the C-terminal BRCT transcriptional
activation domain, suggesting that transcriptional regulation is a critical
function of the wild-type gene. The purpose of this project was to determine
whether there is a link between the role of BRCA1 in transcriptional regulation
and its role in tumor suppression. We developed a cell line (in which BRCA1 can
be induced) and used microarray analysis to compare transcription profiles of
epithelial cells with low endogenous levels of BRCA1 vs. transcription profiles
of cells with 2-4-fold higher induced levels of expression of BRCA1. At these
levels of expression, BRCA1 did not induce apoptosis. Undirected cluster analysis
of six paired experiments revealed 373 genes, the expression of which was altered
significantly and consistently by BRCA1 induction. Expression of 62 genes was
altered more than 2-fold. BRCA1-regulated genes associated with breast
tumorigenesis included the estrogen-responsive genes MYC and cyclin D1, which are
overexpressed in many breast tumors; STAT1 and JAK1, key components of the
cytokine signal transduction pathway; the extracellular matrix protein laminin
3A; ID4, an inhibitor of DNA-binding transcriptional activators, which in turn
negatively regulates BRCA1 expression; and the prohormone stanniocalcin,
expression of which is lost in breast tumor cells. Coordinated expression of
BRCA1 with ID4 and with stanniocalcin was confirmed in primary breast and ovarian
tumors.

PMCID: PMC124283
PMID: 12032322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Anal Biochem. 2002 Mar 1;302(1):38-51.

Microarray analysis of E-box binding-related gene expression in young and
replicatively senescent human fibroblasts.

Semov A(1), Marcotte R, Semova N, Ye X, Wang E.

Author information: 
(1)Bloomfield Center for Research in Aging, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.

An E-box (CACGTG) designer microarray was developed to monitor a group of genes
whose expressions share a particular regulatory mode. Sensitivity and specificity
of microarray hybridization, as well as variability of microarray data, were
evaluated. This designer microarray was used to generate expression profiles of
E-box binding-related genes in WI-38 fibroblast cultures at three different
growth states: low-passage replicating, low-passage contact-inhibited quiescent, 
and replicatively senescent. Microarray gene screening reveals that quiescent and
senescent cells, in comparison with replicating ones, are characterized by
downregulation of Pam, a protein associated with c-Myc, and upregulation of Mad
family genes, Max dimerization proteins. Moreover, quiescence and senescence can 
be distinguished by increased expression of Irlb, c-Myc transcription factor, and
Miz-1, c-Myc-interacting Zn finger protein 1, only in the former state.
Senescence is characterized by downregulation of Id4, inhibitor of DNA binding 4,
and Mitf, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, in comparison with
young replicating and quiescent states. Differential expression of genes detected
by microarray hybridization was independently confirmed by reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction technique. Alterations in the expression of
E-box-binding transcription factors and c-Myc-binding proteins demonstrate the
importance of these genes in establishing the contact-inhibited quiescent or
senescent phenotypes.

PMID: 11846374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8334-41.

The Id proteins and angiogenesis.

Benezra R(1), Rafii S, Lyden D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York 
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. r-benezra@ski.mskcc.org

Since the identification of the Id proteins over a decade ago, a great many cell 
cycle and cell fate decisions have been shown to be under the control of these
proteins as described in other sections of this review issue. Perhaps the most
unsuspected activity of this class of proteins has been their essential role in
angiogenesis, both in the forebrain during development and during the growth and 
metastasis of tumors in adults. This section of the review issue will focus on
the key observations which have led to these conclusions, speculations about
potential mechanisms and the outlook for potential therapeutic interventions.

PMID: 11840326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8326-33.

Id proteins at the cross-road of development and cancer.

Lasorella A(1), Uo T, Iavarone A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

A large body of evidence has been accumulated that demonstrates dominant effects 
of Id proteins on different aspects of cellular growth. Generally, constitutive
expression of Id not only blocks cell differentiation but also drives
proliferation. In some settings, it is sufficient to render cells immortal or
induce oncogenic transformation. The participation of Id proteins in advanced
human malignancy, where they are frequently deregulated, has been dramatically
bolstered by the recent discovery that Id exert pivotal contributions to many of 
the essential alterations that collectively dictate malignant growth. Relentless 
proliferation associated with self-sufficiency in growth signals and
insensitivity to growth inhibitory signals, sustained neoangiogenesis, tissue
invasiveness and migration capabilities of tumor cells all share dependency on
the unlimited availability of Id proteins. It is remarkable that many of these
features recapitulate those physiologically propelled by Id proteins to support
normal development. We propose that the participation of Id in multiple
fundamental traits of cancer may be the basis for unprecedented therapeutic
opportunities.

PMID: 11840325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8317-25.

Id proteins in cell cycle control and cellular senescence.

Zebedee Z(1), Hara E.

Author information: 
(1)CRC Cell Cycle Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie
Hospital NHS Trust, Wilmslow Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

The Id family of helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are thought to affect the
balance between cell growth and differentiation by negatively regulating the
function of basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. Although it has 
been suggested for some time that Id is involved in cell cycle regulation, little
is known about the molecular mechanism of this control. Recent studies, however, 
have revealed that Id binds to important cell cycle regulatory proteins other
than bHLH proteins. Two such proteins, pRB (retinoblastoma tumour suppressor
protein) family proteins and Ets-family transcription factors are known to play
key roles in cell cycle regulation, transformation and tumour suppression.
Through the characterization of these pathways we will begin to understand the
mechanisms by which Id controls normal and abnormal cell cycle progression.

PMID: 11840324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8308-16.

The regulation and function of the Id proteins in lymphocyte development.

Rivera R(1), Murre C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 0366, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. r3@biomail.ucsd.edu

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are essential factors for lymphocyte development 
and function. One class of HLH proteins, the E-proteins, regulate many aspects of
lymphocyte maturation, survival, proliferation, and differentiation. E-proteins
are negatively regulated by another class of HLH proteins known as the Id
proteins. The Id proteins function as dominant negative inhibitors of E-proteins 
by inhibiting their ability to bind DNA. Here we discuss the function and
regulation of the Id proteins in lymphocyte development.

PMID: 11840323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 20;20(58):8290-8.

Id and development.

Yokota Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Fukui Medical University, Shimoaizuki 23-3,
Matsuoka, Fukui 910-1193, Japan. yyokota@fmsrsa.fukui-med.ac.jp

During development, it is obvious that enormous multiplication and
diversification of cells is required to build a body plan from a single
fertilized egg and that these two processes, proliferation and differentiation,
must be coordinated properly. Id proteins, negative regulators of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors, possess the ability to inhibit
differentiation and to stimulate proliferation, and are useful molecules for
investigating the mechanisms regulating development. In the past few years, our
understanding of the roles of Id proteins has been substantially enhanced by the 
detailed investigation of genetically modified animals. The data have indicated
that the functions of Id proteins in vivo are functionally related to those
revealed by earlier work in cell culture systems. However, unexpected organs and 
cell types have also been found to require Id proteins for their normal
development. This review looks at the advances made in our understanding of the
in vivo functions of Id proteins. The topics discussed include neurogenesis,
natural killer cell development, lymphoid organogenesis, mammary gland
development and spermatogenesis.

PMID: 11840321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):341-5.

Id4 expression and its relationship to other Id genes during avian embryonic
development.

Kee Y(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 139-74 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

We present the sequence and expression pattern of chick Id4 and compare its
distribution to that of other vertebrate Id genes. At early stages, Id4
expression is discrete, with transcript transiently expressed in subsets of
migrating neural crest cells, the dorsal myocardium, the segmental plate
mesoderm, and the tail bud. Later, expression is also observed in the
telencephalic vesicles and corneal epithelium. Of all the Id genes, Id4 exhibits 
the most restricted pattern in the developing nervous system, with little
expression in the presumptive neural crest or placodes. Id4 appears in the neural
tube much later than other Id genes. However, all four Id genes display
overlapping patterns in the branchial arches and tail bud.

PMID: 11731247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2001 Jun;46(7):821-8.

[Cell-intrinsic timer regulating oligodendrocyte development].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London.

PMID: 11431925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Endocrinology. 2001 May;142(5):1727-36.

Hormonal regulation and differential actions of the helix-loop-helix
transcriptional inhibitors of differentiation (Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4) in Sertoli
cells.

Chaudhary J(1), Johnson J, Kim G, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4231, USA.

The testicular Sertoli cells support spermatogenesis by providing a
microenvironment and structural support for the developing germ cells. Sertoli
cell functions are regulated by the gonadotropin FSH. Sertoli cells become a
terminally differentiated nongrowing cell population in the adult. In response to
FSH, the Sertoli cells express a large number of differentiated gene products,
such as transferrin, which transports iron to the developing germ cells.
Previously, members of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription 
factors have been shown to influence FSH-mediated gene expression in Sertoli
cells. The functions of the bHLH proteins are modulated by Id (inhibitor of
differentiation) proteins, which lack the DNA-binding basic domain. The Id
proteins form transcriptionally inactive dimers with bHLH proteins and thus
regulate cell proliferation and differentiation. The current study investigated
the expression and function of Id proteins in the postmitotic Sertoli cell.
Freshly isolated and cultured Sertoli cells coexpress all four isoforms of Id
(Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4), as determined by immunoprecipitation with
isoform-specific anti-Id antibodies, RT-PCR, and Northern blot analysis. Id2 and 
Id3 expression levels seem higher than Id1. Interestingly, the expression of Id4 
in Sertoli cells is only detectable after stimulation with FSH or cAMP. The Id1
expression is down-regulated by FSH and cAMP, whereas Id2 and Id3 levels remain
unchanged in response to FSH. In contrast, serum induces the expression of Id1,
Id2, and Id3. Treatment of Sertoli cells with serum significantly reduces the
expression of the larger 4-kb Id4 transcript and promotes the presence of a novel
1.3-kb transcript of Id4. The regulatory role of FSH in the expression of all
four isoforms of Id is mimicked by a cAMP analog, suggesting that the actions of 
FSH are mediated through the protein kinase A pathway. An antisense approach was 
used to study the functional significance of Id proteins in Sertoli cells.
Antisense to Id1 stimulated transferrin promoter activity in a transient
transfection assay. Interestingly, an antisense to Id2 down-regulated transferrin
promoter activity. Id3 and Id4 antisense oligonucleotides had no effect on
FSH-mediated transferrin promoter activation. Contrary to the hypothesis that Id 
proteins have redundant functions, the results of the current study suggest that 
Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4 are differentially regulated and may have distinct
functions. Id1 may act to maintain Sertoli cell growth potential, whereas Id2 and
Id4 may be involved in the differentiation and hormone regulation of Sertoli
cells.

PMID: 11316735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 2;98(1):130-5.

Identification of Id4 as a regulator of BRCA1 expression by using a
ribozyme-library-based inverse genomics approach.

Beger C(1), Pierce LN, Kruger M, Marcusson EG, Robbins JM, Welcsh P, Welch PJ,
Welte K, King MC, Barber JR, Wong-Staal F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0665, USA.

Expression of the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1 is
down-regulated in sporadic breast and ovarian cancer cases. Therefore, the
identification of genes involved in the regulation of BRCA1 expression might lead
to new insights into the pathogenesis and treatment of these tumors. In the
present study, an "inverse genomics" approach based on a randomized ribozyme gene
library was applied to identify cellular genes regulating BRCA1 expression. A
ribozyme gene library with randomized target recognition sequences was introduced
into human ovarian cancer-derived cells stably expressing a selectable marker
[enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP)] under the control of the BRCA1
promoter. Cells in which BRCA1 expression was upregulated by particular ribozymes
were selected through their concomitant increase in EGFP expression. The cellular
target gene of one ribozyme was identified to be the dominant negative
transcriptional regulator Id4. Modulation of Id4 expression resulted in inversely
regulated expression of BRCA1. In addition, increase in Id4 expression was
associated with the ability of cells to exhibit anchorage-independent growth,
demonstrating the biological relevance of this gene. Our data suggest that Id4 is
a crucial gene regulating BRCA1 expression and might therefore be important for
the BRCA1 regulatory pathway involved in the pathogenesis of sporadic breast and 
ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC14556
PMID: 11136250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Sep 24;276(2):803-12.

Regulation of Id gene expression during embryonic stem cell-derived hematopoietic
differentiation.

Nogueira MM(1), Mitjavila-Garcia MT, Le Pesteur F, Filippi MD, Vainchenker W,
Dubart Kupperschmitt A, Sainteny F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U362, Villejuif,
France.

To elucidate the role of helix-loop-helix (HLH) Id proteins in hematopoietic
differentiation, we used a model of embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation in
vitro which gives access not only to hematopoietic myeloid progenitor cells but
also to the more primitive blast colony-forming cell (BL-CFC), the in vitro
equivalent of the hemangioblast that gives rise to blast cell colonies in the
presence of VEGF. We first demonstrated that ES cell-derived blast cell colonies 
could be used as a model to study hematopoietic differentiation and maturation.
We next established the expression profile of Id genes in this model. Transcripts
of the four Id genes were present in ES cells. Id1, Id3 and Id4 gene expression
was down-regulated during the development of blast cell colonies while that of
Id2 was maintained. Thus, Id1, Id3, and Id4 proteins are candidates for being
negative regulators of hematopoiesis in the model of hematopoietic ES cell
differentiation in vitro.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Histol Histopathol. 2000 Apr;15(2):603-18.

Id genes in nervous system development.

Andres-Barquin PJ(1), Hernandez MC, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0520, USA.

Id genes encode helix-loop-helix proteins that function to mediate processes
important for normal development including cellular differentiation,
proliferation and apoptosis. Id proteins act as negative regulators of other
transcription factors, which are essential for cell determination and
differentiation in diverse cell types, and interact with proteins important for
cell cycle regulation. Studies of Id gene expression in the nervous system and in
neural cells in culture indicate that Id proteins contribute to the regulation of
mammalian nervous system development. Also, recognition of a wide variety of
proteins with which Id transcription factors are capable of interacting suggests 
that it will be possible to understand more precisely their specific functions
and importantly how these are integrated.

PMID: 10809382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. EMBO J. 2000 May 2;19(9):1998-2007.

The Id4 HLH protein and the timing of oligodendrocyte differentiation.

Kondo T(1), Raff M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Developmental Neurobiology Programme, MRC Laboratory 
for Molecular Cell Biology and the Biology Department, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. t.kondo@ucl.ac.uk

An intracellular timer is thought to help control the timing of oligodendrocyte
differentiation. We show here that the expression of the helix-loop-helix gene
Id4 in oligodendrocyte precursor cells decreases in vivo and in vitro with a time
course expected if Id4 is part of the timer. We also show that Id4 expression
decreases prematurely when the precursor cells are induced to differentiate by
mitogen withdrawal. Both Id4 mRNA and protein decrease together under all of
these conditions, suggesting that the control of Id4 expression is
transcriptional. Finally, we show that enforced expression of Id4 stimulates cell
proliferation and blocks differentiation induced by either mitogen withdrawal or 
treatment with thyroid hormone. These findings suggest that a progressive fall in
Id4 transcription is part of the intracellular timer that helps determine when
oligodendrocyte precursor cells withdraw from the cell cycle and differentiate.

PMCID: PMC305683
PMID: 10790366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. FASEB J. 1999 Dec;13(15):2257-64.

Degradation of Id proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Bounpheng MA(1), Dimas JJ, Dodds SG, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular and Structural Biology University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245-3207, USA.

Id proteins act as negative regulators of bHLH transcription factors by forming
transcriptionally inactive protein complexes. The proposed function of these
proteins includes promotion of cell growth and cell cycle progression, induction 
of apoptosis, and inhibition of cellular differentiation. We investigated the
role of the ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway in the degradation of the Id3 
protein. We found Id3 to be a short-lived protein and estimated the half-life to 
be approximately 20 min in 293 cells. Using specific inhibitors of the 26S
proteasome and mutant fibroblast cells with a temperature-sensitive defect in the
essential E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, we show that Id3 and the related Id1
and Id2 proteins are degraded through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We found 
the Id4 protein to be much less sensitive to inhibitors of the 26S proteasome,
but its degradation was dependent on the E1 enzyme. In addition, we observed that
coexpression of the bHLH protein E47 with Id3 significantly reduced the rate of
degradation of Id3, suggesting that Id3 is less susceptible to degradation by the
26S proteasome when complexed to a bHLH protein. -Bounpheng, M. A., Dimas, J. J.,
Dodds, S. G., Christy, B. A. Degradation of Id proteins by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

PMID: 10593873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Immunol Lett. 1999 Apr 1;67(2):117-24.

Human T lymphocyte populations which bind to P- or E-selectin are enriched with
cells expressing core 2 O-glycans.

Mukasa R(1), Homma T, Hosono O, Yoshino S, Nishioka K, Fukuda M, Morimoto C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology and AIDS Research Center, Institute of
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The present study was undertaken to investigate whether core 2 O-glycans are
involved in binding of resting human T lymphocytes to P- or E-selectin and in
recruitment of these cells to inflammatory sites. Freshly isolated human
peripheral blood T lymphocytes were incubated with P- or E-selectin-coated
dishes, and expression of core 2 O-glycans by the adherent and nonadherent cells 
was examined using the anti-1D4 mAb, which specifically recognizes human CD43
modified with core 2 O-glycans. The results indicated that both the
P-selectin/adherent and E-selectin/adherent populations were significantly
enriched with ID4+ cells, as compared with the initial population. An enrichment 
of ID4+ cells in the P- and E-selectin/adherent populations was observed in both 
CD4 and CD8 T cell subsets and even in the CD45RO+ memory CD4 T-cell subset.
However, the anti-1D4 mAb did not inhibit binding of human T lymphocytes to P- or
E-selectin, indicating that the 1D4 antigen itself is not directly involved in
selectin binding. We also found that the percentage of ID4+ cells in synovial
fluid T lymphocytes of rheumatoid arthritis patients was significantly increased 
as compared with normal peripheral blood T lymphocytes. Taken together, our
results support the notion that core 2 O-glycans, which are located apart from
the ID4 antigen, are involved in binding of human resting T lymphocytes to both
P- and E-selectin, and these interactions may contribute to preferential
recruitment of human memory CD4 T lymphocytes to inflammatory sites, including
the synovium of rheumatoid arthritis patients.

PMID: 10232393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Mar 24;256(3):614-9.

Expression of the dominant-negative regulator Id4 is induced during adipocyte
differentiation.

Chen H(1), Weng YC, Schatteman GC, Sanders L, Christy RJ, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine/Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, 78245-3207, USA.

Expression of the Id4 gene was investigated during differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes into mature adipocytes. Id4 is a member of a family encoding
non-DNA binding helix-loop-helix proteins proposed to inhibit the activity of
basic HLH (bHLH) proteins important in many developmental processes. We show here
that Id4 expression is low in confluent preadipocytes and rapidly induced by
treatment with the combination of hormones which causes differentiation into
mature adipocytes. Id4 expression is also induced by treatment with individual
hormones, especially dexamathasone. Id4 mRNA can be detected in mouse and human
adipose tissue. Genes encoding E-proteins (bHLH proteins known to interact with
and be regulated by Id proteins) are expressed and regulated during
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. These data suggest that the Id4 transcriptional 
regulator is playing a role in adipose cell differentiation and suggest that
DNA-binding HLH proteins may also be important in regulation of differentiation
of these cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10080947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Mar 15;247(2):347-55.

Id4 expression induces apoptosis in astrocytic cultures and is down-regulated by 
activation of the cAMP-dependent signal transduction pathway.

Andres-Barquin PJ(1), Hernandez MC, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, 94143, USA.

The Id family of helix-loop-helix transcription factors has been implicated in
the regulation of cellular differentiation in several different lineages. We have
explored the potential regulatory role of the cyclic AMP-dependent signaling
pathway on Id gene expression in astroglial primary cultures. We found that
primary cultures of mouse forebrain astrocytes constitutively expressed the four 
known members of the Id gene family, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. During culture in
presence of serum for 4 weeks, the expression of Id4 was up-regulated. In these
same cultures, treatment with dibutyryl-cyclic AMP, a cyclic AMP analogue known
to promote astrocyte differentiation, dramatically and selectively decreased Id4 
gene expression. This effect was detectable after short-term treatment and was
maintained during long-term treatment. Forskolin and pentoxifylline, two other
agents known to elevate intracellular cyclic AMP through different mechanisms,
also potently decreased Id4 gene expression. Furthermore, overexpression of Id4
in an astrocyte-derived cell line induced cells to round up and die by apoptosis.
These results indicate that the cyclic AMP pathway acts as an inhibitor of Id4
gene expression in astrocytes, identify a new function for Id4, and suggest that 
Id4 is strategically positioned in the chain of molecular events regulating
astrocyte differentiation and apoptosis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10066362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Feb 25;247(1):94-104.

Differential biological activities of mammalian Id proteins in muscle cells.

Melnikova IN(1), Bounpheng M, Schatteman GC, Gilliam D, Christy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas, 78245-3207, USA.

Id proteins are helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factors that lack
DNA-binding domains. These proteins form inactive heterodimers with basic HLH
(bHLH) factors, inhibiting their DNA-binding and transcriptional activities.
Consistent with a proposed role for Id proteins as inhibitors of terminal
differentiation, Id1 and Id3 have been shown to negatively regulate myogenesis in
cultured muscle cells. Here we have investigated the possibility that Id2 and/or 
Id4 can act in a similar manner. Surprisingly, while overexpression of Id2
resulted in inhibition of differentiation of Sol 8 myoblast cells, overexpression
of Id4 did not. Sol 8 cells stably transfected with Id4 showed no apparent
changes in expression of muscle-specific genes upon differentiation. DNA-binding 
activities present at the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) enhancer E-box and
transcription of the MCK enhancer were not altered in Id4-overexpressing cells,
compared with vector-transfected cells. Id2 is also a more potent inhibitor of
protein/DNA complex formation at the MCK-R enhancer E-box than Identified in
vitro. Therefore, our data support the notion that members of the Id family might
be involved in the regulation of distinct developmental pathways.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10047451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Neuroreport. 1998 Dec 21;9(18):4075-80.

Injury selectively down-regulates the gene encoding for the Id4 transcription
factor in primary cultures of forebrain astrocytes.

Andres-Barquin PJ(1), Hernandez MC, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurological Surgery, School of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, 94143, USA.

Astrogliosis is an important component of the response to injury of the central
nervous system (CNS). The Id family of helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription
factors has been implicated in the regulation of cellular differentiation in
several different lineages and may contribute to the regulation of astrogliosis. 
We examined the expression of Id genes in primary cultures of mouse forebrain
astrocytes under experimental conditions in which astrogliosis was elicited by
mechanical injury. Astrocyte cultures expressed the four known members of the Id 
gene family, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. After injury, at a time when astrocytes
developed the characteristic phenotypic changes of astrogliosis, Id4 expression
decreased dramatically. Id1, Id2, and Id3 mRNA levels did not change. These
results identify Id4 as a candidate marker of astroglial activation in culture
and suggest that Id4 expression plays a role in the process of astrogliosis.

PMID: 9926850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. DNA Res. 1998 Oct 30;5(5):309-13.

cDNA cloning, tissue distribution and chromosomal localization of the human ID4
gene.

Rigolet M(1), Rich T, Gross-Morand MS, Molina-Gomes D, Viegas-Pequignot E, Junien
C.

Author information: 
(1)U383 INSERM, Clinique Maurice Lamy, Hôpital Necker, Université Paris V,
France. rigolet@lovelace.infobiogen.fr

A cDNA e encoding the human Id4 protein has been isolated from an astrocytoma
library. The predicted protein product shares 98% identity with the mouse Id4
protein and is markedly different from that already reported. By FISH analysis,
the human ID4 gene was more precisely mapped to chromosome 6p22.3-p23. Northern
blot analysis showed that ID4 is mainly expressed in thyroid, brain and fetal
tissue and in some nervous system tumor cell lines.

PMID: 9872455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Dec;9(12):1015-24.

Stage- and subcellular-specific expression of Id proteins in male germ and
Sertoli cells implicates distinctive regulatory roles for Id proteins during
meiosis, spermatogenesis, and Sertoli cell function.

Sablitzky F(1), Moore A, Bromley M, Deed RW, Newton JS, Norton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Windeyer Institute of Medical Sciences, University
College London, United Kingdom. f.sablitzky@ucl.ac.uk

Immunohistological detection of each of the four Id proteins (Id1-Id4) in
sections of mouse testis revealed a unique temporal and spatial expression
pattern for each Id protein during spermatogenesis. Furthermore, each Id protein 
displayed a distinctive, dynamic pattern of subcellular distribution. Id1 was
uniquely expressed in MI/MII spermatocytes undergoing meiotic division. Id4
protein was detectable in the cytoplasm of type A1 spermatogonia, as well as in
late pachytene and in diplotene spermatocytes. Id2 protein, which was most
abundant in Sertoli cell nuclei, was also detectable in pachytene and diplotene
spermatocytes, but as with Id4, it was absent from MI/MII cells. In postmeiotic
spermatids, Id1, Id2, and Id4 proteins were expressed in a stage- and
subcellular-specific manner. Expression of Id3 was restricted to Sertoli cell
cytoplasm. In malignant seminoma cells, all four Id proteins were abundantly
expressed with accompanying changes in their subcellular distribution. The
observed expression of Id proteins in postproliferative Sertoli cells and
spermatids and during specific stages of meiosis implies novel functional roles
for this class of transcriptional regulator during spermatogenesis.

PMID: 9869302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Nov 26;1443(1-2):55-64.

Structure, chromosomal localisation and expression of the murine dominant
negative helix-loop-helix Id4 gene.

van Crüchten I(1), Cinato E, Fox M, King ER, Newton JS, Riechmann V, Sablitzky F.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, Department of Medicine, The Windeyer Institute of
Medical Sciences, 46 Cleveland Street, London W1P 6DB, UK.

Id proteins antagonise the functional properties of DNA-binding, basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors. Id proteins inhibited cell
differentiation in various model systems, both in vitro and in vivo. They are
transcriptionally and post-transcriptionally regulated during cell cycle
progression and promote cell proliferation. In order to establish the molecular
and functional properties of Id4, we analysed structure, chromosomal localisation
and expression of the murine Id4 gene. Sequence analysis indicated that the Id4
gene consists of three exons. Multiple transcription start sites map about 300 bp
upstream of the ATG translational start codon within a 30-bp region of the Id4
promoter, which lacks a classic TATA box. Expression of the Id4 gene results in
four major transcripts, most likely generated by differential use of
polyadenylation sites. Abundance of the four transcripts varies across tissues,
suggesting tissue-specific regulation of polyadenylation and/or
post-transcriptional regulation of Id4 expression. However, the Id4 gene seems to
be expressed as a single protein. Id4 expression is switched on during
embryogenesis between day 7.5 and 9.5 of gestation and is most abundant in adult 
brain, kidney and testis. Id4 maps to chromosome 13 of the mouse.

PMID: 9838043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Gene. 1998 Nov 19;222(2):229-35.

The mouse Id2 and Id4 genes: structural organization and chromosomal
localization.

Mantani A(1), Hernandez MC, Kuo WL, Israel MA.

Author information: 
(1)The Preuss Laboratory for Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Brain Tumor Research
Center, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The Id proteins belong to a family of nuclear HLH proteins lacking a basic region
and thought to function as dominant-negative regulators of bHLH proteins during
cell growth and differentiation. In this paper, we report the genomic
organization of the mouse Id2 and Id4 genes. These genes each span approximately 
3 kb of the mouse genome and are each organized as three exons with recognizable 
splice donor and acceptor consensus sequences. Their genomic organization is very
similar, consistent with their having evolved from a common, ancestral Id-like
gene. Using FISH analysis, we have localized the mouse Id2 and Id4 genes to mouse
chromosome 12 and 13, respectively.

PMID: 9831657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 27;273(13):7668-74.

A role for Sp and helix-loop-helix transcription factors in the regulation of the
human Id4 gene promoter activity.

Pagliuca A(1), Cannada-Bartoli P, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Molecular and General Biology, University of Naples
"Federico II," via Mezzocannone 8, 80134 Naples, Italy.

Id family helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are involved in the regulation of
proliferation and differentiation of several cell types. To identify cis- and
trans-acting factors that regulate Id4 gene expression, we have analyzed the
promoter regulatory sequences of the human Id4 gene in transient transfections
and gel mobility shift assays. We have identified two functional elements, both
located downstream from the TATA motif, that control Id4 promoter activity. One
element contains a consensus E-box, and we demonstrated that the protein complex 
binding to the E-box contains the bHLH-zip upstream stimulatory factor (USF)
transcription factor. Enforced expression of USF1 leads to E-box-mediated
stimulation of promoter activity. The E-box also mediated stimulatory effects of 
several bHLH transcription factors, and co-expression of Id4 blocked the
stimulatory effect mediated by the bHLH factors. A second element is a GA motif, 
located downstream from the transcriptional start sites, mutation of which
resulted in a 20-fold increase in transcriptional activity. Gel-shift analysis
and transfections into Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells showed that the repressor
element is recognized by both Sp1 and Sp3 factors. These data suggest that Id4
transcription control is highly complex, involving both negative and positive
regulatory elements, including a novel inhibitory function exerted by Sp1 and Sp3
transcription factors.

PMID: 9516472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Neurosci Res. 1997 Dec 1;50(5):684-701.

Helix-loop-helix proteins in Schwann cells: a study of regulation and subcellular
localization of Ids, REB, and E12/47 during embryonic and postnatal development.

Stewart HJ(1), Zoidl G, Rossner M, Brennan A, Zoidl C, Nave KA, Mirsky R, Jessen 
KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University College London, United Kingdom.
ucgahes@ucl.ac.uk

Although basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins play an important role in
transcriptional control in many cell types, the role of HLH proteins in Schwann
cells has yet to be assessed. In this study, we have analyzed the expression of
the dominant negative HLH genes, Id1 to Id4 and the class A gene REB, during
Schwann cell development. We found that mRNA derived from these genes was present
in the Schwann cell lineage throughout development including embryonic precursors
and mature cells. The mRNA levels were not significantly regulated during
development. Nevertheless, by using antibodies against the four different Id
proteins, we found clear regulation of some of these genes at the protein level, 
in particular Id 2, 4, and REB, both in amount and nuclear/cytoplasmic
localization. All these proteins are found in the nuclei of Schwann cell
precursors but are not seen in nuclei of Schwann cells of newborn nerves. We
observed extensive overlap in Id expression, especially in Schwann cell
precursors that co-expressed all four Id proteins and REB. We also showed that Id
1 and 2 were up-regulated as Schwann cells progressed through the cell cycle.
These data indicate that HLH transcription factors act as regulators of Schwann
cell development and point to the existence of as yet unidentified cell
type-specific bHLH proteins in these cells.

PMID: 9418957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Dev Dyn. 1997 Jan;208(1):92-106.

Each member of the Id gene family exhibits a unique expression pattern in mouse
gastrulation and neurogenesis.

Jen Y(1), Manova K, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

We have performed a detailed comparative in situ hybridization analysis to
examine the patterns of expression of all the members of the Id gene family
(Id1-4) during murine gastrulation and neurogenesis. During gastrulation, both
Id1 and Id3 are expressed in the tissues derived from the inner cell mass from
5.5 dpc onward, whereas Id2 is expressed in tissues derived from trophoblasts.
Id4 expression is absent during this period of development. Embryonic Id1
messages are detected during gastrulation on the proximal side of the embryonic
ectoderm, which is the border between the embryo proper and the extraembryonic
tissues, and the expression of Id3 is found throughout the entire embryo proper. 
This unique pattern of expression of the different members of the Id family
suggests a nonredundant role for these genes in antagonizing the activity of bHLH
transcription factors during very early mouse development. During neurogenesis,
the expression of each member of the Id family is present in an unique pattern
along the dorsal-ventral axis of the neural tube: In the early stages of spinal
cord development, both Id1 and Id2 are expressed in the roof plate, whereas Id3
is expressed both in the roof and the floor plates. As development progresses,
the expression of both Id1 and Id3 is detected in the dividing neuroblasts,
whereas Id2 and 4 are expressed in presumptive neurons which are undergoing
maturation. The expression patterns of all the members of the Id gene family
persist throughout the entire CNS, both in the spinal cord and in the brain. In
addition, the characteristic expression of Id2 and Id4 in more mature neurons is 
reiterated both in the PNS and in the neurons of some of the sensory organs.
These data suggest that the expression of different subgroups of the Id gene
family may have different physiological consequences and thereby contributes in
unique ways to specify the differentiation state of neuronal cells during
development.

PMID: 8989524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Dev Dyn. 1996 Nov;207(3):235-52.

Expression patterns of Id1, Id2, and Id3 are highly related but distinct from
that of Id4 during mouse embryogenesis.

Jen Y(1), Manova K, Benezra R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The murine dominant negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH) proteins inhibit the
activities of bHLH transcription factors in diverse cell lineages (Benezra et al.
[1990] Cell 61:49-59; Christy et al [1991] Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
88:1815-1819; Sun et al [1991] Mol. Cell Biol. 11: 5603-5611; Riechmann et al.
[1994] Nucleic Acids Res. 22:749-755). Currently, there are four members in the
dnHLH family, Id1, Id2, Id3, and Id4. In this report, we have performed a
detailed comparative in situ hybridization analysis to examine their expression
pattern during post-gastrulational mouse development. Id1, 2, and 3 are expressed
in multiple tissues, whereas Id4 expression can only be detected in neuronal
tissues and in the ventral portion of the epithelium of the developing stomach.
The regions where Id1-3 genes are expressed, such as gut, lung, kidney, tooth,
whisker, and several glandular structures, are undergoing active morphogenetic
activities. The expression patterns of Id1, 2, and 3 overlap in many organs,
except in the tissue derived from primitive gut. In the latter, Id1 and Id3
signals are detected in the mesenchyme surrounding the epithelium, whereas Id2 is
expressed within the epithelium. The difference in the patterns of expressions of
Id2-3 and Id4 suggest that the dominant negative transcriptional activity of
these two subclasses of the Id family may have different physiological
consequences.

PMID: 8922523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 15;24(14):2813-20.

E2A basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors are negatively regulated by
serum growth factors and by the Id3 protein.

Loveys DA(1), Streiff MB, Kato GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Id3, a member of the Id multigene family of dominant negative helix-loop-helix
transcription factors, is induced sharply in murine fibroblasts by serum growth
factors. To identify relevant targets of Id3 activity, the yeast two-hybrid
system was used to identify proteins that dimerize with Id3. Four murine cDNAs
were identified in the screen, all of which encode helix-loop-helix proteins:
E12, E47, ALF1 and Id4. Co-immunoprecipitation assays confirm that Id3 interacts 
with E12, E47 and two alternative splice products of ALF1 in vitro. Id3 disrupts 
DNA binding by these proteins in vitro and blocks transcriptional activation by
these factors in cultured murine cells. Additionally, Id3 shows evidence of
interacting with the related proteins E2-2 and MyoD, but not c-Myc. These results
suggest that Id3 can function as a general negative regulator of the
basic-helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors exemplified by the 'E'
proteins and MyoD. Although it was previously suspected that E2A is
constitutively expressed, our data indicate that E2A is induced in quiescent
fibroblasts, by growth factor withdrawal but not by contact inhibition of cell
proliferation. These observations extend the role of Id3 in the functional
antagonism of E2A-class transcription factors, and suggest that E2A proteins may 
mediate growth inhibition.

PMCID: PMC145994
PMID: 8759016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Jul;6(7):837-43.

Mutually exclusive expression of two dominant-negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH)
genes, Id4 and Id3, in the developing brain of the mouse suggests distinct
regulatory roles of these dnHLH proteins during cellular proliferation and
differentiation of the nervous system.

Riechmann V(1), Sablitzky F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Laboratorium, Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, Cologne, Germany.

The dominant-negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH) proteins Id1 and Id2 have been
implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation in
myogenesis, neurogenesis, and/or hematopoiesis. To further investigate the
functional role of dnHLH proteins, we have performed in situ hybridization
analysis on serial sections of mouse embryos from days 9.5 to 17.5 postcoitus to 
establish the spatial and temporal expression patterns of Id3 (HLH462) and Id4, a
recently isolated fourth member of the mammalian dnHLH gene family. Id3
transcripts are present throughout embryogenesis and are found in neural cells as
well as in cartilage primordia and in epithelial cells lining a variety of
organs. The spatial expression pattern of Id3 overlaps considerably with the
previously determined pattern of Id1. Id4 expression, which is up-regulated
during embryogenesis, is restricted to specific cells of the central and
peripheral nervous system. Within the detection limits of in situ hybridization, 
Id4 and Id3 expression is mutually exclusive in neural precursor cells of the
developing brain, suggesting distinct regulatory functions for these dnHLH
proteins during neurogenesis.

PMID: 7547505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Dyn. 1995 Jun;203(2):163-73.

Expression of the helix-loop-helix gene Id3 during murine embryonic development.

Ellmeier W(1), Weith A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

The family of dominant-negative helix-loop-helix (dnHLH) transcriptional
modulators consists of four mammalian genes known to date: Id1, Id2, Id3 (Id3 was
formerly designated HLH462 or HEIR1 or HLH1R21), and Id4. We have performed a
detailed study of Id3 expression in mouse embryos in order to gain insight into
the possible developmental control functions of this gene and to compare its
expression to that of other mammalian dnHLH genes. Employing RNA in situ
hybridization on sectioned mouse embryos of gestational stages E9.5-17.5 and
neonatal head, we generally detected a high abundance of transcripts at early
stages that gradually declined at most sites toward E15.5. Expression of Id3 in
embryos was detected in brain, spinal cord, olfactory system, branchial arches,
limbs, sclerotome, endocardiac cushions, the outer lining of the gut, lung,
retina, the collecting system of the kidney, and in tooth anlagen. Although the
abundance of mRNA decreased toward later stages in most tissues, it remained high
in teeth and kidney. This expression pattern suggests that Id3 functions both in 
undifferentiated tissues and in organs which are in the process of
differentiation. When compared to the expression of other dnHLH genes, it becomes
obvious that the pattern of Id3 mainly coincides with that of Id1. This may
reflect a partial redundancy in gene function. Furthermore, previous experiments 
suggested a mutually exclusive expression of the proto-oncogene N-myc an Id3. The
results of the present study confirm these data.

PMID: 7655079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Genomics. 1995 May 1;27(1):200-3.

Molecular cloning of ID4, a novel dominant negative helix-loop-helix human gene
on chromosome 6p21.3-p22.

Pagliuca A(1), Bartoli PC, Saccone S, Della Valle G, Lania L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia Generale e Molecolare, Università Federico 
II, Via Mezzocannone 8, Naples, Italy.

Transcription factors containing a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif regulate
the expression of tissue-specific genes in a number of mammalian and insect
systems. DNA-binding activity of the bHLH proteins is dependent upon formation of
homo- and/or heterodimers. Dominant negative HLH proteins (Id-related genes) also
contain the HLH-dimerization domain but lack the DNA-binding basic domain.
Consequently, Id proteins inhibit binding to DNA and transcriptional
transactivation by heterodimerization with bHLH proteins. We report here the cDNA
sequence of a novel human HLH gene (HGMW-approved symbol ID4) that lacks the
basic domain. ID4 is differentially expressed in adult organs in four mRNA
molecules, which are presumably a result of differential splicing and/or
alternative usage of the polyadenylation sites. Transfection experiments
indicated that enforced expression of Id-4H protein inhibits the trans-activation
of the muscle creatine kinase E-box enhancer by MyoD. Finally, we localized the
ID4 gene to the chromosome 6p21-p22 region.

PMID: 7665172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Mar 11;22(5):749-55.

The expression pattern of Id4, a novel dominant negative helix-loop-helix
protein, is distinct from Id1, Id2 and Id3.

Riechmann V(1), van Crüchten I, Sablitzky F.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Laboratorium in der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft Carl-von-Linné-Weg
10, Köln, Germany.

Molecular interaction between transcription factors containing an
basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain is known to regulate differentiation in
several cellular systems including myogenesis, neurogenesis and haematopoiesis.
DNA-binding activity of the bHLH proteins is mediated via the basic region and is
dependent upon formation of homo- and/or heterodimers of these transcription
factors. Dominant negative (dn) HLH proteins (Id1, Id2, Id3 and emc) also contain
the HLH-dimerization domain but lack the DNA-binding basic region. Formation of
heterodimers between dnHLH and bHLH proteins abolishes the DNA-binding activity
of the latter. Concordantly, it was shown that the dnHLH protein Id1 inhibits
differentiation of muscle and myeloid cells in vitro. Therefore, it was
postulated that dnHLH proteins serve as general antagonists of cell
differentiation. We have isolated and characterized a novel mouse dnHLH gene,
designated Id4. The Id4 protein contains a HLH domain highly conserved among the 
dnHLH proteins from mouse and drosophila. Outside of the HLH domain, three
additional short regions of the dnHLH proteins show some degree of homology.
DNA-binding of E47 homo- as well as E47/MyoD heterodimers is inhibited by Id4.
Transcription of the Id4 gene results in three RNA molecules of 3.7, 2.0 and 1.7 
kb which are presumably a result of differential splicing and/or alternatively
used polyadenylation sites within the 3' untranslated region. During
embryogenesis, Id4 expression is up-regulated between day 9.5 and 13.5 of
gestation. The highest expression in adult tissues was detected in testis, brain 
and kidney. Comparison of the expression patterns of the four mouse dnHLH genes
revealed that Id4 expression differs from the more restricted expression of Id2
as well as from the widespread expression of Id1 and Id3.

PMCID: PMC307878
PMID: 8139914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biomed Biochim Acta. 1985;44(1):133-6.

Diffusion of C-peptide but not proinsulin from islets in frozen sections of human
pancreas identified by monoclonal antibodies.

Madsen OD, Larsson LI, Lernmark A.

Human proinsulin (HPI) and C-peptide (HCP) were visualized by specific monoclonal
antibodies (Mab's) in the conventional indirect immunofluorescent assay for ICA
(islet cell cytoplasmic antibodies) on frozen sections of human pancreas. Two
different Mab's GS-9A8 (anti-HPI, mouse IgG1) and GN-ID4 (anti-HPI/HCP, rat
IgG2a) showed both intense islet cell cytoplasmic staining. In contrast to the
anti-HPI staining which was confined to cell bodies only the GN-ID4 Mab produced 
an additional extensive staining of treadlike structures radiating from the
islets. Both types of staining were blocked by excess HPI. Staining of fixed
islet cell tissue were identical for the two different antibodies.
Double-staining experiments clearly demonstrated that HCP but not HPI may diffuse
from islets in sections of frozen human pancreas. It is concluded that antibodies
cross-reacting with HCP do not define (pro) insulin containing cells.

PMID: 3888205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Langenbecks Arch Chir. 1981;354(1):55-68.

[Experience with the percutaneous transhepatic insertion of a bile duct
endoprosthesis (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Hoevels J, Ihse I, Lunderquist A, Owman T.

In thirty patients with extrahepatic cholestasis because of a malignant tumor a
permanent bile endoprosthesis was inserted nonsurgically. As prosthesis a teflon 
tube (OD/ID4.0/3.0mm) was used without side holes (13 cases) or with side holes
(17 cases). The bile was drained through the endoprosthesis during a period of
1-32 weeks. The drainage function of the endoprosthesis without side holes was
classified as partially effective in seven cases and as insufficient in six
cases. The drainage function of the endoprosthesis with side holes was judged as 
optimal in four cases, partially effective in ten and insufficient in three
cases. The dysfunction of the endoprosthesis in nine of thirty cases was caused
by lack of side holes, spontaneous occlusion or spontaneous dislocation of the
prosthesis. Eight patients developed symptoms of cholangitis. In four cases
sepsis occurred after insertion of the prosthesis. One patient died from the
sequelae of an intrahepatic pseudoaneurysm, which had developed from a damaged
segmental artery following the transhepatic bile drainage.

PMID: 7253786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


