
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8361. [Epub ahead of print]

Grapefruit-derived nanovectors deliver miR-18a for treatment of liver metastasis 
of colon cancer by induction of M1 macrophages.

Teng Y(1), Mu J(1), Hu X(2,)(3), Samykutty A(1), Zhuang X(1), Deng Z(1), Zhang
L(1), Cao P(1), Yan J(1), Miller D(1), Zhang HG(4,)(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY
40202, USA. (2)Program in Biostatistics, Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, The 
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston,
TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Robley Rex VA Medical Center, 
Louisville, KY 40206, USA. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

Liver metastasis accounts for many of the cancer deaths in patients. Effective
treatment for metastatic liver tumors is not available. Here, we provide evidence
for the role of miR-18a in the induction of liver M1 (F4/80+interferon gamma
(IFN<U+03B3>)+IL-12+) macrophages. We found that miR-18a encapsulated in
grapefruit-derived nanovector (GNV) mediated inhibition of liver metastasis that 
is dependent upon the induction of M1 (F4/80+IFN<U+03B3>+IL-12+) macrophages; depletion 
of macrophages eliminated its anti-metastasis effect. Furthermore, the miR-18a
mediated induction of macrophage IFN<U+03B3> by targeting IRF2 is required for
subsequent induction of IL-12. IL-12 then activates natural killer (NK) and
natural killer T (NKT) cells for inhibition of liver metastasis of colon cancer. 
This conclusion is supported by the fact that knockout of IFN<U+03B3> eliminates miR-18a
mediated induction of IL-12, miR-18a treatment has an anti-metastatic effects in 
T cell deficient mice but there is no anti-metastatic effect on NK and NKT
deficient mice. Co-delivery of miR-18a and siRNA IL-12 to macrophages did not
result in activation of co-cultured NK and NKT cells. Taken together our results 
indicate that miR-18a can act as an inhibitor for liver metastasis through
induction of M1 macrophages.

PMID: 27028860  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4936. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrated microRNA-gene analysis of coronary artery disease based on miRNA and
gene expression profiles.

Xu X(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vasculocardiology Department, Jiading Central Hospital, Shanghai 201800, P.R
China.

The present study aimed to investigate the key genes and microRNAs (miRNA/miRs)
associated with coronary artery disease (CAD) progression. The gene expression
profile of GSE20680 and GSE12288, and the miRNA expression profile of GSE28858
were downloaded from the gene expression omnibus database. The differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in GSE20680 and GSE12288, and the differentially expressed
miRNAs in GSE28858 were screened using the limma package in R software. Common
DEGs between GSE20680 and GSE12288 were selected. Functions and pathways of DEGs 
and miRNAs were enriched using the DAVID tool from the GO and KEGG databases. The
regulatory network of miRNA and selected CAD-associated DEGs was constructed. A
total of 270 DEGs (167 upregulated and 103 downregulated) based on the GSE20680
dataset, and 2,268 DEGs (534 upregulated and 1,734 downregulated) based on the
GSE12288 dataset, were screened. For the differentially expressed miRNAs,
214 were identified (102 upregulated and 112 downregulated) in CAD samples and
were screened. Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) and cell death-inducing
DFFA-like effector b (CIDEB), which are regulated by signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 and myc-associated factor X, were identified as
common DEGs for CAD. miR-455-5p, miR-455-3p and miR-1257, which are involved in
the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)protein assembly pathway and peptide
antigen assembly with MHC class I protein complex pathway, may regulate various
miRNAs and target genes, including pro-opiomelancortin (POMC), toll-like receptor
4 (TLR4), interleukin 10 (IL10), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and
calreticulin (CALR). The current study identified IRF2 and CIDEB as crucial
genes, and miRNA-455-5p, miRNA-455-3p and miR-1257 along with their target genes 
POMC, TLR4 and CALR, as miRNAs involved in CAD progression. Thus, the present
study may provide a basis for future research into the progression mechanism of
CAD.

PMID: 26936111  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. EBioMedicine. 2015 Sep 24;2(11):1619-1626. eCollection 2015.

Distinct Transcriptional and Anti-Mycobacterial Profiles of Peripheral Blood
Monocytes Dependent on the Ratio of Monocytes: Lymphocytes.

Naranbhai V(1), Fletcher HA(2), Tanner R(3), O'Shea MK(3), McShane H(3), Fairfax 
BP(1), Knight JC(1), Hill AV(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)The Jenner Institute, Nuffield
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom. (3)The Jenner
Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom. (4)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of
Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; The Jenner Institute,
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The ratio of monocytes and lymphocytes (ML ratio) in peripheral blood is
associated with tuberculosis and malaria disease risk and cancer and
cardiovascular disease outcomes. We studied anti-mycobacterial function and the
transcriptome of monocytes in relation to the ML ratio. Mycobacterial growth
inhibition assays of whole or sorted blood were performed and mycobacteria were
enumerated by liquid culture. Transcriptomes of unstimulated CD14 + monocytes
isolated by magnetic bead sorting were characterised by microarray. Transcript
expression was tested for association with ML ratio calculated from leucocyte
differential counts by linear regression. The ML ratio was associated with
mycobacterial growth in vitro (ß = 2.23, SE 0.91, p = 0.02). Using sorted
monocytes and lymphocytes, in vivo ML ratio (% variance explained R(2) = 11%,
p = 0.02) dominated over in vitro ratios (R(2) = 5%, p = 0.10) in explaining
mycobacterial growth. Expression of 906 genes was associated with the ML ratio
and 53 with monocyte count alone. ML-ratio associated genes were enriched for
type-I and -II interferon signalling (p = 1.2 × 10(- 8)), and for genes under
transcriptional control of IRF1, IRF2, RUNX1, RELA and ESRRB. The
ML-ratio-associated gene set was enriched in TB disease (3.11-fold, 95% CI:
2.28-4.19, p = 5.7 × 10(- 12)) and other inflammatory diseases including atopy,
HIV, IBD and SLE. The ML ratio is associated with distinct transcriptional and
anti-mycobacterial profiles of monocytes that may explain the disease
associations of the ML ratio.

PMCID: PMC4740301
PMID: 26870787  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Immunol. 2016 Jan 1;196(1):91-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501061. Epub 2015 Nov
20.

The Expression of BAFF Is Controlled by IRF Transcription Factors.

Sjöstrand M(1), Johansson A(1), Aqrawi L(2), Olsson T(3), Wahren-Herlenius M(1), 
Espinosa A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Experimental Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Center for
Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden;
(2)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, The Gade Institute, University of Bergen,
N-5201 Bergen, Norway; and. (3)Unit of Neuroimmunology, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Unit of Experimental Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 
Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm,
Sweden; alexander.espinosa@ki.se.

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and primary Sjögren's syndrome
(pSS) are typically characterized by the presence of autoantibodies and an
IFN-signature. The strength of the IFN-signature positively correlates with
disease severity, suggesting that type I IFNs are active players in these
diseases. BAFF is a cytokine critical for development and proper selection of B
cells, and the targeting of BAFF has emerged as a successful treatment strategy
of SLE. Previous reports have suggested that BAFF expression is directly induced 
by type I IFNs, but the precise mechanism for this remains unknown. In this
article, we demonstrate that BAFF is a bona fide ISG and that IFN regulatory
factors (IRFs) control the expression of BAFF. We identify IRF1 and IRF2 as
positive regulators of BAFF transcription and IRF4 and IRF8 as potent repressors;
in addition, we have mapped the precise binding site for these factors in the
BAFF promoter. IFN-ß injections induced BAFF expression mainly in neutrophils and
monocytes, and BAFF expression in neutrophils from pSS patients strongly
correlated with the strength of the IFN-signature. In summary, we show that BAFF 
expression is directly induced by type I IFNs via IRF1 and IRF2, whereas IRF4 and
IRF8 are negative regulators of BAFF expression. These data suggest that type I
IFN blockade in SLE and pSS patients will lead to downregulation of BAFF and a
consequential reduction of autoreactive B cell clones and autoantibodies.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4683359
PMID: 26590315  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 15;195(12):5657-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501927. Epub 2015 
Nov 16.

Characterization of Amphioxus IFN Regulatory Factor Family Reveals an Archaic
Signaling Framework for Innate Immune Response.

Yuan S(1), Zheng T(1), Li P(1), Yang R(1), Ruan J(1), Huang S(1), Wu Z(1), Xu
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Department of Biochemistry, College of
Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen (Zhongshan) University, Guangzhou 510275, People's
Republic of China; and. (2)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Department of
Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen (Zhongshan) University,
Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China; and Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing 100029, People's Republic of China lssxal@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

The IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family encodes transcription factors that play
important roles in immune defense, stress response, reproduction, development,
and carcinogenesis. Although the origin of the IRF family has been dated back to 
multicellular organisms, invertebrate IRFs differ from vertebrate IRFs in genomic
structure and gene synteny, and little is known about their functions. Through
comparison of multiple amphioxus genomes, in this study we suggested that
amphioxus contains nine IRF members, whose orthologs are supposed to be shared
among three amphioxus species. As the orthologs to the vertebrate IRF1 and IRF4
subgroups, Branchiostoma belcheri tsingtauense (bbt)IRF1 and bbtIRF8 bind the
IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) and were upregulated when amphioxus
intestinal cells were stimulated with poly(I:C). As amphioxus-specific IRFs, both
bbtIRF3 and bbtIRF7 bind ISRE. When activated, they can be phosphorylated by
bbtTBK1 and then translocate into nucleus for target gene transcription. As
transcriptional repressors, bbtIRF2 and bbtIRF4 can inhibit the transcriptional
activities of bbtIRF1, 3, 7, and 8 by competing for the binding of ISRE.
Interestingly, amphioxus IRF2, IRF8, and Rel were identified as target genes of
bbtIRF1, bbtIRF7, and bbtIRF3, respectively, suggesting a dynamic feedback
regulation among amphioxus IRF and NF-<U+03BA>B. Collectively, to our knowledge we
present for the first time an archaic IRF signaling framework in a basal
chordate, shedding new insights into the origin and evolution of vertebrate
IFN-based antiviral networks.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26573836  [PubMed - in process]


7. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Dec;47(2):978-85. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.10.039.
Epub 2015 Nov 3.

Fish IRF3 up-regulates the transcriptional level of IRF1, IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7 in 
CIK cells.

Xu X(1), Lai Q(2), Gu M(1), Liu D(1), Hou Q(1), Liu X(1), Mi Y(1), Sun Z(1), Wang
H(1), Lin G(1), Hu C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China; Infectious Diseases Hospital of
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, Jiangxi Province, China. (3)Department of
Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.
Electronic address: hucy2008@163.com.

Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) belong to a family of transcription factor
involved in transcriptional regulation of type I IFN and IFN-stimulated genes
(ISG) in cells. In the present study, an IRF3 full-length cDNA (termed CiIRF3,
JX999055) and its promoter sequence were cloned by homology cloning strategy and 
genome walking from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). The full-length cDNA
sequence of CiIRF3 is comprised of a 5'UTR (195 bp), a 3'UTR (269 bp) and a
largest open reading frame (ORF) of 1377 bp encoding a polypeptide of 458 amino
acids. CiIRF3 has a conservative DNA-binding domain (DBD) at N-terminal and a
relatively conserved interferon regulatory factors association domain (IAD).
Phylogenetic tree analysis indicated that CiIRF3 gathers together with other
IRF-3 from higher vertebrates in the same branch. The promoter sequence of CiIRF3
(596 bp) consists of three IRF-E, a C/EBP beta, a NF-kappa B and a TATA-BOX.
CiIRF3 was constitutively expressed at low level in different grass carp tissues 
but was rapidly up-regulated with Poly I:C stimulation. To study the molecular
mechanism of CiIRF3 regulating the transcription of IRFs, CiIRF3 was expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21 and purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA
His-Bind Resin. Gel mobility shift assays revealed the affinity of CiIRF3 protein
with promoters of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 respectively. Then, CIK cells
were co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF3, pGL3-promotor (pGL3-CiIRF1,
pGL3-CiIRF2, pGL3-CiIRF3, pGL3-CiIRF7) and luciferase reporter vector
respectively. The cotransfection experiment showed that CiIRF3 increased the
promoter activity of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7. Furthermore,
overexpression of CiIRF3 in CIK cells also up-regulated the expressions of
CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7. So, CiIRF3 can improve the transcriptional
level of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545324  [PubMed - in process]


8. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 29;5:15768. doi: 10.1038/srep15768.

5-Azacytidine modulates interferon regulatory factor 1 in macrophages to exert a 
cardioprotective effect.

Jeong HY(1,)(2), Kang WS(1,)(2), Hong MH(1), Jeong HC(3), Shin MG(4), Jeong
MH(3), Kim YS(1,)(5), Ahn Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory of Cardiovascular Regeneration, Chonnam National
University Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Graduate School, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Cardiology, Chonnam National University Hospital,
Gwangju, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chonnam
National University Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Republic of Korea. (5)Biomedical
Research Center, Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of
Korea.

Macrophages are actively involved in inflammatory responses during the
progression of cardiac injury, including myocardial infarction (MI). A previous
study showed that 5-azacytidine (5AZ), a DNA methylation inhibitor, can
ameliorate cardiac injury by shifting macrophages toward an anti-inflammatory
phenotype via iNOS inhibition. Here, we show that the beneficial effect of 5AZ is
associated with sumoylation of interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF1) in
macrophages. IRF1 is a critical transcription factor for iNOS induction and is
antagonized by IRF2. In the stimulated macrophages, IRF1 accumulated in the
nucleus without degradation by 5AZ treatment. In animal study, 5AZ administration
resulted in significant improvements in cardiac function and fibrosis.
IRF1-expressing macrophages were more abundant in the 5AZ-treated MI group than
in the PBS-treated MI group. Because sumoylated IRF1 is known to mimic IRF2, we
examined the IRF1 sumoylation. Sumoylated IRF1 was resistant to degradation and
significantly increased in the 5AZ-treated MI group. Collectively, 5AZ had a
protective effect after MI by potentiation of IRF1 sumoylation and is suggested
as a novel therapeutic intervention for cardiac repair.

PMCID: PMC4625165
PMID: 26510961  [PubMed - in process]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 13;10(10):e0140243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140243.
eCollection 2015.

RelA-Induced Interferon Response Negatively Regulates Proliferation.

Kochupurakkal BS(1), Wang ZC(1), Hua T(1), Culhane AC(2), Rodig SJ(3),
Rajkovic-Molek K(4), Lazaro JB(1), Richardson AL(5), Biswas DK(1), Iglehart
JD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Department of
Cytology, Clinical Hospital Center Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. (5)Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America.

Both oncogenic and tumor-suppressor activities are attributed to the Nuclear
Factor kappa B (NF-kB) pathway. Moreover, NF-kB may positively or negatively
regulate proliferation. The molecular determinants of these opposing roles of
NF-kB are unclear. Using primary human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) as a
model, we show that increased RelA levels and consequent increase in basal
transcriptional activity of RelA induces IRF1, a target gene. Induced IRF1
upregulates STAT1 and IRF7, and in consort, these factors induce the expression
of interferon response genes. Activation of the interferon pathway down-regulates
CDK4 and up-regulates p27 resulting in Rb hypo-phosphorylation and cell cycle
arrest. Stimulation of HMEC with IFN-<U+03B3> elicits similar phenotypic and molecular
changes suggesting that basal activity of RelA and IFN-<U+03B3> converge on IRF1 to
regulate proliferation. The anti-proliferative RelA-IRF1-CDK4 signaling axis is
retained in ER+/HER2- breast tumors analyzed by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
Using immuno-histochemical analysis of breast tumors, we confirm the negative
correlation between RelA levels and proliferation rate in ER+/HER2- breast
tumors. These findings attribute an anti-proliferative tumor-suppressor role to
basal RelA activity. Inactivation of Rb, down-regulation of RelA or IRF1, or
upregulation of CDK4 or IRF2 rescues the RelA-IRF1-CDK4 induced proliferation
arrest in HMEC and are points of disruption in aggressive tumors. Activity of the
RelA-IRF1-CDK4 axis may explain favorable response to CDK4/6 inhibition observed 
in patients with ER+ Rb competent tumors.

PMCID: PMC4604146
PMID: 26460486  [PubMed - in process]


10. Eur Heart J. 2015 Nov 7;36(42):2909-19. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv321. Epub 2015 
Jul 22.

The microRNA-221/-222 cluster balances the antiviral and inflammatory response in
viral myocarditis.

Corsten M(1), Heggermont W(2), Papageorgiou AP(3), Deckx S(1), Tijsma A(4),
Verhesen W(1), van Leeuwen R(1), Carai P(3), Thibaut HJ(4), Custers K(1), Summer 
G(1), Hazebroek M(1), Verheyen F(5), Neyts J(4), Schroen B(1), Heymans S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute
Maastricht, Maastricht University, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202, The
Netherlands. (2)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202,
The Netherlands Center for Molecular and Vascular Research, University of Leuven,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium Department of Internal Medicine, Service of Cardiology,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium. (3)Center for Heart Failure 
Research, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, P.
Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202, The Netherlands Center for Molecular and
Vascular Research, University of Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium. (4)Rega
Institute for Medical Research, University of Leuven, Leuven B-3000, Belgium.
(5)Electron Microscopy Unit, Maastricht University, Maastricht AZ-6202, The
Netherlands. (6)Center for Heart Failure Research, Cardiovascular Research
Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht AZ-6202,
The Netherlands Center for Molecular and Vascular Research, University of Leuven,
Leuven B-3000, Belgium s.heymans@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

AIMS: Viral myocarditis (VM) is an important cause of heart failure and sudden
cardiac death in young healthy adults; it is also an aetiological precursor of
dilated cardiomyopathy. We explored the role of the miR-221/-222 family that is
up-regulated in VM.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that microRNA-221 (miR-221) and miR-222 levels
are significantly elevated during acute VM caused by Coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3).
Both miRs are expressed by different cardiac cells and by infiltrating
inflammatory cells, but their up-regulation upon myocarditis is mostly exclusive 
for the cardiomyocyte. Systemic inhibition of miR-221/-222 in mice increased
cardiac viral load, prolonged the viraemic state, and strongly aggravated cardiac
injury and inflammation. Similarly, in vitro, overexpression of miR-221 and
miR-222 inhibited enteroviral replication, whereas knockdown of this miR-cluster 
augmented viral replication. We identified and confirmed a number of miR-221/-222
targets that co-orchestrate the increased viral replication and inflammation,
including ETS1/2, IRF2, BCL2L11, TOX, BMF, and CXCL12. In vitro inhibition of
IRF2, TOX, or CXCL12 in cardiomyocytes significantly dampened their inflammatory 
response to CVB3 infection, confirming the functionality of these targets in VM
and highlighting the importance of miR-221/-222 as regulators of the cardiac
response to VM.
CONCLUSIONS: The miR-221/-222 cluster orchestrates the antiviral and inflammatory
immune response to viral infection of the heart. Its inhibition increases viral
load, inflammation, and overall cardiac injury upon VM.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26206211  [PubMed - in process]


11. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug;152(3):545-56. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3507-z. 
Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Interaction between smoking history and gene expression levels impacts survival
of breast cancer patients.

Andres SA(1), Bickett KE, Alatoum MA, Kalbfleisch TS, Brock GN, Wittliff JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.

In contrast to studies focused on cigarette smoking and risk of breast cancer
occurrence, this study explored the influence of smoking on breast cancer
recurrence and progression. The goal was to evaluate the interaction between
smoking history and gene expression levels on recurrence and overall survival of 
breast cancer patients. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards models were fitted
for 48 cigarette smokers, 50 non-smokers, and the total population separately to 
determine which gene expressions and gene expression/cigarette usage interaction 
terms were significant in predicting overall and disease-free survival in breast 
cancer patients. Using methods similar to Andres et al. (BMC Cancer 13:326,
2013a; Horm Cancer 4:208-221, 2013b), multivariable analyses revealed CENPN,
CETN1, CYP1A1, IRF2, LECT2, and NCOA1 to be important predictors for both breast 
carcinoma recurrence and mortality among smokers. Additionally, COMT was
important for recurrence, and NAT1 and RIPK1 were important for mortality. In
contrast, only IRF2, CETN1, and CYP1A1 were significant for disease recurrence
and mortality among non-smokers, with NAT2 additionally significant for survival.
Analysis of interaction between smoking status and gene expression values using
the combined samples revealed significant interactions between smoking status and
CYP1A1, LECT2, and CETN1. Signatures consisting of 7-8 genes were highly
predictive for breast cancer recurrence and overall survival among smokers, with 
median C-index values of 0.8 and 0.73 for overall survival and recurrence,
respectively. In contrast, median C-index values for non-smokers was only 0.59.
Hence, significant interactions between gene expression and smoking status can
play a key role in predicting breast cancer patient outcomes.

PMID: 26202054  [PubMed - in process]


12. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Dec;53(2):385-91. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.07.009. Epub
2015 Jul 15.

Molecular characterization of three IRF1 subfamily members reveals evolutionary
significance of IRF11 in miiuy croaker.

Shu C(1), Sun Y(1), Xu T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Biogenetics & Immune Evolution, College of Marine Science, 
Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, 316022, China. (2)Laboratory of Fish
Biogenetics & Immune Evolution, College of Marine Science, Zhejiang Ocean
University, Zhoushan, 316022, China. Electronic address: tianjunxu@163.com.

The interferon regulatory factors IRF1 and IRF2 of the IRF1 subfamily play
essential roles in immune responses against viruses. IRF11 is a novel IRF gene of
the IRF1 subfamily; IRF11 genes share almost the same evolutionary distance with 
IRF1 and IRF2 genes. However, the structure and characteristics of IRF11 gene in 
fish have been rarely reported. In our study, IRF1, IRF2 and IRF11 genes were
identified and characterized from miiuy croaker genome. Results showed that the
IRF1, IRF2 and IRF11 genes contain the same domains; each of these genes is
composed of conserved gene organizations and characterized by gene synteny with
the orthologous genes. Interestingly, IRF11 was likely found only in fish (but
not specific to teleost fish). Evolutionary analysis results showed that IRF1
gene in mammals, IRF2 and IRF11 gene in fish underwent positive selection. IRF1, 
IRF2 and IRF11 were expressed in a wide range of miiuy croaker tissues. These
genes also exhibited the same expression patterns after miiuy croaker was
infected with poly(I:C). Therefore, our data enhanced our understanding of the
functions and evolution of IRF11 in fish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187301  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Jan;31(1):155-63. doi: 10.1111/jgh.13041.

MicroRNA-18a modulates P53 expression by targeting IRF2 in gastric cancer
patients.

Chen YJ(1,)(2), Wu H(1,)(2), Zhu JM(1,)(2), Li XD(1,)(2), Luo SW(1,)(2), Dong
L(1,)(2), Liu TT(1,)(2), Shen XZ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology. (2)Shanghai Institute of Liver Diseases,
Zhongshan Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: MicroRNA-18a (miR-18a) has been reported to be upregulated in
gastric cancer (GC) tissues compared with normal gastric tissues. However, little
is known about its prognostic value and biological roles.
METHODS: In this study, miR-18a expression in gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC)
tissues and adjacent non-tumor tissues was validated by in situ hybridization,
and the predictive values of miR-18a were explored. The biological roles of
miR-18a and the underlying signal pathway were investigated in GC cell lines.
RESULTS: Overexpressed intra-tumoral miR-18a was associated with poor survival
rate and was an independent prognostic factor for overall survival rate
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) in GC patients. Forced expression of miR-18a remarkably enhanced cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in GC cells, while inhibition of miR-18a
caused the opposite effects. Further study showed that miR-18a suppressed the
expression of interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) by directly binding to its
3'-untranslated region. Moreover, miR-18a expression levels are inversely
correlated with IRF2 in human GC tissues. Western blot showed that forced
expression of miR-18a could not only downregulate the expression of IRF2, but
also inhibit the expression of P53, suggesting that IRF2 might play as a tumor
suppressor by regulating P53 signaling in GC.
CONCLUSION: miR-18a modulated P53 expression by directly targeting IRF2 and had a
high predictive value for prognosis of GAC patients. These results may lead to
identification of therapeutic candidates of GC.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26173586  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Immunol. 2015 Apr 8;6:165. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00165. eCollection 2015.

Application of Comparative Transcriptional Genomics to Identify Molecular Targets
for Pediatric IBD.

Fang K(1), Grisham MB(2), Kevil CG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , Los Angeles, CA , USA. (2)Department of
Immunology and Molecular Microbiology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center , Lubbock, TX , USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center , Shreveport, LA , USA ; Department of
Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center , Shreveport, LA , USA.

Experimental models of colitis in mice have been used extensively for analyzing
the molecular events that occur during inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
development. However, it is uncertain to what extent the experimental models
reproduce features of human IBD. This is largely due to the lack of precise
methods for direct and comprehensive comparison of mouse and human inflamed colon
tissue at the molecular level. Here, we use global gene expression patterns of
two sets of pediatric IBD and two mouse models of colitis to obtain a direct
comparison of the genome signatures of mouse and human IBD. By comparing the two 
sets of pediatric IBD microarray data, we found 83 genes were differentially
expressed in a similar manner between pediatric Crohn's disease and ulcerative
colitis. Up-regulation of the chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) gene that
maps to 17q12, a confirmed IBD susceptibility loci, indicates that our comparison
study can reveal known genetic associations with IBD. In comparing pediatric IBD 
and experimental colitis microarray data, we found common signatures amongst them
including: (1) up-regulation of CXCL9 and S100A8; (2) cytokine-cytokine receptor 
pathway dysregulation; and (3) over-represented IRF1 and IRF2 transcription
binding sites in the promoter region of up-regulated genes, and HNF1A and Lhx3
binding sites were over-represented in the promoter region of the down-regulated 
genes. In summary, this study provides a comprehensive view of transcriptome
changes between different pediatric IBD populations in comparison with different 
colitis models. These findings reveal several new molecular targets for further
study in the regulation of colitis.

PMCID: PMC4457140
PMID: 26085826  [PubMed]


15. J Hum Genet. 2015 Aug;60(8):443-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.45. Epub 2015 May 21.

Genetic association of key Th1/Th2 pathway candidate genes, IRF2, IL6, IFNGR2,
STAT4 and IL4RA, with atopic asthma in the Indian population.

Kumar A(1), Das S(1), Agrawal A(2), Mukhopadhyay I(3), Ghosh B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunogenetics Laboratory, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology, Delhi, India. (2)Centre of Excellence for Translational
Research in Asthma and Lung Disease, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, Delhi, India. (3)Human Genetics unit, Indian Statistical Institute,
Kolkata, India.

Asthma is a complex, multifactorial disease resulting due to dysregulated immune 
responses. Genetic factors contribute significantly to asthma pathogenesis, and
identification of these factors is one of the major goals in understanding the
disease. Th1/Th2 helper differentiation has a critical role in modulating the
phenotypes associated with atopic asthma. This study was aimed at identifying
genetic modifiers of asthma in selected genes involved in T helper
differentiation. A total of 354 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 33
candidate genes were genotyped in a case-control cohort (cases=147, controls=199)
and families (n=247) using Illumina's Golden Gate Assay. Five SNPs, rs3733475A/C 
(IRF2), rs2069832A/G (IL6), rs2012075G/A (IFNGR2) and rs1400656G/A (STAT4) and
rs1805011C/A (IL4RA) were found to be associated with asthma in family based as
well as in case-control analyses (P=0.002, P=0.001, P=0.004, P=0.003 and P=0.001,
respectively). Interestingly, the minor alleles at these loci showed a protective
effect. A five loci haplotype, TAACG, in IRF2 gene, was significantly associated 
with asthma in families (P=1.1 × 10(-6)) and in case-control cohort (P=0.01). In 
conclusion, our studies led to identification of some key candidate genes, namely
IRF2, IL6, IFNGR2, STAT4 and IL4RA that modulate genetic susceptibility to asthma
in the Indian population. Also, this is the first report of independent
association of IL6 gene polymorphism with atopic asthma.

PMID: 25994869  [PubMed - in process]


16. Vet Microbiol. 2015 Jul 9;178(1-2):41-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2015.04.023. Epub 
2015 May 1.

gga-miR-9* inhibits IFN production in antiviral innate immunity by targeting
interferon regulatory factor 2 to promote IBDV replication.

Ouyang W(1), Wang YS(2), Du XN(3), Liu HJ(4), Zhang HB(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, China; Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences/Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological Engineering and Technology,
Ministry of Agriculture/National Center for Engineering Research of Veterinary
Bio-products, Nanjing 210014, China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention 
and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou
225009, China. (2)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of
Agricultural Sciences/Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological Engineering and
Technology, Ministry of Agriculture/National Center for Engineering Research of
Veterinary Bio-products, Nanjing 210014, China; Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for 
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou 225009, China. Electronic address: wangys63@163.com. (3)Institute of
Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Biological Engineering and Technology, Ministry of
Agriculture/National Center for Engineering Research of Veterinary Bio-products, 
Nanjing 210014, China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China; Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu
Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological
Engineering and Technology, Ministry of Agriculture/National Center for
Engineering Research of Veterinary Bio-products, Nanjing 210014, China.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing
210095, China. Electronic address: haibinzh@njau.edu.cn.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that contribute to the repertoire of
host-pathogen interactions during viral infections. In the current study, miRNA
analysis showed that a panel of microRNAs, including gga-miR-9*, were markedly
upregulated in specific-pathogen-free (SPF) chickens upon infection with
infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV); however, the biological function of
gga-miR-9* during viral infection remains unknown. Using a TCID50 assay, it was
found that ectopic expression of gga-miR-9* significantly promoted IBDV
replication. In turn, gga-miR-9* negatively regulated IBDV-triggered type I IFN
production, thus promoting IBDV replication in DF-1 cells. Bioinformatics
analysis indicates that the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of interferon regulatory
factor 2 (IRF2) has two putative binding sites for gga-miR-9*. Targeting of IRF2 
3'UTR by gga-miR-9* was determined by luciferase assay. Functional overexpression
of gga-miR-9*, using gga-miR-9* mimics, inhibited IRF2 mRNA and protein
expression. Transfection of the gga-miR-9* inhibitor abolished the suppression of
IRF2 protein expression. Furthermore, IRF2 knockdown mediated the enhancing
effect of gga-miR-9* on the type I IFN-mediated antiviral response. These
findings indicate that inducible gga-miR-9* feedback negatively regulates the
host antiviral innate immune response by suppressing type I IFN production via
targeting IRF2.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25975521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Biosci. 2015 Apr 18;5:17. doi: 10.1186/s13578-015-0007-0. eCollection 2015.

Division of labor between IRF1 and IRF2 in regulating different stages of
transcriptional activation in cellular antiviral activities.

Ren G(1), Cui K(2), Zhang Z(3), Zhao K(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100 PR China ; Systems Biology Center, Division of Intramural
Research, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA. (2)Systems Biology Center, Division of Intramural
Research, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100 PR China.

BACKGROUND: Cellular antiviral activities are critically controlled by
transcriptional activation of interferon-inducible genes, involving interferon
regulatory factors (IRFs). Previous data suggested that IRF1 is an activator and 
IRF2 is a repressor, which functionally antagonize each other in transcriptional 
regulation. However, it is not clear how these two factors function to regulate
cellular antiviral activities.
RESULTS: We show that IRF2 is critically required for the induction of the TLR3
and other interferon-inducible genes in a chromatin environment. While both IRF1 
and IRF2 directly interact with the BAF chromatin remodeling complex, IRF2 is
associated with the TLR3 promoter in the unstimulated state and IRF1 binding to
the promoter is strongly induced by stimulation with interferon, suggesting that 
these two factors may function at different stages of gene induction in the
recruitment of the BAF complex. IRF2 acts to maintain the basal level expression,
an open chromatin structure, and active histone modification marks (H3K9, K14
acetylation and H3K4 tri-methylation) of the TLR3 promoter in the unstimulated
state, while IRF1 serves to rapidly activate the promoter upon stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF1 and IRF2 of the IRF family of transcription factors play
distinct roles in cellular response to viral infection. IRF2 binds to TLR3 and
other IFN-inducible gene promoters and maintains an active chromatin structure in
the unstimulated state, which is required for their induction, while IRF1 binding
to these promoters activates their transcription upon viral infection. Thus, the 
division of labor between the IRF transcription factor family members plays a
pivotal role in coordinating the transcriptional activation in the cellular
antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC4424430
PMID: 25960866  [PubMed]


18. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0118713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118713.
eCollection 2015.

Interferon-<U+03B3> suppresses intestinal epithelial aquaporin-1 expression via Janus
kinase and STAT3 activation.

Dicay MS(1), Hirota CL(1), Ronaghan NJ(1), Peplowski MA(1), Zaheer RS(1), Carati 
CA(2), MacNaughton WK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Research Network and Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. (2)Department of Anatomy and Histology,
Flinders University, Bedford Park, Australia.

Inflammatory bowel diseases are associated with dysregulated electrolyte and
water transport and resultant diarrhea. Aquaporins are transmembrane proteins
that function as water channels in intestinal epithelial cells. We investigated
the effect of the inflammatory cytokine, interferon-<U+03B3>, which is a major player in
inflammatory bowel diseases, on aquaporin-1 expression in a mouse colonic
epithelial cell line, CMT93. CMT93 monolayers were exposed to 10 ng/mL
interferon-<U+03B3> and aquaporin-1 mRNA and protein expressions were measured by
real-time PCR and western blot, respectively. In other experiments, CMT93 cells
were pretreated with inhibitors or were transfected with siRNA to block the
effects of Janus kinases, STATs 1 and 3, or interferon regulatory factor 2, prior
to treatment with interferon-<U+03B3>. Interferon-<U+03B3> decreased aquaporin-1 expression in 
mouse intestinal epithelial cells in a manner that did not depend on the
classical STAT1/JAK2/IRF-1 pathway, but rather, on an alternate Janus kinase
(likely JAK1) as well as on STAT3. The pro-inflammatory cytokine, interferon-<U+03B3>
may contribute to diarrhea associated with intestinal inflammation in part
through regulation of the epithelial aquaporin-1 water channel via a
non-classical JAK/STAT receptor signalling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4405000
PMID: 25793528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 26;9(12):e116169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116169.
eCollection 2014.

The influence of the CHIEF pathway on colorectal cancer-specific mortality.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
383 Colorow Building, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

Many components of the CHIEF (Convergence of Hormones, Inflammation, and Energy
Related Factors) pathway could influence survival given their involvement in cell
growth, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion stimulation. We used ARTP
(Adaptive Rank Truncation Product) to test if genes in the pathway were
associated with colorectal cancer-specific mortality. Colon cancer (n = 1555) and
rectal cancer (n = 754) cases were followed over five years. Age, center, stage
at diagnosis, and tumor molecular phenotype were considered when calculating ARTP
p values. A polygenic risk score was used to summarize the magnitude of risk
associated with this pathway. The JAK/STAT/SOC was significant for colon cancer
survival (PARTP = 0.035). Fifteen genes (DUSP2, INFGR1, IL6, IRF2, JAK2, MAP3K10,
MMP1, NFkB1A, NOS2A, PIK3CA, SEPX1, SMAD3, TLR2, TYK2, and VDR) were associated
with colon cancer mortality (PARTP < 0.05); JAK2 (PARTP <U+200A>= 0.0086), PIK3CA (PARTP
= 0.0098), and SMAD3 (PARTP = 0.0059) had the strongest associations. Over 40
SNPs were significantly associated with survival within the 15 significant genes 
(PARTP < 0.05). SMAD3 had the strongest association with survival (HRGG 2.46 95% 
CI 1.44,4.21 PTtrnd = 0.0002). Seven genes (IL2RA, IL8RA, IL8RB, IRF2, RAF1,
RUNX3, and SEPX1) were significantly associated with rectal cancer (PARTP <
0.05). The HR for colorectal cancer-specific mortality among colon cancer cases
in the upper at-risk alleles group was 11.81 (95% CI 7.07, 19. 74) and was 10.99 
(95% CI 5.30, 22.78) for rectal cancer. These results suggest that several genes 
in the CHIEF pathway are important for colorectal cancer survival; the risk
associated with the pathway merits validation in other studies.

PMCID: PMC4277466
PMID: 25541970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Mar;49(1):103-12. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.11.014. Epub
2014 Nov 25.

Ctenopharyngodon idella IRF2 plays an antagonistic role to IRF1 in
transcriptional regulation of IFN and ISG genes.

Gu M(1), Lin G(1), Lai Q(1), Zhong B(1), Liu Y(1), Mi Y(1), Chen H(1), Wang B(1),
Fan L(1), Hu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address:
hucy2008@163.com.

Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) make up a family of transcription factors
involved in transcriptional regulation of type I IFN and IFN-stimulated genes
(ISG) in cells. In the present study, an IRF2 gene (termed CiIRF2, JX628585) was 
cloned and characterized from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). The
full-length cDNA of CiIRF2 is 1809<U+2009>bp in length, with the largest open reading
frame (ORF) of 981<U+2009>bp encoding a putative protein of 326 amino acids. CiIRF2
contains a conserved DNA-binding domain (DBD) in N-terminal and a non-conserved
C-terminal region. Protein sequence analysis revealed that CiIRF2 shares
significant homology to the known IRF2 counterparts. Phylogenetic reconstruction 
confirmed its closer evolutionary relationship with other fish counterparts,
especially with zebra fish IRF2. CiIRF2 was ubiquitously expressed at low level
in all tested grass carp tissues and significantly up-regulated except in brain
following poly I:C 6-12<U+2009>h post stimulation. In order to understand fish innate
immune and resistance to virus diseases, recombinant CiIRF2 with His-tag was
over-expressed in BL21 Escherichia coli, and the expressed protein was purified
by affinity chromatography with Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin. Promoter sequences of
grass carp type I IFN gene (CiIFN) and two ISG genes (CiPKR and CiPKZ) were
amplified and cloned. In vitro, gel mobility shift assays were employed to
analyze the interaction of CiIRF2 protein with promoters of CiIFN, CiPKR and
CiPKZ respectively. The results showed that CiIRF2 bound to these promoters with 
high affinity by means of its DBD. Afterwards, recombinant plasmids of
pGL3-CiIFN, pGL3-CiPKR and pGL3-CiPKZ were constructed and transiently
co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF2 or pcDNA3.1-CiIRF1 respectively into
C.<U+2009>idella kidney (CIK) cells. Dual-luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that
CiIRF2 down-regulates the transcription activity of CiIFN, CiPKR and CiPKZ genes 
in CIK cells. To further understand the function of fish IRF2, expression
plasmids (pcDNA3.1-IRF2 and pcDNA3.1-IRF1) were transiently co-transfected with
pGL3-IFN or pGL3-CiPKZ into CIK cells, respectively. The results revealed that
CiIRF2 plays an antagonistic role to CiIRF1 in transcriptional regulation of IFN 
and ISG genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Feb;42(2):249-55. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.11.008.
Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Promoter analysis and transcriptional regulation of a Gig2 gene in grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idella).

Chen H(1), Sun C(1), Liu W(1), Gu M(1), Lin G(1), Liu Y(1), Mi Y(1), Fan L(1),
Wang B(1), Hu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address:
hucy2008@163.com.

Grass carp reovirus (GCRV)-induced gene 2 (Gig2) is recognized as a new antiviral
factor involved in response to viral infection. However, little is known about
the mechanisms behind the transcriptional regulation of Gig2 when infected by
virus. In this study, the upstream promoter region of grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idella) Gig2 gene (CiGig2) was identified by homology cloning
strategy. CiGig2 promoter sequence was found to be 859 bp in length and contained
three scattered IFN-stimulated response elements (ISRE). In addition, some grass 
carp IRFs (CiIRF1, CiIRF2 and CiIRF3) ORF sequences were subcloned into the
expression plasmids pET-32a and expressed in Escherichia coli BL21, then the
expressed proteins were purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA
His-Bind Resin. Gel mobility shift assay was employed to screen the
transcriptional regulatory factor for CiGig2. The results revealed that the
recombinant polypeptides of CiIRF1, CiIRF2 and CiIRF3 bound to CiGig2 promoter
with high affinity; indicating that IRF1, IRF2 and IRF3 could be the potential
transcriptional regulatory factors for Gig2. Subsequently, CiGig2 promoter
sequence was cloned into pGL3-Basic vector and the ORFs of CiIRF1, CiIRF2 and
CiIRF3 were cloned into the expression plasmids pcDNA3.1 (+). Then, pGL3-CiGig2
promoter sequence and pcDNA3.1-CiIRFs were co-transfected into C. idella kidney
(CIK) cells. The in vivo effects of CiIRFs on CiGig2 promoter were measured by
dual-luciferase assays in the transfected CIK cells. Our results showed that the 
roles of CiIRFs were diversified in regulating CiGig2 transcription, e.g., CiIRF3
played a positive role in during this process; on the contrary CiIRF1 worked as a
suppressor; however the effect of CiIRF2 on CiGig2 transcription was not obvious.
For further study the roles of the three ISREs in CiGig2 transcription, we cloned
three mutant CiGig2 promoters called ISRE1mut-luc (deleted ISRE1), ISRE2mut-luc
(deleted ISRE2) and ISRE3mut-luc (deleted ISRE3), respectively. In vitro, gel
mobility shift assays showed that all three mutant promoters also were combined
with CiIRFs. CIK cells were co-transfected with CiGig2 promoter mutants
(ISRE1mut-luc, ISRE2mut-luc or ISRE3mut-luc, respectively) and pcDNA3.1-IRFs. The
results suggested that different ISRE played the diverse roles. ISRE2 is more
important than ISRE1 and ISRE3 to the transcription of CiGig2 induced by CiIRF1. 
ISRE1 and ISRE3 are important to the transcription of CiGig2 induced by CiIRF2
and CiIRF3.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genes Dev. 2014 Dec 1;28(23):2597-612. doi: 10.1101/gad.253302.114. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Inflammatory signaling regulates embryonic hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell
production.

Li Y(1), Esain V(2), Teng L(3), Xu J(4), Kwan W(2), Frost IM(2), Yzaguirre AD(1),
Cai X(1), Cortes M(2), Maijenburg MW(1), Tober J(1), Dzierzak E(5), Orkin SH(6), 
Tan K(7), North TE(8), Speck NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19014, USA; (2)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA; (4)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; (5)The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9YL, United Kingdom; (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA; (7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA; Department of Bioengineering, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA. (8)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA;
nancyas@exchange.upenn.edu tnorth@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Identifying signaling pathways that regulate hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cell (HSPC) formation in the embryo will guide efforts to produce and expand
HSPCs ex vivo. Here we show that sterile tonic inflammatory signaling regulates
embryonic HSPC formation. Expression profiling of progenitors with lymphoid
potential and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from aorta/gonad/mesonephros (AGM) 
regions of midgestation mouse embryos revealed a robust innate
immune/inflammatory signature. Mouse embryos lacking interferon <U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) or
IFN-a signaling and zebrafish morphants lacking IFN-<U+03B3> and IFN-<U+03D5> activity had
significantly fewer AGM HSPCs. Conversely, knockdown of IFN regulatory factor 2
(IRF2), a negative regulator of IFN signaling, increased expression of IFN target
genes and HSPC production in zebrafish. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
combined with sequencing (ChIP-seq) and expression analyses demonstrated that
IRF2-occupied genes identified in human fetal liver CD34(+) HSPCs are actively
transcribed in human and mouse HSPCs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
primitive myeloid population contributes to the local inflammatory response to
impact the scale of HSPC production in the AGM region. Thus, sterile inflammatory
signaling is an evolutionarily conserved pathway regulating the production of
HSPCs during embryonic development.

© 2014 Li et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248291
PMID: 25395663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 6;9(10):e109764. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109764.
eCollection 2014.

Association of functional polymorphisms in interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) 
with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus: a case-control association
study.

Kawasaki A(1), Furukawa H(2), Nishida N(3), Warabi E(4), Kondo Y(5), Ito S(6),
Matsumoto I(5), Kusaoi M(7), Amano H(7), Suda A(8), Nagaoka S(9), Setoguchi
K(10), Nagai T(11), Hirohata S(11), Shimada K(12), Sugii S(12), Okamoto A(13),
Chiba N(14), Suematsu E(15), Ohno S(16), Katayama M(17), Okamoto A(18), Kono
H(18), Tokunaga K(19), Takasaki Y(7), Hashimoto H(20), Sumida T(5), Tohma S(2),
Tsuchiya N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (2)Clinical Research Center for Allergy and 
Rheumatology, Sagamihara Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Research Center for Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center
for Global Health and Medicine, Ichikawa, Chiba, Japan. (4)Environmental
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (6)Department of Rheumatology,
Niigata Rheumatic Center, Shibata, Niigata, Japan. (7)Department of Internal
Medicine and Rheumatology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. 
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Yokohama Minami Kyosai Hospital, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, Japan; Center for Rheumatic Diseases, Yokohama City University Medical 
Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (9)Department of Rheumatology, Yokohama Minami
Kyosai Hospital, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (10)Allergy and Immunological
Diseases, Tokyo Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (11)Department of Rheumatology and Infectious Diseases,
Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, Tokyo Metropolitan Tama Medical Center, Fuchu,
Tokyo, Japan. (13)Department of Rheumatology, Himeji Medical Center, National
Hospital Organization, Himeji, Hyogo, Japan. (14)Department of Rheumatology,
Morioka Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Morioka, Iwate, Japan.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, Clinical Research
Institute, Kyushu Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, Fukuoka, Japan.
(16)Center for Rheumatic Diseases, Yokohama City University Medical Center,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (17)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya Medical
Center, National Hospital Organization, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan. (18)Department of
Internal Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(19)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (20)Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) negatively regulates type I interferon
(IFN) responses, while it plays a role in induction of Th1 differentiation.
Previous linkage and association studies in European-American populations
suggested genetic role of IRF2 in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE); however,
this observation has not yet been confirmed. No studies have been reported in the
Asian populations. Here we investigated whether IRF2 polymorphisms contribute to 
susceptibility to SLE in a Japanese population. Association study of 46 IRF2 tag 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) detected association of an intronic SNP,
rs13146124, with SLE. When the association was analyzed in 834 Japanese patients 
with SLE and 817 healthy controls, rs13146124 T was significantly increased in
SLE compared with healthy controls (dominant model, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.4×10(-4),
Bonferroni-corrected P [Pc]<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.026, odds ratio [OR] 1.48, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 1.18-1.85). To find causal SNPs, resequencing was performed by
next-generation sequencing. Twelve polymorphisms in linkage disequilibrium with
rs13146124 (r2: 0.30-1.00) were identified, among which significant association
was observed for rs66801661 (allele model, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.7×10(-4), Pc<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.037, OR 1.53,
95%CI 1.19-1.96) and rs62339994 (dominant model, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.0×10(-4), Pc<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.043, OR
1.46, 95%CI 1.17-1.82). The haplotype carrying both of the risk alleles
(rs66801661A-rs62339994A) was significantly increased in SLE (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.9×10(-4)),
while the haplotype constituted by both of the non-risk alleles
(rs66801661G-rs62339994G) was decreased (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0020). A reporter assay was
carried out to examine the effect of the IRF2 haplotypes on the transcriptional
activity, and association of the IRF2 risk haplotype with higher transcriptional 
activity was detected in Jurkat T cells under IFN<U+03B3> stimulation (Tukey's test,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.2×10(-4)). In conclusion, our observations supported the association of
IRF2 with susceptibility to SLE, and the risk haplotype was suggested to be
associated with transcriptional activation of IRF2.

PMCID: PMC4186848
PMID: 25285625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell Biochem Funct. 2014 Dec;32(8):630-6. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3050. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

Chimeric murine interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) binds to IRF-E (IRF
binding element), VREß (virus response element) but not to VREa1.

Prakash K(1), Kumar P, Mukherjee S, Rath PC.

Author information: 
(1)Recombinant DNA Technology Laboratory, Centre for Biological Science, Central 
University of Bihar, Patna, India; School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, India.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) is a multifunctional transcription factor 
having gene activation, repression and synergistic effect in conjunction with
IRF-1. IRF-2 is also involved in type I IFN signalling by repressing INFß gene.
So far, the molecular mechanism of its DNA binding activity remains elusive. We
have carried out molecular sub-cloning, expression and electrophoretically
mobility shift assay study of chimeric murine IRF-2. Here, we report expression
of chimeric murine IRF-2 as GST-IRF-2 fusion protein in Escherichia coli/BL21
cells and demonstrated DNA binding activity by gel retardation technique using
radio (32) P-labelled IRF-E motif (GAAAGT)4 , virus response element (VRE) of
human INFß and IFNa1 gene. We observed five different masses DNA/GST-IRF-2
complexes (1-5) with IRF-E motif, three different masses DNA/GST-IRF-2 complexes 
(1-3) with VREß , but we could not observe any complex of DNA/GST-IRF-2 with
VREa1 . The specific binding on IRF-E motif was confirmed by carrying out 100-X
fold cold competition with (32) P-labelled IRF-E motif. In contrast to specific
binding on VREß , we used negative control where we observed no binding complex, 
but we observed complexes with clones IPTG-induced extract. As far as binding on 
VREa1 is concerned, we could not observe any complex in negative control as well 
as in IPTG-inducible clones extract. Chimeric IRF-2 binds with IRF-E motif and
VREß but not with VREa1. This study is first of its kind and paves the way to
understand the differential DNA binding and molecular mechanism of DNA binding
activity of the IRF-2 molecule, which is crucial for its function(s).

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25251598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Feb;35(2):108-15. doi: 10.1089/jir.2014.0091.
Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Modulation of interferon activity-associated soluble molecules by appendicitis
and appendectomy limits colitis-identification of novel anti-colitic targets.

Cheluvappa R(1), Eri R, Luo AS, Grimm MC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine, St. George Clinical School, University of New South 
Wales , Sydney, Australia .

The therapeutic efficacy of interferons (IFNs) in ulcerative colitis is minimal. 
However, IFN activity-associated molecules have been inadequately investigated.
Appendicitis and appendectomy (AA), when done while young, protect against
colitis development later. Our novel murine AA model protects against colitis.
This therapeutic target-identifying study enumerates IFN activity-associated
molecules involved in this protection. Mice with 2 laparotomies were controls
(sham-sham/SS). Distal colons were harvested (4 AA-group colons and 4 SS-group
colons). Microarray-analysis/reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction-validation was done from RNA from each (3-days/28-days-post-AA). Gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) software was used to analyze distal colonic gene
sets associated with 46 IFN activity-related genes. More AA-upregulated gene sets
were associated with IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, IRF7, IFI35, and IFI44 (False Discovery
Rate-FDR <5% and P<0.001), although only IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, and IFI44 showed
individual gene upregulation (P<0.05). More AA-downregulated gene sets were
associated with IRF1, IRF2, IRF4, IRF8, IRF9, IRF2BP1, IFRD1, IFRD2, and IFIH1
(FDR <5%/P<0.001); although only IRF2BP1 showed individual gene downregulation
(P<0.05). There was significant upregulation (P<0.05) of IFNZ; and downregulation
of IRF2BP2 and IFI30, despite no major associated GSEA differences. IFIT1, IFIT2,
IFIT3, and IFI44, with profound AA-induced individual/GSEA upregulation, and
their immunomodulatory/ antiproliferative activity, are the best molecules to
investigate therapeutic potential. IRF4, IRF8, IRF2BP1, IFRD1, and IFRD2, owing
to their profound AA-induced gene set downregulation, and because of their
diverse lymphocytic activity, are good targets to competitively inhibit or to
treat with exogenous products in knockout animals.

PMCID: PMC4312794
PMID: 25243802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Pancreas. 2014 Oct;43(7):1125-6. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000207.

Variants in the interferon regulatory factor-2 gene are not associated with
pancreatitis in Japan.

Nakano E(1), Masamune A, Kume K, Kakuta Y, Shimosegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine
Sendai, Japan amasamune@med.tohoku.ac.jp.

PMID: 25207663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cancer Radiother. 2014 Oct;18(5-6):437-40. doi: 10.1016/j.canrad.2014.07.156.
Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Dose rate in brachytherapy using after-loading machine: pulsed or high-dose rate?

Hannoun-Lévi JM(1), Peiffert D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de radiothérapie oncologie, centre Antoine-Lacassagne, université 
Nice-Sophia, 33, avenue de Valombrose, 06000 Nice, France. Electronic address:
jean-michel.hannoun-levi@nice.unicancer.fr. (2)Département de radiothérapie
oncologie, institut de cancérologie de Lorraine Alexis-Vautrin, 6, avenue de
Bourgogne, 54500 Vanduvre-lès-Nancy, France.

Since February 2014, it is no longer possible to use low-dose rate 192 iridium
wires due to the end of industrial production of IRF1 and IRF2 sources. The
Brachytherapy Group of the French society of radiation oncology (GC-SFRO) has
recommended switching from iridium wires to after-loading machines. Two types of 
after-loading machines are currently available, based on the dose rate used:
pulsed-dose rate or high-dose rate. In this article, we propose a comparative
analysis between pulsed-dose rate and high-dose rate brachytherapy, based on
biological, technological, organizational and financial considerations.

Copyright © 2014 Société française de radiothérapie oncologique (SFRO). Published
by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25195117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Kidney Int. 2015 Feb;87(2):332-42. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.270. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Innate immunity pathways regulate the nephropathy gene Apolipoprotein L1.

Nichols B(1), Jog P(1), Lee JH(1), Blackler D(1), Wilmot M(1), D'Agati V(2),
Markowitz G(2), Kopp JB(3), Alper SL(4), Pollak MR(5), Friedman DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Renal Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA [2] Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA. (3)Kidney Diseases Branch, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (4)Renal Division, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)1] Renal Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA [2] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2015 Feb;87(2):270-2.

Apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) risk variants greatly elevate the risk of kidney
disease in African Americans. Here we report a cohort of patients who developed
collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis while receiving therapeutic
interferon, all of whom carried the APOL1 high-risk genotype. This finding raised
the possibility that interferons and the molecular pattern recognition receptors 
that stimulate interferon production may contribute to APOL1-associated kidney
disease. In cell culture, interferons and Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists
increased APOL1 expression by up to 200-fold, in some cases with the appearance
of transcripts not detected under basal conditions. PolyI:C, a double-stranded
RNA TLR3 agonist, increased APOL1 expression by upregulating interferons directly
or through an interferon-independent, IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent
pathway. Using pharmacological inhibitors, small hairpin RNA knockdown, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that the interferon-independent TLR3
pathway relied on signaling through TBK1, NF-<U+03BA>B, and Jak kinases, and on binding 
of IRF1, IRF2, and STAT2 at the APOL1 transcription start site. We also
demonstrate that overexpression of the APOL1 risk variants is more injurious to
cells than overexpression of the wild-type APOL1 protein. Our study illustrates
that antiviral pathways may be important inducers of kidney disease in
individuals with the APOL1 high-risk genotype and identifies potential targets
for prevention or treatment.

PMCID: PMC4312530
PMID: 25100047  [PubMed - in process]


29. Gut. 2015 May;64(5):820-9. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306228. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Integration of tumour and viral genomic characterizations in HBV-related
hepatocellular carcinomas.

Amaddeo G(1), Cao Q(1), Ladeiro Y(1), Imbeaud S(1), Nault JC(1), Jaoui D(2),
Gaston Mathe Y(2), Laurent C(3), Laurent A(4), Bioulac-Sage P(5), Calderaro J(6),
Zucman-Rossi J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR-674, Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, IUH, Paris,
France Université Paris Descartes, Labex Immuno-oncology, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France. (2)Hypercube research, France. (3)Department 
of Surgery, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. (4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, digestive, hepatobiliary and liver transplantation, CHU Henri Mondor,
Créteil, France IMRB-Inserm U955 Equipe n. 18 "Virologie moleculaire et
immunologie -Physiopathologie et therapeutique des Hépatites virales chroniques",
Créteil, France. (5)Inserm, UMR-1053; Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2,
Bordeaux, France Department of Pathology, CHU de Bordeaux, Pellegrin Hospital,
Bordeaux, France. (6)Inserm, UMR-674, Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs
solides, IUH, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Labex Immuno-oncology,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France Department of Pathology, 
CHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. (7)Inserm, UMR-674, Génomique fonctionnelle
des tumeurs solides, IUH, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Labex
Immuno-oncology, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France Hopital 
Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Gut. 2015 May;64(5):853-4.
    Gut. 2015 May;64(5):852-3.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common liver
cancer. We characterised HCC associated with infection compared with
non-HBV-related HCC to understand interactions between viral and hepatocyte
genomic alterations and their relationships with clinical features.
METHODS: Frozen HBV (n=86) or non-HBV-related (n=90) HCC were collected in two
French surgical departments. Viral characterisation was performed by sequencing
HBS and HBX genes and quantifying HBV DNA and cccDNA. Nine genes were screened
for somatic mutations and expression profiling of 37 genes involved in
hepatocarcinogenesis was studied.
RESULTS: HBX revealed frequent non-sense, frameshift and deletions in tumours,
suggesting an HBX inactivation selected in HCC. The number of viral copies was
frequently lower in tumour than in non-tumour tissues (p=0.0005) and patients
with low HBV copies in the non-tumour liver tissues presented additional risk
factor (HCV, alcohol or non-alcoholic steato-hepatitis, p=0.006). P53 was the
most frequently altered pathway in HBV-related HCC (47%, p=0.001). Furthermore,
TP53 mutations were associated with shorter survival only in HBV-related HCC
(p=0.02) whereas R249S mutations were identified exclusively in migrants.
Compared with other aetiologies, HBV-HCC were more frequently classified in
tumours subgroups with upregulation of genes involved in cell-cycle regulation
and a progenitor phenotype. Finally, in HBV-related HCC, transcriptomic profiles 
were associated with specific gene mutations (HBX, TP53, IRF2, AXIN1 and CTNNB1).
CONCLUSIONS: Integrated genomic characterisation of HBV and non-HBV-related HCC
emphasised the immense molecular diversity of HCC closely related to aetiologies 
that could impact clinical care of HCC patients.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4392232
PMID: 25021421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5863-72. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203230. Epub 2014 
May 7.

Human dendritic cells exhibit a pronounced type I IFN signature following
Leishmania major infection that is required for IL-12 induction.

Favila MA(1), Geraci NS(1), Zeng E(2), Harker B(2), Condon D(1), Cotton RN(1),
Jayakumar A(1), Tripathi V(1), McDowell MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556; and. (2)Genomics and Bioinformatics Core
Facility, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556. (3)Department of
Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN 46556; and mcdowell.11@nd.edu.

Leishmania major-infected human dendritic cells (DCs) exhibit a marked induction 
of IL-12, ultimately promoting a robust Th1-mediated response associated with
parasite killing and protective immunity. The host cell transcription machinery
associated with the specific IL-12 induction observed during L. major infection
remains to be thoroughly elucidated. In this study, we used Affymetrix GeneChip
(Affymetrix) to globally assess the host cell genes and pathways associated with 
early L. major infection in human myeloid-derived DCs. Our data revealed 728
genes were significantly differentially expressed and molecular signaling pathway
revealed that the type I IFN pathway was significantly enriched. Addition of a
neutralizing type I IFN decoy receptor blocked the expression of IRF7 and
IL-12p40 during DC infection, indicating the L. major-induced expression of
IL-12p40 is dependent upon the type I IFN signaling pathway. In stark contrast,
IL-12p40 expression is not elicited by L. donovani, the etiological agent of
deadly visceral leishmaniasis. Therefore, we examined the gene expression profile
for several IFN response genes in L. major versus L. donovani DC infections. Our 
data revealed that L. major, but not L. donovani, induces expression of IRF2,
IRF7, and IFIT5, implicating the regulation of type I IFN-associated signaling
pathways as mediating factors toward the production of IL-12.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4052223
PMID: 24808365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Pancreas. 2014 Aug;43(6):909-16. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000116.

The roles of interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2 in the progression of human
pancreatic cancer.

Sakai T(1), Mashima H, Yamada Y, Goto T, Sato W, Dohmen T, Kamada K, Yoshioka M, 
Uchinami H, Yamamoto Y, Ohnishi H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of *Gastroenterology and Gastroenterological Surgery,
Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Pancreatic cancer is one of the most malignant diseases worldwide.
Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 and IRF2 function as a tumor suppressor and 
oncoprotein, respectively, in several types of cancers. We investigated whether
IRF1 and IRF2 are involved in the progression of pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: We examined the expressions of IRF1 and IRF2 in pancreatic cancer
specimens and analyzed the association with clinicopathologic features. We
evaluated the biological effects of IRF1 and IRF2 using a pancreatic cancer cell 
line.
RESULTS: The expression levels of IRF1 and IRF2 were decreased and increased,
respectively, in the pancreatic cancer cells compared with those observed in the 
paired normal areas. A higher expression of IRF1 was associated with better
features of tumor differentiation, infiltration depth, tumor size, and survival, 
whereas that of IRF2 was associated with a worse feature of tumor infiltration
depth. Interferon regulatory factor 2-overexpressing PANC-1 cells exhibited an
increase in cell growth, less apoptotic features, and chemoresistance to
gemcitabine treatment. In contrast, IRF1-overexpressing cells exhibited the
opposite characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2 may regulate the progression
of pancreatic cancer by functioning as an antioncoprotein and oncoprotein,
respectively. These molecules may serve as potential targets of therapy.

PMID: 24632547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;74(9):2591-603. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1606. Epub
2014 Mar 7.

Survival in patients with high-risk prostate cancer is predicted by miR-221,
which regulates proliferation, apoptosis, and invasion of prostate cancer cells
by inhibiting IRF2 and SOCS3.

Kneitz B(1), Krebs M, Kalogirou C, Schubert M, Joniau S, van Poppel H, Lerut E,
Kneitz S, Scholz CJ, Ströbel P, Gessler M, Riedmiller H, Spahn M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Urology and Paediatric Urology,
University Hospital Wuerzburg; IZKF Laboratory for Microarray Applications,
University Hospital Wuerzburg; Departments of Physiological Chemistry I;
Developmental Biochemistry, Biocenter; Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken,
University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg; Department of Pathology, University Hospital 
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany; Department of Urology, University Hospital Bern,
Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland; and Departments of Urology and Pathology,
University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

A lack of reliably informative biomarkers to distinguish indolent and lethal
prostate cancer is one reason this disease is overtreated. miR-221 has been
suggested as a biomarker in high-risk prostate cancer, but there is insufficient 
evidence of its potential utility. Here we report that miR-221 is an independent 
predictor for cancer-related death, extending and validating earlier findings. By
mechanistic investigations we showed that miR-221 regulates cell growth,
invasiveness, and apoptosis in prostate cancer at least partially via
STAT1/STAT3-mediated activation of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. miR-221
directly inhibits the expression of SOCS3 and IRF2, two oncogenes that negatively
regulate this signaling pathway. miR-221 expression sensitized prostate cancer
cells for IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated growth inhibition. Our findings suggest that miR-221
offers a novel prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target in high-risk prostate 
cancer.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24607843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1246949. doi: 10.1126/science.1246949.

Innate immune activity conditions the effect of regulatory variants upon monocyte
gene expression.

Fairfax BP(1), Humburg P, Makino S, Naranbhai V, Wong D, Lau E, Jostins L, Plant 
K, Andrews R, McGee C, Knight JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1087-8.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Apr;14(4):212.

To systematically investigate the impact of immune stimulation upon regulatory
variant activity, we exposed primary monocytes from 432 healthy Europeans to
interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) or differing durations of lipopolysaccharide and mapped
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). More than half of cis-eQTLs
identified, involving hundreds of genes and associated pathways, are detected
specifically in stimulated monocytes. Induced innate immune activity reveals
multiple master regulatory trans-eQTLs including the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC), coding variants altering enzyme and receptor function, an IFN-ß
cytokine network showing temporal specificity, and an interferon regulatory
factor 2 (IRF2) transcription factor-modulated network. Induced eQTL are
significantly enriched for genome-wide association study loci, identifying
context-specific associations to putative causal genes including CARD9, ATM, and 
IRF8. Thus, applying pathophysiologically relevant immune stimuli assists
resolution of functional genetic variants.

PMCID: PMC4064786
PMID: 24604202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Dec 21;19(47):8873-9. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i47.8873.

Target genes discovery through copy number alteration analysis in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gu DL(1), Chen YH(1), Shih JH(1), Lin CH(1), Jou YS(1), Chen CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)De-Leung Gu, Yen-Hsieh Chen, Jou-Ho Shih, Yuh-Shan Jou, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

High-throughput short-read sequencing of exomes and whole cancer genomes in
multiple human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cohorts confirmed previously
identified frequently mutated somatic genes, such as TP53, CTNNB1 and AXIN1, and 
identified several novel genes with moderate mutation frequencies, including
ARID1A, ARID2, MLL, MLL2, MLL3, MLL4, IRF2, ATM, CDKN2A, FGF19, PIK3CA, RPS6KA3, 
JAK1, KEAP1, NFE2L2, C16orf62, LEPR, RAC2, and IL6ST. Functional classification
of these mutated genes suggested that alterations in pathways participating in
chromatin remodeling, Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, JAK/STAT signaling, and oxidative 
stress play critical roles in HCC tumorigenesis. Nevertheless, because there are 
few druggable genes used in HCC therapy, the identification of new therapeutic
targets through integrated genomic approaches remains an important task. Because 
a large amount of HCC genomic data genotyped by high density single nucleotide
polymorphism arrays is deposited in the public domain, copy number alteration
(CNA) analyses of these arrays is a cost-effective way to reveal target genes
through profiling of recurrent and overlapping amplicons, homozygous deletions
and potentially unbalanced chromosomal translocations accumulated during HCC
progression. Moreover, integration of CNAs with other high-throughput genomic
data, such as aberrantly coding transcriptomes and non-coding gene expression in 
human HCC tissues and rodent HCC models, provides lines of evidence that can be
used to facilitate the identification of novel HCC target genes with the
potential of improving the survival of HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC3870538
PMID: 24379610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):145-50. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.029. Epub 2013 Nov
27.

Array CGH analysis of a cohort of Russian patients with intellectual disability.

Kashevarova AA(1), Nazarenko LP(2), Skryabin NA(2), Salyukova OA(2), Chechetkina 
NN(2), Tolmacheva EN(2), Sazhenova EA(2), Magini P(3), Graziano C(3), Romeo G(3),
Kucinskas V(4), Lebedev IN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russia. Electronic address:
anna.kashevarova@medgenetics.ru. (2)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russia.
(3)University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (4)Vilnius University, Department of
Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania.

The use of array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) as a diagnostic
tool in molecular genetics has facilitated the identification of many new
microdeletion/microduplication syndromes (MMSs). Furthermore, this method has
allowed for the identification of copy number variations (CNVs) whose pathogenic 
role has yet to be uncovered. Here, we report on our application of array CGH for
the identification of pathogenic CNVs in 79 Russian children with intellectual
disability (ID). Twenty-six pathogenic or likely pathogenic changes in copy
number were detected in 22 patients (28%): 8 CNVs corresponded to known MMSs, and
17 were not associated with previously described syndromes. In this report, we
describe our findings and comment on genes potentially associated with ID that
are located within the CNV regions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24291026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Fish Dis. 2014 Dec;37(12):1041-54. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12182. Epub 2013 Sep 24.

Disease resistance and immune-relevant gene expression in golden mandarin fish,
Siniperca scherzeri Steindachner, infected with infectious spleen and kidney
necrosis virus-like agent.

Shin GW(1), White SL, Dahms HU, Jeong HD, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Fundamental Research Department, National Fisheries Research and Development
Institute, Busan, Korea.

Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV), family Iridoviridae, genus
Megalocytivirus, may cause high mortality rates such as those seen in mandarin
fish, Siniperca chuatsi. ISKNV has attracted much attention due to the possible
environmental threat and economic losses it poses on both cultured and wild
populations. We have investigated the pathogenicity of ISKNV-like agent
Megalocytivirus, isolated from infected pearl gourami, in golden mandarin fish,
Siniperca scherzeri - a member of the Percichthyidae family - and in another
Percichthyidae species, S. chuatsi. Fish were challenged with four different
doses of ISKNV-like agent Megalocytivirus (1, 10, 100 or 1000 µg per fish) over a
30-day period, and cumulative fish mortalities were calculated for each group. No
significant mortality was observed for fish challenged with the lowest dose (1 µg
per fish) relative to a control group. However, all other challenged groups
showed 100% mortality over a 30-day period in proportion to the challenge dose.
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed to measure mRNA expression levels for
six immune-related genes in golden mandarin fish following ISKNV-like agent
challenge. mRNA expression levels for IRF1, Mx, viperin and interleukin 8
significantly increased, while mRNA levels for IRF2 and IRF7 remained constant or
declined during the challenge period.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24111797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3753-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202341. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

Expression of the immune regulator tripartite-motif 21 is controlled by IFN
regulatory factors.

Sjöstrand M(1), Ambrosi A, Brauner S, Sullivan J, Malin S, Kuchroo VK, Espinosa
A, Wahren-Herlenius M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76
Stockholm, Sweden;

Tripartite-motif 21 (TRIM21) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates innate
immune responses by ubiquitinating IFN regulatory factors (IRFs). TRIM21 is
mainly found in hematopoietic cells in which its expression is induced by IFNs
during viral. infections and in systemic autoimmune diseases such as systemic
lupus erythematosus and Sjögren's syndrome. However, the exact molecular
mechanism by which the expression of the Trim21 gene is regulated is unknown. In 
this study, we demonstrate that IFNs induce Trim21 expression in immune cells via
IRFs and that IFN-a and IFN-ß are the most potent inducers of Trim21. A
functional IFN-stimulated response element but no conserved IFN-<U+03B3>-activated site 
was detected in the promoter of Trim21. IRF1 and IRF2 strongly induced Trim21
expression in an IFN-stimulated response element-dependent manner, whereas IRF4
and IRF8 strongly repressed the IRF1-mediated induction of Trim21. Consistent
with this observation, baseline expression of Trim21 was elevated in Irf4(-/-)
cells. TRIM21, IRF1, and IRF2 expression was increased in PBMCs from patients
with Sjögren's syndrome compared with healthy controls. In contrast, IRF4 and
IRF8 expression was not increased in PBMCs from patients. The IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated
induction of Trim21 was completely abolished by inhibiting protein synthesis with
cycloheximide, and Trim21 expression could not be induced by IFN-<U+03B3> in Irf1(-/-)
cells, demonstrating that IFN-<U+03B3> induces Trim21 indirectly via IRF1 and not
directly via STAT1 activation. Our data demonstrate that multiple IRFs tightly
regulate expression of Trim21 in immune cells, suggesting that a well-controlled 
expression of the E3 ligase TRIM21 is important for regulation of immune
responses.

PMID: 23975864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Gut. 2014 Apr;63(4):665-73. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-304377. Epub 2013 Jun 20.

Dysregulation of interferon regulatory factors impairs the expression of
immunostimulatory molecules in hepatitis C virus genotype 1-infected hepatocytes.

Larrea E(1), Riezu-Boj JI, Aldabe R, Guembe L, Echeverria I, Balasiddaiah A,
Gastaminza P, Civeira MP, Sarobe P, Prieto J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy, Center for Applied Medical Research
(CIMA), , Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: IL-7 and IL-15 are produced by hepatocytes and are critical for the
expansion and function of CD8 T cells. IL-15 needs to be presented by IL-15Ra for
efficient stimulation of CD8 T cells.
METHODS: We analysed the hepatic levels of IL-7, IL-15, IL-15Ra and interferon
regulatory factors (IRF) in patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC) (78% genotype
1) and the role of IRF1 and IRF2 on IL-7 and IL-15Ra expression in Huh7 cells
with or without hepatitis C virus (HCV) replicon.
RESULTS: Hepatic expression of both IL-7 and IL-15Ra, but not of IL-15, was
reduced in CHC. These patients exhibited decreased hepatic IRF2 messenger RNA
levels and diminished IRF2 staining in hepatocyte nuclei. We found that IRF2
controls basal expression of both IL-7 and IL-15Ra in Huh7 cells. IRF2, but not
IRF1, is downregulated in cells with HCV genotype 1b replicon and this was
accompanied by decreased expression of IL-7 and IL-15Ra, a defect reversed by
overexpressing IRF2. Treating Huh7 cells with IFNa plus oncostatin M increased
IL-7 and IL-15Ra mRNA more intensely than either cytokine alone. This effect was 
mediated by strong upregulation of IRF1 triggered by the combined treatment.
Induction of IRF1, IL-7 and IL-15Ra by IFNa plus oncostatin M was dampened in
replicon cells but the combination was more effective than either cytokine alone.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV genotype 1 infection downregulates IRF2 in hepatocytes
attenuating hepatocellular expression of IL-7 and IL-15Ra. Our data reveal a new 
mechanism by which HCV abrogates specific T-cell responses and point to a novel
therapeutic approach to stimulate anti-HCV immunity.

PMID: 23787026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(15):2843-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00003-13. Epub 2013 May 
20.

Immune mediators regulate CFTR expression through a bifunctional airway-selective
enhancer.

Zhang Z(1), Leir SH, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, and
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

An airway-selective DNase-hypersensitive site (DHS) at kb -35 (DHS-35kb) 5' to
the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene is evident in
many lung cell lines and primary human tracheal epithelial cells but is absent
from intestinal epithelia. The DHS-35kb contains an element with enhancer
activity in 16HBE14o- airway epithelial cells and is enriched for monomethylated 
H3K4 histones (H3K4me1). We now define a 350-bp region within DHS-35kb which has 
full enhancer activity and binds interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) and
nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) in vitro and in vivo. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated depletion of IRF1 or overexpression of IRF2, an antagonist of
IRF1, reduces CFTR expression in 16HBE14o- cells. NF-Y is critical for
maintenance of H3K4me1 enrichment at DHS-35kb since depletion of NF-YA, a subunit
of NF-Y, reduces H3K4me1 enrichment at this site. Moreover, depletion of SETD7,
an H3K4 monomethyltransferase, reduces both H3K4me1 and NF-Y occupancy,
suggesting a requirement of H3K4me1 for NF-Y binding. NF-Y depletion also
represses Sin3A and reduces its occupancy across the CFTR locus, which is
accompanied by an increase in p300 enrichment at multiple sites. Our results
reveal that the DHS-35kb airway-selective enhancer element plays a pivotal role
in regulation of CFTR expression by two independent regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3719672
PMID: 23689137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;132(2):313-20.e15. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.01.051. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Genome-wide association study identifies TH1 pathway genes associated with lung
function in asthmatic patients.

Li X(1), Hawkins GA, Ampleford EJ, Moore WC, Li H, Hastie AT, Howard TD, Boushey 
HA, Busse WW, Calhoun WJ, Castro M, Erzurum SC, Israel E, Lemanske RF Jr, Szefler
SJ, Wasserman SI, Wenzel SE, Peters SP, Meyers DA, Bleecker ER.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. xinli@wakehealth.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies in general
populations of European descent have identified 28 loci for lung function.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to identify novel lung function loci specifically for asthma
and to confirm lung function loci identified in general populations.
METHODS: Genome-wide association studies of lung function (percent predicted FEV1
[ppFEV1], percent predicted forced vital capacity, and FEV1/forced vital capacity
ratio) were performed in 4 white populations of European descent (n = 1544),
followed by meta-analyses.
RESULTS: Seven of 28 previously identified lung function loci (HHIP, FAM13A,
THSD4, GSTCD, NOTCH4-AGER, RARB, and ZNF323) identified in general populations
were confirmed at single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) levels (P < .05). Four of 
32 loci (IL12A, IL12RB1, STAT4, and IRF2) associated with ppFEV1 (P < 10(-4))
belong to the TH1 or IL-12 cytokine family pathway. By using a linear additive
model, these 4 TH1 pathway SNPs cumulatively explained 2.9% to 7.8% of the
variance in ppFEV1 values in 4 populations (P = 3 × 10(-11)). Genetic scores of
these 4 SNPs were associated with ppFEV1 values (P = 2 × 10(-7)) and the American
Thoracic Society severe asthma classification (P = .005) in the Severe Asthma
Research Program population. TH2 pathway genes (IL13, TSLP, IL33, and IL1RL1)
conferring asthma susceptibility were not associated with lung function.
CONCLUSION: Genes involved in airway structure/remodeling are associated with
lung function in both general populations and asthmatic subjects. TH1 pathway
genes involved in anti-virus/bacterial infection and inflammation modify lung
function in asthmatic subjects. Genes associated with lung function that might
affect asthma severity are distinct from those genes associated with asthma
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3746327
PMID: 23541324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Liver Int. 2013 Aug;33(7):991-8. doi: 10.1111/liv.12148. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

IL28B genotype and the expression of ISGs in normal liver.

Raglow Z(1), Thoma-Perry C, Gilroy R, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology & Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Both polymorphisms in the IL28B gene locus and ISG expression 
levels are associated with the outcome of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. The 
two are also interrelated, although the mechanism is unknown. Favourable CC
genotype at rs12979860 expresses lower baseline ISG levels and responds better to
treatment than unfavourable CT and TT genotypes. Little is known about this
relationship in normal, uninfected liver. This study sought to explore this
relationship.
METHODS: Normal human liver specimens (64) and HCV positive human liver specimens
(95) were genotyped for IL28B rs12979860 C > T. mRNA levels of ISGs and other
relevant genes were studied by qPCR.
RESULTS: Most studied ISGs had significantly different expression by IL28B
genotype in normal liver. CC genotype expressed the highest levels, CT
intermediate and TT the lowest. This is opposite to the pattern seen in HCV
patients. Principal component analysis of IL28B genotype and ISG expression
further revealed a distinct set of genes correlated with the C allele (ISG15,
HTATIP2, LGALS3BP, IRF2 and BCL2) and T allele (IFNa, ß, <U+03B3>, <U+03BB>3 and CD80).
CONCLUSION: A subset of ISGs was found to be differentially expressed in normal
liver by IL28B genotype. This suggests a relationship between IL28B genotype and 
gene expression before HCV infection.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23522062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Cell Sci. 2013 May 1;126(Pt 9):1969-80. doi: 10.1242/jcs.118174. Epub 2013 Mar 
13.

BAL1/ARTD9 represses the anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic IFN<U+03B3>-STAT1-IRF1-p53
axis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Camicia R(1), Bachmann SB, Winkler HC, Beer M, Tinguely M, Haralambieva E, Hassa 
PO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

The B-aggressive lymphoma-1 protein and ADP-ribosyltransferase BAL1/ARTD9 has
been recently identified as a risk-related gene product in aggressive diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). BAL1 is constitutively expressed in a subset of
high-risk DLBCLs with an active host inflammatory response and has been suggested
to be associated with interferon-related gene expression. Here we identify BAL1
as a novel oncogenic survival factor in DLBCL and show that constitutive
overexpression of BAL1 in DLBCL tightly associates with intrinsic
interferon-gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) signaling and constitutive activity of signal transducer 
and activator of transcription (STAT)-1. Remarkably, BAL1 stimulates the
phosphorylation of both STAT1 isoforms, STAT1a and STAT1ß, on Y701 and thereby
promotes the nuclear accumulation of the antagonistically acting and
transcriptionally repressive isoform STAT1ß. Moreover, BAL1 physically interacts 
with both STAT1a and STAT1ß through its macrodomains in an
ADP-ribosylation-dependent manner. BAL1 directly inhibits, together with STAT1ß, 
the expression of tumor suppressor and interferon response factor (IRF)-1.
Conversely, BAL1 enhances the expression of the proto-oncogenes IRF2 and B-cell
CLL/lymphoma (BCL)-6 in DLBCL. Our results show for the first time that BAL1
represses the anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic IFN<U+03B3>-STAT1-IRF1-p53 axis and
mediates proliferation, survival and chemo-resistance in DLBCL. As a consequence 
constitutive IFN<U+03B3>-STAT1 signaling does not lead to apoptosis but rather to
chemo-resistance in DLBCL overexpressing BAL1. Our results suggest that BAL1 may 
induce an switch in STAT1 from a tumor suppressor to an oncogene in high-risk
DLBCL.

PMID: 23487038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Blood. 2013 Apr 18;121(16):3267-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-443713. Epub 2013 
Feb 14.

Novel interferon-based pre-transplantation conditioning in the treatment of a
congenital metabolic disorder.

Sato T(1), Ikeda M, Yotsumoto S, Shimada Y, Higuchi T, Kobayashi H, Fukuda T,
Ohashi T, Suda T, Ohteki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biodefense Research, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-5810, Japan.

Hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) gene therapy is a potentially curative treatment
modality for monogenic hematological diseases and storage disorders. It is
necessary, however, to establish pre-bone marrow (BM) transplant conditioning
regimens that minimize DNA damage and toxicity. Type I interferon (IFN) signaling
activates quiescent HSCs and enables them to be sensitive to 5-fluorouracil
(FU)-mediated cytotoxicity, thus implying a molecular basis for improving HSC
transplant outcomes. Here we show that type I IFN preconditioning, without
irradiation or DNA alkylating agents, significantly enhanced the HSC engraftment 
efficiency in wild-type (WT) recipient mice. The importance of active type I IFN 
signaling in HSC recipients was further demonstrated using mice lacking IFN
regulatory factor 2 (IRF2), a transcriptional suppressor of type I IFN signaling.
In both WT and Irf2(-/-) recipients, active type I IFN signaling greatly enhanced
the sensitivity to 5-FU or low-dose irradiation of HSCs. Importantly, IFN-based
pre-BM transplant conditioning was also applicable to the treatment of Sly
syndrome, a congenital storage disorder with ß-glucuronidase deficiency, in which
it restored enzyme expression at the HSC level and reciprocally reduced
pathological glycosaminoglycan storage. Our findings suggest type I IFN-based
preconditioning, combined with HSC transplantation, as a novel nongenotoxic
treatment of some congenital diseases.

PMID: 23412092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncoimmunology. 2012 Dec 1;1(9):1612-1613.

Next-generation sequencing identified new oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in
human hepatic tumors.

Amaddeo G(1), Guichard C, Imbeaud S, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR-674; Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides; IUH; Paris,
France ; Université Paris Descartes; Labex Immuno-oncology; Faculté de Médecine; 
Sorbonne Paris Cité; Paris, France.

Genetic studies were performed in a French series of hepatocellular carcinomas.
New oncogenes (NFE2L2) and tumor suppressor genes (IRF2, ARID1A and RPS6K3) were 
found to be recurrently altered. Moreover, a genotoxic signature was identified, 
raising the possible implication of a genotoxic exposure in the etiology of HCC, 
which remains to be characterized.

PMCID: PMC3525620
PMID: 23264911  [PubMed]


47. Eur Urol. 2013 Apr;63(4):745-52. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2012.09.052. Epub 2012 Sep
28.

STAT3 polymorphism can predict the response to interferon-a therapy in patients
with metastatic renal cell carcinoma.

Eto M(1), Kamba T, Miyake H, Fujisawa M, Kamai T, Uemura H, Tsukamoto T, Azuma H,
Matsubara A, Nishimura K, Nakamura T, Ogawa O, Naito S; Japan Immunotherapy
SNPs-Study Group for Kidney Cancer.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In our 2007 retrospective study, we reported that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3
(acute-phase response factor) (STAT3) gene were significantly associated with
better response to interferon (IFN)-a in patients with metastatic renal cell
carcinoma (mRCC).
OBJECTIVE: To prospectively confirm those results, the Japan Immunotherapy
SNPs-Study Group for Kidney Cancer conducted this trial.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this multicenter, prospective study, 203
eligible patients were enrolled. We evaluated the correlation between the
antitumor effects of IFN-a and 11 SNPs (STAT3-2, STAT3-0, SOCS3-1, IL4R-34,
PTGS1-3, PTGS1-4, PTGS1-5, PTGS2-12, IRF2-67, ICSBP-38, and TAP2-5) in eight
genes in 180 patients who received IFN-a for >12 wk.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were treated with three doses per week of IFN-a 5 million
IU.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: We analyzed the association of
response to IFN-a and overall survival (OS) with genetic polymorphisms using a
chi-square test and a logistic regression model.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: The response rate of IFN-a was 13.8% (28 of 203
patients; 9 complete responses [CRs], 19 partial responses [PRs]). The CR rate of
4.4% was higher than we expected. Response to IFN-a was not associated with any
of the 11 SNPs examined. However, when we assessed patients with CR, PR, and
stable disease >24 wk as a group representing those with clinical response, a
significant association was observed between STAT3-2 (rs1905341) and the clinical
response of IFN-a (p=0.039). Namely, C/C genotype of STAT3-2 was significantly
associated with the clinical response of IFN-a and OS. These results were
generated in Japanese patients and should be studied in other ethnic groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first prospective study demonstrating that a STAT3
polymorphism can be a predictive marker for treatment with IFN-a for patients
with mRCC.

Copyright © 2012 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 23063454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Cell. 2012 Oct 16;23(4):796-811. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.09.003. Epub 2012
Oct 4.

Combinatorial assembly of developmental stage-specific enhancers controls gene
expression programs during human erythropoiesis.

Xu J(1), Shao Z, Glass K, Bauer DE, Pinello L, Van Handel B, Hou S,
Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Mikkola HK, Yuan GC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gene-distal enhancers are critical for tissue-specific gene expression, but their
genomic determinants within a specific lineage at different stages of development
are unknown. Here we profile chromatin state maps, transcription factor
occupancy, and gene expression profiles during human erythroid development at
fetal and adult stages. Comparative analyses of human erythropoiesis identify
developmental stage-specific enhancers as primary determinants of stage-specific 
gene expression programs. We find that erythroid master regulators GATA1 and TAL1
act cooperatively within active enhancers but confer little predictive value for 
stage specificity. Instead, a set of stage-specific coregulators collaborates
with master regulators and contributes to differential gene expression. We
further identify and validate IRF2, IRF6, and MYB as effectors of an adult-stage 
expression program. Thus, the combinatorial assembly of lineage-specific master
regulators and transcriptional coregulators within developmental stage-specific
enhancers determines gene expression programs and temporal regulation of
transcriptional networks in a mammalian genome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477283
PMID: 23041383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Sep 1;303(5):G666-73. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00050.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 is protective against hepatic ischemia-reperfusion
injury.

Klune JR(1), Dhupar R, Kimura S, Ueki S, Cardinal J, Nakao A, Nace G, Evankovich 
J, Murase N, Tsung A, Geller DA.

Author information: 
(1)Starzl Transplantation Institute, Department of Surgery, University of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 is a nuclear transcription factor that
induces inflammatory cytokine mediators and contributes to hepatic
ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. No strategies to mitigate IRF1-mediated liver 
damage exist. IRF2 is a structurally similar endogenous protein that competes
with IRF1 for DNA binding sites in IRF-responsive target genes and acts as a
competitive inhibitor. However, the role of IRF2 in hepatic injury during hypoxic
or inflammatory conditions is unknown. We hypothesize that IRF2 overexpression
may mitigate IRF1-mediated I/R damage. Endogenous IRF2 is basally expressed in
normal livers and is mildly increased by ischemia alone. Overexpression of IRF2
protects against hepatic warm I/R injury. Furthermore, we demonstrate that IRF2
overexpression limits production of IRF1-dependent proinflammatory genes, such as
IL-12, IFNß, and inducible nitric oxide synthase, even in the presence of IRF1
induction. Additionally, isograft liver transplantation with IRF2 heterozygote
knockout (IRF2(+/-)) donor grafts that have reduced endogenous IRF2 levels
results in worse injury following cold I/R during murine orthotopic liver
transplantation. These findings indicate that endogenous intrahepatic IRF2
protein is protective, because the IRF2-deficient liver donor grafts exhibited
increased liver damage compared with the wild-type donor grafts. In summary, IRF2
overexpression protects against I/R injury by decreasing IRF1-dependent injury
and may represent a novel therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3468551
PMID: 22744333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nat Genet. 2012 May 6;44(6):694-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2256.

Integrated analysis of somatic mutations and focal copy-number changes identifies
key genes and pathways in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Guichard C(1), Amaddeo G, Imbeaud S, Ladeiro Y, Pelletier L, Maad IB, Calderaro
J, Bioulac-Sage P, Letexier M, Degos F, Clément B, Balabaud C, Chevet E, Laurent 
A, Couchy G, Letouzé E, Calvo F, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), Unité
Mixte de Recherche (UMR)-674, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2013 Mar;58(3):622-4.
    Gastroenterology. 2012 Nov;143(5):1391-3.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary liver malignancy. Here,
we performed high-resolution copy-number analysis on 125 HCC tumors and
whole-exome sequencing on 24 of these tumors. We identified 135 homozygous
deletions and 994 somatic mutations of genes with predicted functional
consequences. We found new recurrent alterations in four genes (ARID1A, RPS6KA3, 
NFE2L2 and IRF2) not previously described in HCC. Functional analyses showed
tumor suppressor properties for IRF2, whose inactivation, exclusively found in
hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related tumors, led to impaired TP53 function. In
contrast, inactivation of chromatin remodelers was frequent and predominant in
alcohol-related tumors. Moreover, association of mutations in specific genes
(RPS6KA3-AXIN1 and NFE2L2-CTNNB1) suggested that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling might
cooperate in liver carcinogenesis with both oxidative stress metabolism and
Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. This study provides insight
into the somatic mutational landscape in HCC and identifies interactions between 
mutations in oncogene and tumor suppressor gene mutations related to specific
risk factors.

PMCID: PMC3819251
PMID: 22561517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Transl Med. 2012 Feb 7;10:25. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-25.

The impact of IL28B genotype on the gene expression profile of patients with
chronic hepatitis C treated with pegylated interferon alpha and ribavirin.

Younossi ZM(1), Birerdinc A, Estep M, Stepanova M, Afendy A, Baranova A.

Author information: 
(1)Betty and Guy Beatty Center for Integrated Research, Inova Health System,
Falls Church, VA, USA. zobair.younossi@inova.org

BACKGROUND: Recent studies of CH-C patients have demonstrated a strong
association between IL28B CC genotype and sustained virologic response (SVR)
after PEG-IFN/RBV treatment. We aimed to assess whether IL28B alleles rs12979860 
genotype influences gene expression in response to PEG-IFN/RBV in CH-C patients.
METHODS: Clinical data and gene expression data were available for 56 patients
treated with PEG-IFN/RBV. Whole blood was used to determine IL28B genotypes.
Differential expression of 153 human genes was assessed for each treatment time
point (Days: 0, 1, 7, 28, 56) and was correlated with IL28B genotype (IL28B C/C
or non-C/C) over the course of the PEG-IFN/RBV treatment. Genes with
statistically significant changes in their expression at each time point were
used as an input for pathway analysis using KEGG Pathway Painter (KPP). Pathways 
were ranked based on number of gene involved separately per each study cohort.
RESULTS: The most striking difference between the response patterns of patients
with IL28B C/C and T* genotypes during treatment, across all pathways, is a
sustained pattern of treatment-induced gene expression in patients carrying IL28B
C/C. In the case of IL28B T* genotype, pre-activation of genes, the lack of
sustained pattern of gene expression or a combination of both were observed. This
observation could potentially provide an explanation for the lower rate of SVR
observed in these patients. Additionally, when the lists of IL28B
genotype-specific genes which were differentially expressed in patients without
SVR were compared at their baseline, IRF2 and SOCS1 genes were down-regulated
regardless of patients' IL28B genotype. Furthermore, our data suggest that CH-C
patients who do not have the SOCS1 gene silenced have a better chance of
achieving SVR. Our observations suggest that the action of SOCS1 is independent
of IL28B genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: IL28B CC genotype patients with CH-C show a sustained
treatment-induced gene expression profile which is not seen in non-CC genotype
patients. Silencing of SOCS1 is a negative and independent predictor of SVR.
These data may provide some mechanistic explanation for higher rate of SVR in
IL28B CC patients who are treated with PEG-IFN/RBV.

PMCID: PMC3296607
PMID: 22313623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002371. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002371. Epub
2011 Nov 17.

A gammaherpesvirus cooperates with interferon-alpha/beta-induced IRF2 to halt
viral replication, control reactivation, and minimize host lethality.

Mandal P(1), Krueger BE, Oldenburg D, Andry KA, Beard RS, White DW, Barton ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana,
United States of America.

The gammaherpesviruses, including Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), establish latency in memory B lymphocytes 
and promote lymphoproliferative disease in immunocompromised individuals. The
precise immune mechanisms that prevent gammaherpesvirus reactivation and
tumorigenesis are poorly defined. Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV68) is closely
related to EBV and KSHV, and type I (alpha/beta) interferons (IFNaß) regulate
MHV68 reactivation from both B cells and macrophages by unknown mechanisms. Here 
we demonstrate that IFNß is highly upregulated during latent infection, in the
absence of detectable MHV68 replication. We identify an interferon-stimulated
response element (ISRE) in the MHV68 M2 gene promoter that is bound by the
IFNaß-induced transcriptional repressor IRF2 during latency in vivo. The M2
protein regulates B cell signaling to promote establishment of latency and
reactivation. Virus lacking the M2 ISRE (ISRE<U+0394>) overexpresses M2 mRNA and
displays uncontrolled acute replication in vivo, higher latent viral load, and
aberrantly high reactivation from latency. These phenotypes of the ISRE<U+0394> mutant
are B-cell-specific, require IRF2, and correlate with a significant increase in
virulence in a model of acute viral pneumonia. We therefore identify a mechanism 
by which a gammaherpesvirus subverts host IFNaß signaling in a surprisingly
cooperative manner, to directly repress viral replication and reactivation and
enforce latency, thereby minimizing acute host disease. Since we find ISREs 5' to
the major lymphocyte latency genes of multiple rodent, primate, and human
gammaherpesviruses, we propose that cooperative subversion of IFNaß-induced IRFs 
to promote latent infection is an ancient strategy that ensures a stable,
minimally-pathogenic virus-host relationship.

PMCID: PMC3219715
PMID: 22114555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Mar;132(3 Pt 1):650-7. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.374. Epub
2011 Nov 24.

Genetic variants in interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) are associated with
atopic dermatitis and eczema herpeticum.

Gao PS(1), Leung DY, Rafaels NM, Boguniewicz M, Hand T, Gao L, Hata TR, Schneider
LC, Hanifin JM, Beaty TH, Beck LA, Weinberg A, Barnes KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) is a member of a family of transcriptional 
factors involved in the modulation of IFN-induced immune responses to viral
infection. To test whether genetic variants in IRF2 predict risk of atopic
dermatitis (AD) and ADEH (atopic dermatitis complicated by eczema herpeticum), we
genotyped 78 IRF2 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in both
European-American (n = 435) and African-American (n = 339) populations.
Significant associations were observed between AD and two SNPs (rs793814, P =
0.007, odds ratio (OR) = 0.52; rs3756094, P = 0.037, OR = 0.66) among European
Americans and one SNP (rs3775572, P = 0.016, OR = 0.46) among African Americans. 
Significant associations were also observed between ADEH and five SNPs (P =
0.049-0.022) among European Americans. The association with ADEH was further
strengthened by haplotype analyses, wherein a five-SNP (CAGGA) haplotype showed
the strongest association with ADEH (P = 0.0008). Eight IRF2 SNPs were
significantly associated with IFN-<U+03B3> production after herpes simplex virus (HSV)
stimulation (P = 0.048-0.0008), including an AD-associated SNP (rs13139310, P =
0.008). Our findings suggest that distinct markers in IRF2 may be associated with
AD and ADEH, which may depend upon ethnic ancestry, and genetic variants in IRF2 
may contribute to an abnormal immune response to HSV.

PMCID: PMC3278591
PMID: 22113474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 15;108(46):18766-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116273108. Epub 2011 Oct 31.

Characterization of dsRNA-induced pancreatitis model reveals the regulatory role 
of IFN regulatory factor 2 (Irf2) in trypsinogen5 gene transcription.

Hayashi H(1), Kohno T, Yasui K, Murota H, Kimura T, Duncan GS, Nakashima T,
Yamamoto K, Katayama I, Ma Y, Chua KJ, Suematsu T, Shimokawa I, Akira S, Kubo Y, 
Mak TW, Matsuyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Signaling, Department of Molecular Biology, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

Mice deficient for interferon regulatory factor (Irf)2 (Irf2(-/-) mice) exhibit
immunological abnormalities and cannot survive lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
infection. The pancreas of these animals is highly inflamed, a phenotype
replicated by treatment with poly(I:C), a synthetic double-stranded RNA.
Trypsinogen5 mRNA was constitutively up-regulated about 1,000-fold in Irf2(-/-)
mice compared with controls as assessed by quantitative RT-PCR. Further knockout 
of IFNa/ß receptor 1(Ifnar1) abolished poly(I:C)-induced pancreatitis but had no 
effect on the constitutive up-regulation of trypsinogen5 gene, indicating crucial
type I IFN signaling to elicit the inflammation. Analysis of Ifnar1(-/-) mice
confirmed type I IFN-dependent transcriptional activation of dsRNA-sensing
pattern recognition receptor genes MDA5, RIG-I, and TLR3, which induced
poly(I:C)-dependent cell death in acinar cells in the absence of IRF2. We
speculate that Trypsin5, the trypsinogen5 gene product, leaking from dead acinar 
cells triggers a chain reaction leading to lethal pancreatitis in Irf2(-/-) mice 
because it is resistant to a major endogenous trypsin inhibitor, Spink3.

PMCID: PMC3219097
PMID: 22042864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Haematologica. 2011 Dec;96(12):1783-91. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.046888. Epub
2011 Aug 31.

Integrative nucleophosmin mutation-associated microRNA and gene expression
pattern analysis identifies novel microRNA - target gene interactions in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Russ AC(1), Sander S, Lück SC, Lang KM, Bauer M, Rücker FG, Kestler HA, Schlenk
RF, Döhner H, Holzmann K, Döhner K, Bullinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 23, 89081 Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs are regulators of gene expression, which act mainly by
decreasing mRNA levels of their multiple targets. Deregulated microRNA expression
has been shown for acute myeloid leukemia, a disease also characterized by
altered gene expression associated with distinct genomic aberrations such as
nucleophosmin (NPM1) mutations. To shed further light on the role of deregulated 
microRNA and gene expression in cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia
with NPM1 mutation we performed an integrative analysis of microRNA and mRNA
expression data sets.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Both microRNA and gene expression profiles were investigated 
in samples from a cohort of adult cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia
patients (n=43; median age 46 years, range 23-60 years) with known NPM1 mutation 
status (n=23 mutated, n=20 wild-type) and the data were integratively analyzed.
Putative microRNA-mRNA interactions were validated by quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, western blotting and luciferase reporter
assays. For selected microRNAs, sensitivity of microRNA-overexpressing cells to
cytarabine treatment was tested by FACS viability and cell proliferation assays.
RESULTS: Our integrative approach of analyzing both microRNA- and gene expression
profiles in parallel resulted in a refined list of putative target genes affected
by NPM1 mutation-associated microRNA deregulation. Of 177 putative microRNA -
target mRNA interactions we identified and validated 77 novel candidates with
known or potential involvement in leukemogenesis, such as IRF2-miR-20a,
KIT-miR-20a and MN1-miR-15a. Furthermore, our data showed that deregulated
expression of tumor suppressor microRNAs, such as miR-29a and miR-30c, might
contribute to sensitivity to cytarabine, which is observed in NPM1 mutated acute 
myeloid leukemia.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our observations highlight that integrative data analysis
approaches can improve insights into leukemia biology, and lead to the
identification of novel microRNA - target gene interactions of potential
relevance for acute myeloid leukemia treatment.

PMCID: PMC3232260
PMID: 21880628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Nov;32(11):1660-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr189. Epub 2011 Aug
22.

Interferon-signaling pathway: associations with colon and rectal cancer risk and 
subsequent survival.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Bondurant KL, Wolff RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
295 Chipeta Way, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Interferons (IFNs) are proteins involved in many functions including antiviral
and antimicrobial response, apoptosis, cell cycle control and mediating other
cytokines. IFN gamma (IFNG) is a proinflammatory cytokine that modulates many
immune-related genes. In this study we examine genetic variation in IFNG, IFNGR1,
IFNGR2 and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) to determine associations with
colon and rectal cancer and survival after diagnosis. We include data from two
population-based incident studies of colon cancer (1555 cases and 1956 controls) 
and rectal cancer (754 cases and 959 controls). Five tagSNPs in IFNG, IRF2 and
IRF3 were associated with colon cancer and eight tagSNPs in IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IRF2,
IRF4, IRF6 and IRF8 were associated with rectal cancer. IRF3 rs2304204 was
associated with the strongest direct association and IRF2 3775554 with the
strongest inverse association for colon cancer [odds ratios (ORs) 1.43, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.12-1.82 for recessive model and 0.52, 95% CI 0.28-0.97
for unrestricted model]. For rectal cancer, IFNGR1 rs3799488 was directly
associated with risk (OR 2.30, 95% CI 1.04-5.09 for recessive model), whereas
IRF6 rs861020 was inversely associated with risk (OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.34-0.95).
Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms interacted significant with both NF-<U+03BA>B1
and IL6 and with aspirin/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cigarette
smoking. Using a summary score to estimate mutational load, we observed a hazard 
rate ratio (HRR) close to 5.00 (95% CI 2.73-8.99) for both colon and rectal (HRR 
4.83, 95% CI 2.34-10.05) cancer for those in the category having the most at-risk
genotypes. These data suggest the importance of IFN-signaling pathway on colon
and rectal cancer risk and survival after diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3204348
PMID: 21859832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 9;108(32):13353-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1103105108. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Cooperative transcription factor associations discovered using regulatory
variation.

Karczewski KJ(1), Tatonetti NP, Landt SG, Yang X, Slifer T, Altman RB, Snyder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Regulation of gene expression at the transcriptional level is achieved by complex
interactions of transcription factors operating at their target genes. Dissecting
the specific combination of factors that bind each target is a significant
challenge. Here, we describe in detail the Allele Binding Cooperativity test,
which uses variation in transcription factor binding among individuals to
discover combinations of factors and their targets. We developed the ALPHABIT (a 
large-scale process to hunt for allele binding interacting transcription factors)
pipeline, which includes statistical analysis of binding sites followed by
experimental validation, and demonstrate that this method predicts transcription 
factors that associate with NF<U+03BA>B. Our method successfully identifies factors that
have been known to work with NF<U+03BA>B (E2A, STAT1, IRF2), but whose global
coassociation and sites of cooperative action were not known. In addition, we
identify a unique coassociation (EBF1) that had not been reported previously. We 
present a general approach for discovering combinatorial models of regulation and
advance our understanding of the genetic basis of variation in transcription
factor binding.

PMCID: PMC3156166
PMID: 21828005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gastroenterology. 2011 Sep;141(3):1102-1113.e1-8. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.05.051. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 regulates exocytosis mechanisms mediated by SNAREs
in pancreatic acinar cells.

Mashima H(1), Sato T, Horie Y, Nakagawa Y, Kojima I, Ohteki T, Ohnishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Akita, Japan. hmashima1-tky@umin.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Pancreatic acinar cells are used to study regulated
exocytosis. We investigated the role of interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF2) in 
exocytosis in pancreatic acinar cells.
METHODS: Pancreas tissues from Irf2<U+207A>/<U+207A>, Irf2<U+207A>/<U+207B>), and Irf2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice were examined 
by microscopy, immunohistochemical, and immunoblot analyses; amylase secretion
was quantified. We also compared salivary glands and pancreatic islets of Irf2<U+207B>/<U+207B>
mice with those of Irf2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice. To examine the effects of increased signaling by
type I interferons, we studied pancreatic acini from Irf2<U+207B>/<U+207B>Ifnar1<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice. The
effect of IRF2 on amylase secretion was studied using an acinar cell line and a
retroviral system. We studied expression of IRF2 in wild-type mice with
cerulein-induced pancreatitis and changes in pancreatic tissue of Irf2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice,
compared with those of Irf2<U+207A>/<U+207B> mice.
RESULTS: Irf2<U+207B>/<U+207B> pancreas was white and opaque; numerous and wide-spread zymogen 
granules were observed throughout the cytoplasm, along with lack of fusion
between zymogen granules and the apical membrane, lack of secretagogue-stimulated
amylase secretion, and low serum levels of amylase and elastase-1, indicating
altered regulation of exocytosis. The expression pattern of soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptors changed
significantly, specifically in pancreatic acini, and was not rescued by
disruption of type I interferon signaling. Down-regulation of IRF2 decreased
amylase secretion in an acinar cell line. In mice with pancreatitis, levels of
IRF2 were reduced. Irf2<U+207B>/<U+207B> acini were partially resistant to induction of
pancreatitis.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF2 regulates exocytosis in pancreatic acinar cells; defects in
this process might be involved in the early phases of acute pancreatitis.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21699790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(14):2889-901. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00974-10. Epub 2011 May
16.

Interferon regulatory factor 2 binding protein 2 is a new NFAT1 partner and
represses its transcriptional activity.

Carneiro FR(1), Ramalho-Oliveira R, Mognol GP, Viola JP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Biology, Brazilian National Cancer Institute, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

The nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) family of transcription factors is
expressed in a wide range of cell types and regulates genes involved in cell
cycle, differentiation, and apoptosis. NFAT proteins share two well-conserved
regions, the regulatory domain and the DNA binding domain. The N- and C-terminal 
ends are transactivation sites and show less sequence similarity, whereas their
molecular functions remain poorly understood. Here, we identified a
transcriptional repressor, interferon regulatory factor 2 binding protein 2
(IRF-2BP2), which specifically interacts with the C-terminal domain of NFAT1
among the NFAT family members. IRF-2BP2 was described as a corepressor by
inhibiting both enhancer-activated and basal transcription. Gene reporter assays 
demonstrated that IRF-2BP2 represses the NFAT1-dependent transactivation of
NFAT-responsive promoters. The ectopic expression of IRF-2BP2 in CD4 T cells
resulted in decreased interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-4 production, supporting a
repressive function of IRF-2BP2 for NFAT target genes. Furthermore, NFAT1 and
IRF-2BP2 colocalized in the nucleus in activated cells, and the mutation of a
newly identified nuclear localization signal in the IRF-2BP2 rendered it
cytoplasmic, abolishing its repressive effect on NFAT1 activity. Collectively,
our data demonstrate that IRF-2BP2 is a negative regulator of the NFAT1
transcription factor and suggest that NFAT1 repression occurs at the
transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC3133407
PMID: 21576369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Leukoc Biol. 2011 Jul;90(1):111-21. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1010546. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Transcriptional regulation of the major HIV-1 coreceptor, CXCR4, by the kappa
opioid receptor.

Finley MJ(1), Steele A, Cornwell WD, Rogers TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Temple University School of Medicine, 3307 N. Broad St., Philadelphia, PA
19140, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated that KOR activation results in decreased
susceptibility to infection by HIV-1 in human PBMCs. In the present studies, we
have found this effect is, in part, a result of down-regulation of the major
HIV-1 coreceptor, CXCR4. Using a combination of biochemical approaches, our
results show that CXCR4 protein and mRNA levels were reduced significantly
following KOR activation. We evaluated the nature of the signaling pathway(s),
which were induced by KOR activation, using transcription factor-binding array
analysis and comparing extracts from control and KOR-activated cells. We
determined that the IRFs and STATs were induced following KOR activation, and
these events were important for the inhibition of CXCR4 expression. Using
chemical inhibitors and siRNA constructs, we determined that JAK2, STAT3, and
IRF2 were critical members of this signal transduction pathway. Immediately
following KOR activation, JAK2 was phosphorylated, and this was required for the 
phosphorylation/activation of STAT3. Moreover, IRF2 mRNA and protein expression
were also up-regulated, and further studies using ChIP analysis showed that IRF2 
was induced to bind in vivo to the CXCR4 promoter. This is the first report
detailing the initiation of a KOR-induced JAK2/STAT3 and IRF2 signaling cascade, 
and these pathways result in substantial down-regulation of CXCR4 expression. The
capacity of KOR to down-regulate CXCR4 expression may provide a strategy for the 
development of novel therapeutics for the inhibition of HIV replication.

PMCID: PMC3114596
PMID: 21447649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):755-63. doi: 10.1002/art.30188.

Association of a functional polymorphism in the 3'-untranslated region of SPI1
with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Hikami K(1), Kawasaki A, Ito I, Koga M, Ito S, Hayashi T, Matsumoto I, Tsutsumi
A, Kusaoi M, Takasaki Y, Hashimoto H, Arinami T, Sumida T, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: SPI1, also referred to as PU.1, is an Ets family transcription factor 
that interacts with IRF2, IRF4, and IRF8. In view of the significance of the type
I interferon pathway in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), this study was
undertaken to investigate a possible association between SPI1 polymorphisms and
SLE.
METHODS: A case-control association study was performed using 6 tag
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), as well as a SNP located upstream of SPI1
previously found to be associated with acute myelogenous leukemia, in 400
Japanese patients with SLE and 450 healthy controls. Resequencing of all exons
and known regulatory regions was performed to identify functional polymorphisms. 
Association of genotype and SPI1 expression was examined using the GENEVAR
database and reporter assays.
RESULTS: A significant association was detected in 2 SNPs in intron 2 (rs10769258
and rs4752829) (P = 0.005 and P = 0.008, respectively, under the dominant model).
The association was stronger in patients with nephropathy. Resequencing
identified a potentially functional polymorphism in the 3'-untranslated region
(3'-UTR), rs1057233, which was in strong linkage disequilibrium with the SNPs in 
intron 2. The number of risk alleles at rs1057233 was strongly correlated with
SPI1 messenger RNA (mRNA) level in the database analysis (P = 0.0002), and was
confirmed by a reporter assay. Interestingly, rs1057233 alters a target sequence 
for microRNA hsa-miR-569 (miR-569). Transfection experiments demonstrated that
miR-569 inhibits expression of a reporter construct with the 3'-UTR sequence
containing the nonrisk allele but not the risk allele.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that a SNP in the 3'-UTR of SPI1 is associated 
with elevated SPI1 mRNA level and with susceptibility to SLE.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21360505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biosci. 2010 Dec;35(4):547-56.

Replacement of the C-terminal tetrapeptide (314 PAPV 317 to 314 SSSM 317) in
interferon regulatory factor-2 alters its N-terminal DNA-binding activity.

Prakash K(1), Rath PC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi 110 067, India.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) is an important transcription factor
involved in cell growth regulation, immune response and cancer. IRF-2 can
function as a transcriptional repressor and activator depending on its
DNA-binding activity and protein-protein interactions. We compared the amino acid
sequences of IRF-2 and found a C-terminal tetrapeptide (314PAPV317) of mouse
IRF-2 to be different (314SSSM317) from human IRF-2. Recombinant GST-IRF-2 with
314PAPV317 (wild type) and 314SSSM317 (mutant) expressed in Escherichia coli were
assessed for DNA-binding activity with 32P-(GAAAGT) 4 by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA). Wild type- and mutant GST-IRF-2 showed similar expression
patterns and immunoreactivities but different DNA-binding activities. Mutant (mt)
IRF-2 formed higher-molecular-mass, more and stronger DNA-protein complexes in
comparison to wild type (wt) IRF-2. Anti-IRF-2 antibody stabilized the
DNA-protein complexes formed by both wt IRF-2 and mt IRF-2, resolving the
differences. This suggests that PAPV and SSSM sequences at 314-317 in the
C-terminal region of mouse and human IRF-2 contribute to conformation of IRF-2
and influence DNA-binding activity of the N-terminal region, indicating
intramolecular interactions. Thus, evolution of IRF-2 from murine to human genome
has resulted in subtle differences in C-terminal amino acid motifs, which may
contribute to qualitative changes in IRF-2-dependent DNA-binding activity and
gene expression.

PMID: 21289437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2011 Jul;31(1):10-21. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2011.01.015.
Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Activation of cytokine expression occurs through the TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway 
in birnavirus-infected cells.

Wang WL(1), Liu W, Gong HY, Hong JR, Lin CC, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang 115,
Taipei, Taiwan.

The infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) belongs to the Birnaviridae
family of viruses and causes acute contagious diseases in a number of
economically important freshwater and marine fish. In this study, we infected
zebrafish embryonic cells (ZF4) with IPNV and analyzed the gene expression
patterns of normal and infected cells using quantitative real-time PCR. We
identified a number of immune response genes, including ifna, ifng, mx, irf1,
irf2, irf4, tnfa, tnfb, il-1b, il-15, il-26, ccl4 and mmp family genes, that are 
induced after viral infection. Transcriptional regulators, including cebpb, junb,
nfkb and stat1, stat4 and stat5, were also upregulated in IPNV-infected cells. In
addition, we used Pathway Studio software to identify TNFa as having the greatest
downstream influence among these altered genes. Treating virus-infected cells
with an siRNA targeting TNFa inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B expression. To further interrupt the
TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway, the expression levels of cytokines and
metalloproteinases were inhibited in IPNV-infected cells. These data suggest
that, during IPNV infection, the expression of cytokines and metalloproteinases
might be initiated through the TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated pathway. The modulation of
TNFa/NF-<U+03BA>B-related mechanisms may provide a therapeutic strategy for inhibiting
viral infection in teleosts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21272652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Nov 29;42A(4):290-300. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00107.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Actions and interactions of progesterone and estrogen on transcriptome profiles
of the bovine endometrium.

Shimizu T(1), Krebs S, Bauersachs S, Blum H, Wolf E, Miyamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Animal and Food Hygiene, Obihiro University of Agriculture 
and Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro, Japan.

The aim of our study was to analyze endometrial gene expression profiles in
ovariectomized cows treated with estradiol and/or progesterone by using
microarray analysis. Clustering of differentially expressed genes allowed
separation into distinct hormone response patterns. These patterns could be
classified into independent and interdependent actions of the steroid hormones
estrogen and progesterone. The use of ovariectomized cows and external
administration of hormones identified a set of genes whose regulation depends on 
a progesterone priming effect. The progesterone-primed estrogen response
comprises gene functions such as migration, cell differentiation, and cell
adhesion and therefore may play a crucial role in tissue remodeling, as one of
its key regulators in the endometrium, TGFB2, is among this group of
progesterone-primed genes. Functional annotation analysis of the
estrogen-responsive gene clusters shows a clear dominance of functions such as
cell cycle, morphogenesis, and differentiation. The functional profile of the
progesterone-responsive clusters is less clear but nevertheless shows some
important fertility-related terms like luteinization, oocyte maturation, and
catecholamine metabolism. We looked for putative regulators of the steroid
hormone response in endometrium by searching for enriched transcription factor
binding sites in the promoter regions of the genes with similar hormone response 
profile. This analysis identified transcription factors such as SP1, NFYA, FOXA2,
IRF2, ESR1, and NOBOX as candidate regulators of gene expression in bovine
endometrium treated with steroid hormones. Taken together, our data provide novel
insights into the regulation of bovine endometrial physiology by steroid
hormones.

PMID: 20876846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Thromb Haemost. 2010 Nov;104(5):998-1008. doi: 10.1160/TH10-04-0243. Epub 2010
Aug 30.

Allele-specific transcription of the PAI-1 gene in human astrocytes.

Hultman K(1), Tjarnlund-Wolf A, Odeberg J, Eriksson P, Jern C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

The 4G allele of the PAI-1 -675(4G/5G) insertion/deletion promoter polymorphism
has been associated with elevated plasma levels of PAI-1 and an increased risk of
myocardial infarction. However, this allele has also been associated with a
reduced risk of ischaemic stroke. In the brain, PAI-1 is mainly produced by
astrocytes, and can reduce the neurotoxic effects exerted by tissue-type
plasminogen activator during pathophysiologic conditions. The aim of the present 
study was to investigate whether the PAI-1 -675(4G/5G) polymorphism and the
linked -844A/G polymorphism affect transcriptional activity of the PAI-1 gene in 
human astrocytes. Haplotype chromatin immunoprecipitation (haploChIP) was used in
order to quantify allele-specific promoter activity in heterozygous cells.
Protein-DNA interactions were investigated by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA). A clear allele-specific difference in PAI-1 gene expression was
observed in astrocytes, where the haplotype containing the 4G and the -844A
alleles was associated with higher transcriptional activity compared to the 5G
and -844G-containing haplotype. EMSA revealed an allele-specific binding of
nuclear proteins to the 4G/5G site as well as to the -844A/G site. Supershift
experiments identified specific binding of the transcription factors Elf-1 and
Elk-1 to the -844G allele. The relative impact of the different sites on
allele-specific PAI-1 promoter activity remains to be determined. We demonstrate 
that common polymorphisms within the PAI-1 promoter affect transcriptional
activity of the PAI-1 gene in human astrocytes, thus providing a possible
molecular genetic mechanism behind the association between PAI-1 promoter
variants and ischaemic stroke.

PMID: 20806116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Dalton Trans. 2010 Jul 7;39(25):5827-32. doi: 10.1039/c0dt00066c. Epub 2010 May
25.

Synthesis and characterisation of some iridium-carbonyl-fluoride complexes.
Crystal structures of [IrF(CO){P(C6H4-2-CH3)3}2] and [IrF2(COD)py2][BF4].

Fawcett J(1), Harding DA, Hope EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK LE1 7RH.

Two routes to iridium(III) fluorocomplexes are described. The direct reaction of 
tetrairidium dodecacarbonyl with elemental fluorine in aHF offers a clean,
convenient, large scale route to [IrF(3)(CO)(3)]; addition of phosphines to
[IrF(3)(CO)(3)] in THF affords mer-[IrF(3)(CO)L(2)] or [IrF(CO)L(2)].
Alternatively, cationic [IrF(2)(COD)L(2)](+) and [IrF(2)(CO)(2)L(2)](+) (L =
phosphine, pyridine; L(2) = alpha-diimine) are accessible via the oxidation of
the iridium(I) precursors with xenon difluoride.

PMID: 20498916  [PubMed]


67. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jul;47(11-12):2005-14. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.04.015. Epub 
2010 May 21.

Regulation and function of interferon regulatory factors of Atlantic salmon.

Bergan V(1), Kileng Ø, Sun B, Robertsen B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tromsø, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and Economics,
Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family are major 
regulators of the early immune responses against viral infections. In particular,
IRF1, IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7 of mammals are known to regulate the expression of type
I interferons (IFNs), which constitute the obligate cytokines for antiviral
defense. We therefore cloned the coding sequence of Atlantic salmon (As) IRF1,
IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7B. Expression profiles were studied in Atlantic salmon TO
cells after poly I:C (dsRNA) transfection, treatment with recombinant salmon
IFNa1 and infection with infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV). The main findings
were that AsIRF1 was earliest up-regulated by all stimuli, while AsIRF3 and
AsIRF7 had a similar activation profile induced at a slightly later time point.
The ability to induce the Atlantic salmon IFNa1 promoter was measured in a
luciferase reporter assay. The results showed that AsIRF1, AsIRF3 and AsIRF7B
were able to induce the promoter in a dose-dependent manner. AsIRF2 repressed the
promoter, while AsIRF7A and a splicing variant (AsIRF3D) lacking the interaction 
domain had almost no effect. Combination of AsIRF1 and AsIRF3 had a synergistic
stimulatory effect on the promoter compared to each of the two IRFs alone.
Overall, our findings suggest that AsIRF3 is the main regulator of salmon IFNa1
production along with AsIRF1, which is less potent. This confirms a similar role 
for salmon IRF3 as mammalian IRF3 to be one of the main IRFs eliciting salmon
IFNa1 production. Surprisingly, AsIRF7A and AsIRF7B seemed to have a lesser role 
in salmon IFNa1 induction, which may indicate that these factors have a larger
role in activating other IFN genes or interferon stimulatory genes of Atlantic
salmon.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20494444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Virology. 2010 Apr 10;399(2):270-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.12.025. Epub 2010
Feb 2.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-2 activates the HPV-16 E6-E7 promoter in
keratinocytes.

Lace MJ(1), Anson JR, Haugen TH, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VAMC, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
michael-lace@uiowa.edu

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are critical mediators of gene expression,
cell growth and immune responses. We previously demonstrated that interferon
(IFN) induction of early viral transcription and replication in several mucosal
HPVs requires IRF-1 binding to a conserved interferon response element (IRE).
Here we show that the IRF-2 protein serves as a baseline transactivator of the
HPV-16 major early promoter, P97. Cotransfections in IRF knockout cells confirmed
that basal HPV-16 promoter activity was supported by both IRF-1 and IRF-2
complexes interacting with the promoter-proximal IRE in a dose-dependent manner. 
Furthermore, HPV-16 E7 expression downregulates the IRF-2 promoter, thus linking 
IRF-2 levels to viral transforming gene expression through a negative feedback
mechanism. Taken together, these observations reveal a complex viral strategy
utilizing multiple signal transduction pathways during the establishment and
maintenance of HPV persistence.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20129639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncol Rep. 2010 Feb;23(2):445-55.

Analysis of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 4q in hepatocellular carcinoma
using high-throughput SNP array.

Zhang H(1), Ma H, Wang Q, Chen M, Weng D, Wang H, Zhou J, Li Y, Sun J, Chen Y,
Liang X, Zhao J, Pan K, Wang H, Xia J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China and Department of
Experimental Research, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangdong, PR China.

To identify tumour suppressor genes (TSGs) associated with hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) on chromosome 4q using a high-throughput single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) array, we first scanned for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of 40
SNPs on chromosome 4q and discovered 2 hot regions: 4q24-26 and 4q34.3-35. We
then further scanned for LOH of 338 SNPs in genes around 4q34.3-35 and discovered
3 genes with the most frequent LOH: nei endonuclease VIII-like 3 (NEIL3),
interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) and inhibitor of growth family member 2
(ING2). A review of the literature indicates only ING2 might be a TSG associated 
with HCC.

PMID: 20043106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 22;391(4):1623-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.12.092. Epub 2009 Dec 23.

Enhanced RIG-I expression is mediated by interferon regulatory factor-2 in
peripheral blood B cells from hepatitis C virus-infected patients.

Masumi A(1), Ito M, Mochida K, Hamaguchi I, Mizukami T, Momose H, Kuramitsu M,
Tsuruhara M, Takizawa K, Kato A, Yamaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Research on Blood and Biological Products, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, 4-7-1, Gakuen Musashimurayama-shi, Tokyo
208-0011, Japan. amasumi@nih.go.jp

Chronic hepatitis C patients carry the risk of developing into B-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (B-NHL). To clarify the mechanisms underlying this
association, we first investigated the molecular markers of B cells from
hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infected patients. CD19-positive cells were isolated as B
cells from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of patients infected with the
hepatitis C virus and IFN-related gene expression was analyzed. We found that
RIG-I and IRF-2 expression were up-regulated in CD19-positive cells from the
infected patients. In vitro luciferase reporter analysis using human cell lines
indicated that IRF-2 activates the human RIG-I promoter. IRF-2 expression levels 
were enhanced by HCV cDNA transfection in Huh7 cells. In addition, we observed
much less induction in the interferon stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) after Sendai
virus (SenV) stimulation of CD19-positive cells from infected patients versus
healthy controls, thereby suggesting an impairment of RIG-I downstream signaling 
in HCV-infected patients. Hence, we found that the failure of the anti-viral
response with enhanced IRF-2 oncogenic protein expression in blood B cells from
HCV-infected patients. Our results provide important information to better
understand the role of IRFs in the cause of HCV chronic infection.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20034464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr;18(4):448-56. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.183. Epub 2009 Nov
4.

Analysis of allele-specific RNA transcription in FSHD by RNA-DNA FISH in single
myonuclei.

Masny PS(1), Chan OY, de Greef JC, Bengtsson U, Ehrlich M, Tawil R, Lock LF,
Hewitt JE, Stocksdale J, Martin JH, van der Maarel SM, Winokur ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697, USA.

Autosomal dominant facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is likely caused
by epigenetic alterations in chromatin involving contraction of the D4Z4 repeat
array near the telomere of chromosome 4q. The precise mechanism by which
deletions of D4Z4 influence gene expression in FSHD is not yet resolved.
Regulatory models include a cis effect on proximal gene transcription (position
effect), DNA looping, non-coding RNA, nuclear localization and trans-effects. To 
directly test whether deletions of D4Z4 affect gene expression in cis, nascent
RNA was examined in single myonuclei so that transcription from each allele could
be measured independently. FSHD and control myotubes (differentiated myoblasts)
were subjected to sequential RNA-DNA FISH. A total of 16 genes in the FSHD region
(FRG2, TUBB4Q, FRG1, FAT1, F11, KLKB1, CYP4V2, TLR3, SORBS2, PDLIM3 (ALP),
LRP2BP, ING2, SNX25, SLC25A4 (ANT1), HELT and IRF2) were examined for
interallelic variation in RNA expression within individual myonuclei. Sequential 
DNA hybridization with a unique 4q35 chromosome probe was then applied to confirm
the localization of nascent RNA to 4q. A D4Z4 probe, labeled with a third
fluorochrome, distinguished between the deleted and normal allele in FSHD nuclei.
Our data do not support an FSHD model in which contracted D4Z4 arrays induce
altered transcription in cis from 4q35 genes, even for those genes (FRG1, FRG2
and SLC25A4 (ANT1)) for which such an effect has been proposed.

PMCID: PMC2843500
PMID: 19888305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Soc Reprod Fertil Suppl. 2009;66:321-32.

Conceptus-uterus interactions in pigs: endometrial gene expression in response to
estrogens and interferons from conceptuses.

Johnson GA(1), Bazer FW, Burghardt RC, Spencer TE, Wu G, Bayless KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX
77843-4458, USA. gjohnson@cvm.tamu.edu

This review highlights information on conceptus-uterus interactions in the pig
with respect to uterine gene expression in response to estrogens and interferons 
(IFNs) secreted from elongating conceptuses. Pig conceptuses release estrogens
for pregnancy recognition, but also secrete IFNs that do not appear to be
antiluteolytic. Estrogens and IFNs induce expression of largely non-overlapping
sets of genes, and evidence suggests that pig conceptuses orchestrate essential
events of early pregnancy including pregnancy recognition signaling, implantation
and secretion of histotroph by precisely controlling temporal and spatial
(cell-specific) changes in uterine gene expression through initial secretion of
estrogens, followed by cytokines including IFNG and IFND. By Day 12 of pregnancy,
estrogens increase the expression of multiple genes in the uterine luminal
epithelium including SPP1, STC1, IRF2 and STAT1 that likely have roles for
implantation. By Day 15 of pregnancy, IFNs upregulate a large array of IFN
responsive genes in the underlying stroma and glandular epithelium including
ISG15, IRF1, STAT1, SLAs and B2M that likely have roles in uterine remodeling to 
support placentation.

PMID: 19848299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 16;4(9):e7049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007049.

Role of polypyrimidine tract binding protein in mediating internal initiation of 
translation of interferon regulatory factor 2 RNA.

Dhar D(1), Venkataramana M, Ponnuswamy A, Das S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

BACKGROUND: Earlier we have reported translational control of interferon
regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) by internal initiation (Dhar et al, Nucleic Acids Res,
2007). The results implied possible role of IRF2 in controlling the intricate
balance of cellular gene expression under stress conditions in general. Here we
have investigated the secondary structure of the Internal Ribosome Entry Site of 
IRF2 RNA and demonstrated the role of PTB protein in ribosome assembly to
facilitate internal initiation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have probed the putative secondary structure
of the IRF2 5'UTR RNA using various enzymatic and chemical modification agents to
constrain the secondary structure predicted from RNA folding algorithm Mfold. The
IRES activity was found to be influenced by the interaction of trans-acting
factor, polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB). Deletion of 25 nts from the
3'terminus of the 5'untranslated region resulted in reduced binding with PTB
protein and also showed significant decrease in IRES activity compared to the
wild type. We have also demonstrated putative contact points of PTB on the
IRF2-5'UTR using primer extension inhibition assay. Majority of the PTB
toe-prints were found to be restricted to the 3'end of the IRES. Additionally,
Circular Dichroism (CD) spectra analysis suggested change in the conformation of 
the RNA upon PTB binding. Further, binding studies using S10 extract from HeLa
cells, partially silenced for PTB gene expression, resulted in reduced binding by
other trans-acting factors. Finally, we have demonstrated that addition of
recombinant PTB enhances ribosome assembly on IRF2 IRES suggesting possible role 
of PTB in mediating internal initiation of translation of IRF2 RNA.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: It appears that PTB binding to multiple sites within
IRF2 5'UTR leads to a conformational change in the RNA that facilitate binding of
other trans-acting factors to mediate internal initiation of translation.

PMCID: PMC2737629
PMID: 19756143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Aug;30(8):1336-44. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp150. Epub 2009 Jun
18.

Interferon-beta treatment increases human papillomavirus early gene transcription
and viral plasmid genome replication by activating interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-1.

Lace MJ(1), Anson JR, Klingelhutz AJ, Harada H, Taniguchi T, Bossler AD, Haugen
TH, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Iowa City, IA 52246, USA.
michael-lace@uiowa.edu

Interferons (IFNs) have been used to treat mucosal lesions caused by human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection, such as intraepithelial precursor lesions to
cancer of the uterine cervix, genital warts or recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis, to potentially reduce or eliminate replicating HPV plasmid
genomes. Mucosal HPVs have evolved mechanisms that impede IFN-beta synthesis and 
downregulate genes induced by IFN. Here we show that these HPV types directly
subvert a cellular transcriptional response to IFN-beta as a potential boost in
infection. Treatment with low levels of human IFN-beta induced initial
amplification of HPV-16 and HPV-11 plasmid genomes and increased HPV-16 or HPV-31
DNA copy numbers up to 6-fold in HPV-immortalized keratinocytes. IFN treatment
also increased early gene transcription from the major early gene promoters in
HPV-16, HPV-31 and HPV-11. Furthermore, mutagenesis of the viral genomes and
ectopic interferon regulatory factor (IRF) expression in transfection experiments
using IRF-1(-/-), IRF-2(-/-) and dual knockout cell lines determined that these
responses are due to the activation of IRF-1 interaction with a conserved
interferon response element demonstrated in several mucosal HPV early gene
promoters. Our results provide a molecular explanation for the varying clinical
outcomes of IFN therapy of papillomatoses and define an assay for the modulation 
of the HPV gene program by IFNs as well as other cytokines and signaling
molecules in infection and therapy.

PMID: 19541854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nat Med. 2009 Jun;15(6):696-700. doi: 10.1038/nm.1973.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 protects quiescent hematopoietic stem cells from
type I interferon-dependent exhaustion.

Sato T(1), Onai N, Yoshihara H, Arai F, Suda T, Ohteki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Akita University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita,
Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2009 Jun;15(6):612-3.

Type I interferons (IFNs), a family of cytokines, orchestrate numerous biological
and cellular processes1, 2, 3. Although it is well known that type I IFNs are
essential for establishing the host antiviral state4, their role in hematopoietic
homeostasis has not been studied. Here we show that type I IFNs induce
proliferation and exhaustion in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and that
interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF2), a transcriptional suppressor of type I IFN
signaling5, 6, preserves the self-renewal and multilineage differentiation
capacity of HSCs. HSCs were substantially less abundant in the bone marrow of
Irf2-/- as compared to Irf2+/- mice. Irf2-/- HSCs showed enhanced cell cycling
status and failed to produce hematopoietic cells in competitive repopulation
assays, and the reconstituting capacity of Irf2-/- HSCs was restored by disabling
type I IFN signaling in these cells. In wild-type mice, injection of poly(I:C),
an inducer of type I IFN signaling, or IFN- induced HSC proliferation, and
chronic type I IFN signaling further reduced the number of quiescent HSCs.
Notably, combined poly(I:C) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment allowed exogenous
HSC engraftment and hematopoietic reconstitution in WT mice. Our findings provide
insight into the molecular basis for the maintenance of HSC quiescence and may
lead to improvements in bone marrow transplantation and type I IFN-based
therapies for viral infection and cancer.

PMID: 19483695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):763-74. doi: 10.1002/hep.22729.

Early gene expression profiles of patients with chronic hepatitis C treated with 
pegylated interferon-alfa and ribavirin.

Younossi ZM(1), Baranova A, Afendy A, Collantes R, Stepanova M, Manyam G, Bakshi 
A, Sigua CL, Chan JP, Iverson AA, Santini CD, Chang SY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Liver Diseases at Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, VA 22042,
USA. zobair.younossi@inova.org

Responsiveness to hepatitis C virus (HCV) therapy depends on viral and host
factors. Our aim was to assess sustained virologic response (SVR)-associated
early gene expression in patients with HCV receiving pegylated interferon-alpha2a
(PEG-IFN-alpha2a) or PEG-IFN-alpha2b and ribavirin with the duration based on
genotypes. Blood samples were collected into PAXgene tubes prior to treatment as 
well as 1, 7, 28, and 56 days after treatment. From the peripheral blood cells,
total RNA was extracted, quantified, and used for one-step reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction to profile 154 messenger RNAs. Expression levels of
messenger RNAs were normalized with six "housekeeping" genes and a reference RNA.
Multiple regression and stepwise selection were performed to assess differences
in gene expression at different time points, and predictive performance was
evaluated for each model. A total of 68 patients were enrolled in the study and
treated with combination therapy. The results of gene expression showed that SVR 
could be predicted by the gene expression of signal transducer and activator of
transcription-6 (STAT-6) and suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 in the
pretreatment samples. After 24 hours, SVR was predicted by the expression of
interferon-dependent genes, and this dependence continued to be prominent
throughout the treatment.CONCLUSION: Early gene expression during anti-HCV
therapy may elucidate important molecular pathways that may be influencing the
probability of achieving virologic response.

PMID: 19140155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(2):322-35. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn940. Epub 2008 Nov 
28.

The novel p53 target gene IRF2BP2 participates in cell survival during the p53
stress response.

Koeppel M(1), van Heeringen SJ, Smeenk L, Navis AC, Janssen-Megens EM, Lohrum M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The tumor suppressor p53 contributes to the cellular fate after genotoxic
insults, mainly through the regulation of target genes, thereby allowing e.g.
repair mechanisms resulting in cell survival or inducing apoptosis. Unresolved so
far is the issue, which exact mechanisms lead to one or the other cellular
outcome. Here, we describe the interferon regulatory factor-2-binding protein-2
(IRF2BP2) as a new direct target gene of p53, influencing the p53-mediated
cellular decision. We show that upregulation of IRF2BP2 after treatment with
actinomycin D (Act.D) is dependent on functional p53 in different cell lines.
This occurs in parallel with the down-regulation of the interacting partner of
IRF2BP2, the interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF2), which is known to positively 
influence cell growth. Analyzing the molecular functions of IRF2BP2, it appears
to be able to impede on the p53-mediated transactivation of the p21- and the
Bax-gene. We show here that overexpressed IRF2BP2 has an impact on the cellular
stress response after Act.D treatment and that it diminishes the induction of
apoptosis after doxorubicin treatment. Furthermore, the knockdown of IRF2BP2
leads to an upregulation of p21 and faster induction of apoptosis after
doxorubicin as well as Act.D treatment.

PMCID: PMC2632907
PMID: 19042971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Feb 27;299(2):252-60. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.10.025.
Epub 2008 Oct 30.

Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) is expressed in the ovine uterus and
functions as a transcriptional activator.

Fleming JA(1), Song G, Choi Y, Spencer TE, Bazer FW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics and Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Interferon tau (IFNT), the maternal recognition of pregnancy signal in sheep and 
other ruminants, is secreted by the conceptus and regulates the expression of a
number of genes in a cell-specific manner within the uterus. The response of
different endometrial cell types to IFNT appears to be specified by IFN
regulatory factors (IRFs). IRF2, a potent repressor of gene transcription, is
expressed only by luminal (LE) and superficial glandular epithelia (sGE), whereas
IRF1 and IRF9, activators of gene transcription, are expressed only in GE and
stromal cells of the uterus during early pregnancy. In the present study, IRF6
was found to be expressed in LE/sGE and middle GE of the ovine uterine
endometrium as well as conceptus trophectoderm. IRF family members can regulate
transcription via IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs). Transient
transfection analyses found that IRF6 enhanced basal activity of ISRE-containing 
promoters, but did not enhance IFNT stimulation of ISRE-containing promoters in
variety of different cell types. Further, IRF6 did not cooperate with IRF1 or
reduce IRF2 repression of ISRE-containing promoter activity. These results
establish that IRF6 is a transcriptional activator that is preferentially
expressed in the endometrial epithelia and conceptus trophectoderm. IRF6 is
hypothesized to play critical roles in endometrial gene expression as well as in 
conceptus trophectoderm growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2655364
PMID: 19022341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. FEBS Lett. 2008 Aug 20;582(19):2833-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2008.07.033. Epub
2008 Jul 29.

IRF2-binding protein-1 is a JDP2 ubiquitin ligase and an inhibitor of
ATF2-dependent transcription.

Kimura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, RIKEN, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
makimura@riken.jp

Jun-dimerization protein 2 (JDP2) is a member of the activating protein-1 (AP-1) 
family of transcription factors. JDP2 dimerizes with other AP-1 proteins such as 
activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) and Jun to repress transcription from
promoters that contain a cyclic AMP-responsive element (CRE). Interferon
regulatory factor-2-binding protein-1 (IRF2-BP1), which is reported to be a
transcriptional corepressor of IRF2, was isolated as a JDP2-binding protein using
an epitope-tagging method. As anticipated from the presence of a RING-finger
domain, IRF2-BP1 enhanced the polyubiquitination of JDP2. Moreover, IRF2-BP1
repressed ATF2-mediated transcriptional activation from a CRE-containing
promoter.

PMID: 18671972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Signal. 2008 Oct;20(10):1873-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.06.017. Epub
2008 Jul 2.

Bacterial ligand of TLR2 signals Stat activation via induction of IRF1/2 and
interferon-alpha production.

Liljeroos M(1), Vuolteenaho R, Rounioja S, Henriques-Normark B, Hallman M,
Ojaniemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Division of Pediatrics, University of Oulu,
Oulu, FIN-90014, Finland.

Both type I interferons (IFNs) and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are well 
characterized in viral infections, whereas they are far less studied in
bacterially activated toll-like receptor (TLR) pathways. Here, we studied the
involvement of IRF1 and IRF2 in TLR2-mediated responses. In mouse macrophages,
IRF2 was activated by lipoteichoic acid (LTA) of Staphylococcus aureus, resulting
in up-regulation of IRF1 and rapid secretion of IFN-alpha. In addition,
LTA-induced activation of Signal transducers and activators of transcription 1
(Stat1) and Stat3 via IRF2. The secretion of IFN-alpha was reduced in
IRF2-silenced macrophages, resulting in a disappearance of
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat3 and a reduction of pro-inflammatory responses,
despite induction of Mal adapter protein. These results provide a mechanistic
insight into the pro-inflammatory responses against S. aureus LTA in mouse
macrophages. IRFs can be intersecting factors of viral and bacterial responses in
activated TLR signalling pathways.

PMID: 18652890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Oncol. 2008 Jul;33(1):175-83.

siRNA targeting the IRF2 transcription factor inhibits leukaemic cell growth.

Choo A(1), Palladinetti P, Holmes T, Basu S, Shen S, Lock RB, O'Brien TA, Symonds
G, Dolnikov A.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Randwick,
Australia.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 and its functional antagonist IRF2 were
originally discovered as transcription factors that regulate the interferon-beta 
gene. Control of cell growth has led to the definition of IRF1 as a tumour
suppressor gene and IRF2 as an oncogene. Clinically, approximately 70% of cases
of acute myeloid leukaemia demonstrate dysregulated expression of IRF1 and/or
IRF2. Our previous studies have shown that human leukaemic TF-1 cells exhibit
abnormally high expression of both IRF1 and IRF2, the latter acting to abrogate
IRF1 tumour suppression, making these cells ideal for analysis of down-regulation
of IRF2 expression. A novel G418 screening protocol was developed and used for
identifying effective siRNA that targets IRF2 (siIRF2). Using optimized siIRF2 in
leukaemic TF-1 cells, IRF2 was down-regulated by approximately 70% at both mRNA
and protein levels. Phenotypically, this resulted in growth inhibition associated
with G2/M arrest as well as induction of polyploidy, differentiation and
apoptosis. In contrast to these results, siIRF2 targeting did not affect normal
haematopoietic stem/progenitor cell growth. These results indicate the potential 
utility of IRF2 inhibition as a therapeutic approach to cancer.

PMID: 18575764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):772-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.103. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Regulation of IRF2 transcriptional activity by its sumoylation.

Han KJ(1), Jiang L, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
CO 80206, USA.

IRFs constitute a family of transcription factors involved in IFN signaling and
in the development and differentiation of the immune system. IRFs activities are 
regulated at transcriptional level (such as IRF1) and post-translational
modifications (such as IRF3 and IRF7). Here we show that IRF2 interacts with the 
SUMO-E3 ligase PIASy and is sumoylated in vivo. Mutagenesis analysis suggests
that IRF2 contains three sumoylation sites. Sumoylation of IRF2 has no
significant effects on its nuclear localization and DNA-binding activity, but
increases its ability to inhibit IRF1 transcriptional activity and decreases its 
ability to activate the ISRE and H4 promoters. Our findings suggest that
sumoylation of IRF2 regulates its transcriptional activities.

PMID: 18514056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Immunol. 2008 May 1;180(9):5898-906.

Deacetylase activity is required for STAT5-dependent GM-CSF functional activity
in macrophages and differentiation to dendritic cells.

Sebastián C(1), Serra M, Yeramian A, Serrat N, Lloberas J, Celada A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine and University of Barcelona, Barcelona
Science Park, Josep Samitier 105, Barcelona, Spain.

After interaction with its receptor, GM-CSF induces phosphorylation of the
beta-chain in two distinct domains in macrophages. One induces activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases and the PI3K/Akt pathway, and the other induces
JAK2-STAT5. In this study we describe how trichostatin A (TSA), which inhibits
deacetylase activity, blocks JAK2-STAT5-dependent gene expression but not the
expression of genes that depend on the signal transduction induced by the other
domain of the receptor. TSA treatment inhibited the GM-CSF-dependent
proliferation of macrophages by interfering with c-myc and cyclin D1 expression. 
However, M-CSF-dependent proliferation, which requires ERK1/2, was unaffected.
Protection from apoptosis, which involves Akt phosphorylation and p21(waf-1)
expression, was not modified by TSA. GM-CSF-dependent expression of MHC class II 
molecules was inhibited because CIITA was not induced. The generation of
dendritic cells was also impaired by TSA treatment because of the inhibition of
IRF4, IRF2, and RelB expression. TSA mediates its effects by preventing the
recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter of STAT5 target genes and by
inhibiting their expression. However, this drug did not affect STAT5A or STAT5B
phosphorylation or DNA binding. These results in GM-CSF-treated macrophages
reveal a relationship between histone deacetylase complexes and STAT5 in the
regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 18424709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 15;68(4):1136-43. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5021.

Negative feedback regulation of IFN-gamma pathway by IFN regulatory factor 2 in
esophageal cancers.

Wang Y(1), Liu D, Chen P, Koeffler HP, Tong X, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

IFN-gamma is an antitumor cytokine that inhibits cell proliferation and induces
apoptosis after engagement with the IFN-gamma receptors (IFNGR) expressed on
target cells, whereas IFN regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2) is able to block the
effects of IFN-gamma by repressing transcription of IFN-gamma-induced genes. Thus
far, few studies have explored the influences of IFN-gamma on human esophageal
cancer cells. In the present study, therefore, we investigated in detail the
functions of IFN-gamma in esophageal cancer cells. The results in clinical
samples of human esophageal cancers showed that the level of IFN-gamma was
increased in tumor tissues and positively correlated with tumor progression and
IRF-2 expression, whereas the level of IFNGR1 was decreased and negatively
correlated with tumor progression and IRF-2 expression. Consistently, in vitro
experiments showed that low concentration of IFN-gamma induced the expression of 
IRF-2 with potential promotion of cell growth, and moreover, IRF-2 was able to
suppress IFNGR1 transcription in human esophageal cancer cells by binding a
specific motif in IFNGR1 promoter, which lowered the sensitivity of esophageal
cancer cells to IFN-gamma. Taken together, our results disclosed a new
IRF-2-mediated inhibitory mechanism for IFN-gamma-induced pathway in esophageal
cancer cells: IFN-gamma induced IRF-2 up-regulation, then up-regulated IRF-2
decreased endogenous IFNGR1 level, and finally, the loss of IFNGR1 turned to
enhance the resistance of esophageal cancer cells to IFN-gamma. Accordingly, the 
results implied that IRF-2 might act as a mediator for the functions of IFN-gamma
and IFNGR1 in human esophageal cancers.

PMID: 18281489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Exp Hematol. 2008 Mar;36(3):255-64. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.11.004. Epub 2008 
Jan 22.

Homeostatic erythropoiesis by the transcription factor IRF2 through attenuation
of type I interferon signaling.

Mizutani T(1), Tsuji K, Ebihara Y, Taki S, Ohba Y, Taniguchi T, Honda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Erythrocyte production is tightly regulated by cytokines, particularly
erythropoietin (EPO), which affects expansion and viability of erythroid lineage 
cells via induction of several factors, including Bcl2-like 1 (Bcl-XL). Because
type I interferon (IFN) is known to inhibit erythropoiesis, we studied mice
deficient in the gene for interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2), which functions 
as a negative regulator of type I IFN signaling, in the context of erythropoiesis
regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed hematologic analyses and detected normocytic 
anemia in Irf2-deficient mice.
RESULTS: Assessment of the maturation of erythroid progenitors in Irf2-deficient 
bone marrow by flow cytometry revealed a decreased number of late erythroblasts
accompanied by an increased number of early erythroid progenitors. Irf2-deficient
mice manifested elevated serum EPO levels, decreased Bcl-XL expression levels and
enhanced apoptosis of erythroblasts, which may account for the decreased number
of late erythroblasts. We further assessed the role of IRF2 in the regulation of 
type I IFN signaling during erythropoiesis, and found that additional homozygous 
mutation of IFNAR1, a subunit of type I IFN receptor complex, led to rescue of
the defect of erythropoiesis in Irf2-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Impaired erythropoiesis in Irf2-deficient mice results from
excessive type I IFN signaling, which inhibits Bcl-XL expression in erythroid
lineage cells. Our present study provides a mechanistic understanding of the
potential cross-talk between type I IFN and EPO signaling pathways during
erythropoiesis and may offer therapeutic insights into anemia.

PMID: 18207304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 7;367(2):277-83. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Regulation of the murine TR2/HVEM gene expression by IRF.

Sul OJ(1), Lee HW, Kim WK, Choi JH, Kwak JS, Choi YJ, Latour AM, Koller BH, Jeong
CS, Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and the Immunomodulation Research Center,
University of Ulsan, San29 Mugeo-Dong, Nam-Gu, Ulsan 680-749, Republic of Korea.

TR2 (TNFR-related 2, HVEM, or TNFRSF-14), a member of the TNFR family, is
involved in a number of immune responses. While TR2 is expressed on the surface
of T cells during the resting state, little is known regarding how expression of 
the TR2 gene is regulated. To understand the mechanisms regulating the expression
of TR2 in T cells, we analyzed the 5' flanking region of TR2. We identified an
important region for the activity of the TR2 promoter using site directed
mutagenesis. Using EMSA analysis, we found that IRF-2 was bound to the promoter
region of the TR2 gene during the resting state of EL-4 T cells. Transfection of 
IRF-2 expression plasmid and of dominant negative IRF-2 mutant further confirmed 
our results. Together, these data demonstrate that IRF-2 is involved in the
regulation of TR2 expression in EL-4 T cells.

PMID: 18155158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 1;179(5):3249-57.

Genetic control directed toward spontaneous IFN-alpha/IFN-beta responses and
downstream IFN-gamma expression influences the pathogenesis of a murine
psoriasis-like skin disease.

Arakura F(1), Hida S, Ichikawa E, Yajima C, Nakajima S, Saida T, Taki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine,
Shinshu University, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

Psoriasis is an inflammatory skin disease, onset and severity of which are
controlled by multiple genetic factors; aberrant expression of and responses to
several cytokines including IFN-alpha/IFN-beta and IFN-gamma are associated with 
this "type 1" disease. However, it remains unclear whether genetic regulation
influences these cytokine-related abnormalities. Mice deficient for IFN
regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) on the C57BL/6 background (IRF-2(-/-)BN mice)
exhibited accelerated IFN-alpha/IFN-beta responses leading to a psoriasis-like
skin inflammation. In this study, we found that this skin phenotype disappeared
in IRF-2(-/-) mice with the BALB/c or BALB/c x C57BL/6 F(1) backgrounds.
Genome-wide scan revealed two major quantitative trait loci controlled the skin
disease severity. Interestingly, these loci were different from that for the
defect in CD4(+) dendritic cells, another IFN-alpha/IFN-beta-dependent phenotype 
of the mice. Notably, IFN-gamma expression as well as spontaneous
IFN-alpha/IFN-beta responses were up-regulated several fold spontaneously in the 
skin in IRF-2(-/-)BN mice but not in IRF-2(-/-) mice with "resistant"
backgrounds. The absence of such IFN-gamma up-regulation in IRF-2(-/-)BN mice
lacking the IFN-alpha/IFN-beta receptor or beta(2)-microglobulin indicated that
accelerated IFN-alpha/IFN-beta signals augmented IFN-gamma expression by CD8(+) T
cells in the skin. IFN-gamma indeed played pathogenic roles as skin inflammation 
was delayed and was much more infrequent when IRF-2(-/-)BN mice lacked the
IFN-gamma receptor. Our current study thus revealed a novel genetic mechanism
that kept the skin immune system under control and prevented skin inflammation
through regulating the magnitude of IFN-alpha/IFN-beta responses and downstream
IFN-gamma production, independently of CD4(+) dendritic cells.

PMID: 17709541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(16):5409-21. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Translational control of the interferon regulatory factor 2 mRNA by IRES element.

Dhar D(1), Roy S, Das S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore-560012, India.

Translational control represents an important mode of regulation of gene
expression under stress conditions. We have studied the translation of interferon
regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) mRNA, a negative regulator of transcription of
interferon-stimulated genes and demonstrated the presence of internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) element in the 5'UTR of IRF2 RNA. Various control experiments
ruled out the contribution of leaky scanning, cryptic promoter activity or RNA
splicing in the internal initiation of IRF2 RNA. It seems IRF2-IRES function is
not sensitive to eIF4G cleavage, since its activity was only marginally affected 
in presence of Coxsackievirus 2A protease. Interferon alpha treatment did not
affect the IRF2-IRES activity or the protein level significantly. Also, in cells 
treated with tunicamycin [an agent causing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress],
the IRF2-IRES activity and the protein levels were unaffected, although the
cap-dependent translation was severely impaired. Analysis of the cellular protein
binding with the IRF2-IRES suggests certain cellular factors, which might
influence its function under stress conditions. Interestingly, partial knockdown 
of PTB protein significantly inhibited the IRF2-IRES function. Taken together, it
appears that IRF2 gene expression during stress condition is controlled by the
IRES element, which in turn influences the cellular response.

PMCID: PMC2018642
PMID: 17698501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biol Reprod. 2007 Aug;77(2):292-302. Epub 2007 May 2.

Pig conceptuses increase uterine interferon-regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), but
restrict expression to stroma through estrogen-induced IRF2 in luminal
epithelium.

Joyce MM(1), Burghardt JR, Burghardt RC, Hooper RN, Jaeger LA, Spencer TE, Bazer 
FW, Johnson GA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843-4458, USA.

Pig conceptuses secrete estrogen for pregnancy recognition, and they secrete
interferons (IFNs) gamma and delta during the peri-implantation period. The
uterine effects of pig IFNs are not known, although ruminant conceptuses secrete 
IFN tau for pregnancy recognition, and this increases the expression of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in the endometrium. In sheep, the transcriptional
repressor interferon-regulatory factor 2 (IRF2) is expressed in the endometrial
luminal epithelium (LE) and appears to restrict IFN tau induction of most ISGs,
including IRF1, to the stroma and glands. Interestingly, MX1, which is an ISG in 
sheep, is also expressed in the endometrial stroma of pregnant pigs. The
objective of the present study was to determine if estrogen and/or conceptus
secretory proteins (CSPs) that contain IFNs regulate IRF1 and IRF2 in pig
endometria. The endometrial levels of IRF1 and IRF2 were low throughout the
estrus cycle. After Day 12 of pregnancy, the levels of the classical ISGs, which 
include IRF1, STAT2, MIC, and B2M, increased in the overall endometrium, with
expression of IRF1 and STAT2 being specifically localized to the stroma. IRF2
increased in the LE after Day 12. To determine the effects of estrogen, pigs were
treated with 17 beta-estradiol benzoate (E2). To determine the CSP effects, pigs 
were treated with E2 and implanted with mini-osmotic pumps that delivered control
serum proteins (CX) to one ligated uterine horn and CSP to the other horn.
Estrogen increased the level of IRF2 in the endometrial LE. The administration of
E2 and infusion of CSP increased the level of IRF1 in the stroma. These results
suggest that conceptus estrogen induces IRF2 in the LE and limits the induction
of IRF1 by conceptus IFNs to the stroma. The cell-specific expression of IRF1 and
IRF2 in the pig endometrium highlights the complex and overlapping events that
are associated with gene expression during the peri-implantation period, when
pregnancy recognition signaling and uterine remodeling for implantation and
placentation are necessary for successful pregnancy.

PMID: 17475929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2535-43.

Involvement of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 in the formation and
progression of human esophageal cancers.

Wang Y(1), Liu DP, Chen PP, Koeffler HP, Tong XJ, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 are generally regarded as a tumor
suppressor and an oncoprotein, respectively. However, little is known about their
expression and function in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCC). In our
present work, IRF-1 expression was decreased and IRF-2 expression was increased
in ESCCs compared with matched normal esophageal tissues. Moreover, statistical
data indicated that IRF-2 expression was tightly correlated with progression of
ESCCs. As expected, overexpression of either IRF-1 or IRF-2 in an ESCC cell line 
resulted in either suppression or enhancement of cell growth, respectively. Also,
proliferation- and apoptosis-related molecules (p21(WAF1/CIP1), cyclin-D1, Bcl-2,
and histone H4) were regulated by IRF-1 and IRF-2. Additionally, high levels of
IRF-2 blocked the function of IRF-1 by preventing the latter from translocating
into the nucleus; in contrast, knock down of IRF-2 by small interfering RNA
permitted nuclear localization and activity of IRF-1. In vivo assay using nude
mice indicated that the tumorigenicity of ESCC cells was enhanced with IRF-2
overexpression but dramatically attenuated after forced expression of IRF-1. In
conclusion, IRF-1 and IRF-2 are able to regulate tumorigenicity of ESCC cells as 
antioncoprotein and oncoprotein, respectively. Relative amounts of IRF-1 to IRF-2
are functionally very important for the development and progression of ESCCs, and
reduction of the ratio of IRF-1/IRF-2 may lead to the enhancement of
tumorigenicity of ESCC cells. Therefore, levels of IRF-1 and IRF-2 are useful
indicators in diagnosis and prognosis for ESCCs, and these molecules are
potential drug targets for ESCC therapy.

PMID: 17363571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 15;178(6):3602-11.

IFN regulatory factor-2 regulates macrophage apoptosis through a STAT1/3- and
caspase-1-dependent mechanism.

Cuesta N(1), Nhu QM, Zudaire E, Polumuri S, Cuttitta F, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, 600 West Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-2(-/-) mice are significantly more resistant to LPS
challenge than wild-type littermates, and this was correlated with increased
numbers of apoptotic Kupffer cells. To assess the generality of this observation,
and to understand the role of IRF-2 in apoptosis, responses of peritoneal
macrophages from IRF-2(+/+) and IRF-2(-/-) mice to apoptotic stimuli, including
the fungal metabolite, gliotoxin, were compared. IRF-2(-/-) macrophages exhibited
a consistently higher incidence of apoptosis that failed to correlate with
caspase-3/7 activity. Using microarray gene expression profiling of liver RNA
samples derived from IRF-2(+/+) and IRF-2(-/-) mice treated with saline or LPS,
we identified >40 genes that were significantly down-regulated in IRF-2(-/-)
mice, including Stat3, which has been reported to regulate apoptosis. Compared
with IRF-2(+/+) macrophages, STAT3alpha mRNA was up-regulated constitutively or
after gliotoxin treatment of IRF-2(-/-) macrophages, whereas STAT3beta mRNA was
down-regulated. Phospho-Y705-STAT3, phospho-S727-STAT1, and phospho-p38 protein
levels were also significantly higher in IRF-2(-/-) than control macrophages.
Activation of the STAT signaling pathway has been shown to elicit expression of
CASP1 and apoptosis. IRF-2(-/-) macrophages exhibited increased basal and
gliotoxin-induced caspase-1 mRNA expression and enhanced caspase-1 activity.
Pharmacologic inhibition of STAT3 and caspase-1 abolished gliotoxin-induced
apoptosis in IRF-2(-/-) macrophages. A novel IFN-stimulated response element,
identified within the murine promoter of Casp1, was determined to be functional
by EMSA and supershift analysis. Collectively, these data support the hypothesis 
that IRF-2 acts as a transcriptional repressor of Casp1, and that the absence of 
IRF-2 renders macrophages more sensitive to apoptotic stimuli in a
caspase-1-dependent process.

PMID: 17339457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 15;178(2):986-92.

Identification of CXCL11 as a STAT3-dependent gene induced by IFN.

Yang CH(1), Wei L, Pfeffer SR, Du Z, Murti A, Valentine WJ, Zheng Y, Pfeffer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Tennessee
Health Science Center and Cancer Institute, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

IFNs selectively regulate gene expression through several signaling pathways. The
present study explored the involvement of STAT3 in the IFN-induced expression of 
the gene encoding the CXCL11 chemokine. The CXCL11 gene was induced in
IFN-sensitive Daudi cells, but not in an IFN-resistant DRST3 subline with a
defective STAT3 signaling pathway. Although the IFN-stimulated gene ISG15 was
induced to a similar extent in Daudi and DRST3 cells, expression of wild-type
STAT3 in DRST3 cells restored the IFN inducibility of CXCL11. Reconstitution of
STAT3 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts with wild-type STAT3, or STAT3 with
the canonical STAT3 dimerization site at Y705 mutated, restored IFN inducibility 
of the CXCL11 gene. These data indicate that CXCL11 gene induction by IFN is
STAT3 dependent, but that phosphorylation of Y705 of STAT3 is not required.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that IFN treatment of Daudi and
DRST3 cells induced STAT3 binding to the CXCL11 promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays also revealed that NF-kappaB family member p65 and IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)1 were bound to CXCL11 promoter upon IFN treatment of
Daudi cells. In contrast, IFN induced the binding of p50 and IRF2 to the CXCL11
promoter in DRST3 cells. The profile of promoter binding was indistinguishable in
IFN-sensitive Daudi cells and DRST3 cells reconstituted with wild-type STAT3.
Thus, STAT3 also plays a role in the recruitment of the transcriptional
activators p65 and IRF1, and the displacement of the transcriptional repressors
p50 and IRF2 from the CXCL11 promoter also appears to regulate the induction of
CXCL11 gene transcription.

PMID: 17202361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 2;282(9):6629-43. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

PU.1, interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 2, and the interferon consensus
sequence-binding protein (ICSBP/IRF8) cooperate to activate NF1 transcription in 
differentiating myeloid cells.

Huang W(1), Horvath E, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)The Feinberg School of Medicine and The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Nf1 (neurofibromin 1) is a Ras-GAP protein that regulates cytokine-induced
proliferation of myeloid cells. In previous studies, we found that the interferon
consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP; also referred to as interferon
regulatory factor 8) activates transcription of the gene encoding Nf1 (the NF1
gene) in differentiating myeloid cells. We also found that NF1 activation
requires cytokine-stimulated phosphorylation of a conserved tyrosine residue in
the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) domain of ICSBP/IRF8. In this study, we
found that ICSBP/IRF8 cooperates with PU.1 and interferon regulatory factor 2 to 
activate a composite ets/IRF-cis element in the NF1 promoter. We found that PU.1 
binds directly to the NF1-cis element, and DNA-bound PU.1 interacts with IRF2,
recruiting IRF2 to the cis element. This interaction requires cytokine-induced
phosphorylation of specific serine residues in the PU.1 PEST domain and of a
conserved tyrosine residue in the IRF domain of IRF2. We found that ICSBP/IRF8
interaction with the NF1-cis element requires pre-binding of PU.1 and IRF2. The
conserved IRF domain tyrosine in ICSBP/IRF8 is required for interaction with the 
DNA-bound PU.1-IRF2 heterodimer. NF1 deficiency in myeloid progenitor cells
results in cytokine hypersensitivity and myeloproliferation. Therefore, these
studies identify a target gene for the previously observed tumor-suppressor
effect of PU.1. Additionally, these studies identify a tumor-suppressor function 
for the "oncogenic" transcription factor, IRF2.

PMID: 17200120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Vasc Res. 2007;44(1):51-60. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Interferon-beta is a potent inducer of interferon regulatory factor-1/2-dependent
IP-10/CXCL10 expression in primary human endothelial cells.

Buttmann M(1), Berberich-Siebelt F, Serfling E, Rieckmann P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Julius-Maximilians University,
Josef-Schneider-Strasse 11, DE-97080 Würzburg, Germany.
m.buttmann@uni-wuerzburg.de

Most virus-infected cells release interferon-beta (IFN-beta) as a powerful
inducer of antiviral defense. Endothelial cells tightly regulate local immune
cell recruitment by expression of adhesion molecules and chemokines. Here, we
studied the transcriptional regulation of IFN-beta-induced chemokine expression
in primary human endothelial cells. IFN-beta moderately increased monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1/CCL2 and potently raised IFN-gamma-inducible
protein-10/CXCL10 mRNA steady-state levels and protein release, while no effect
was detected on various other chemokines. As shown by transient transfections,
induction of CXCL10 expression depends on an IFN-stimulated response element
(ISRE) within the CXCL10 promoter. A double point mutation of the putative IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)-1/2 binding site within this ISRE motif abolished
IFN-beta-induced promoter activity. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
this ISRE motif showed a basal IRF-2 and an IFN-beta-inducible IRF-1 and
augmented IRF-2 binding. Furthermore, stimulation with IFN-beta induced a rapid
nuclear translocation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(STAT1) and STAT2 and their transient binding to a gamma-activated site within
the CCL2 promoter. The kinetics of transient STAT1 binding to this
gamma-activated site element correlated with the amount of Y701-phosphorylated
nuclear STAT1, while S727-phosphorylated nuclear STAT1 remained stable over 24 h 
after stimulation. Therefore, IFN-beta potently induces endothelial chemokine
expression at the transcriptional level.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17167270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Curr Gene Ther. 2006 Oct;6(5):543-50.

The role of IRF1 and IRF2 transcription factors in leukaemogenesis.

Choo A(1), Palladinetti P, Passioura T, Shen S, Lock R, Symonds G, Dolnikov A.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia for Medical Research, Randwick, Sydney, 
Australia.

Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is the most common form of leukaemia in adults.
Although of the order of 75-85% of patients will achieve complete remission after
induction chemotherapy, long-term survival is still relatively low. Despite the
progress in the rational design of drugs in disorders such as chronic myeloid
leukaemia, AML lacks a single specific pathogenomic event to act as a drug
target. Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) is a member of a family of related 
proteins that act as transcriptional activators or repressors. IRF1 and its
functional antagonist IRF2 originally discovered as transcription factors
regulating the interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene, are involved in the regulation of
normal haematopoiesis and leukaemogenesis. IRF1 appears to act as a tumour
suppressor gene and IRF2 as an oncogene. IRF1 acts to repress IRF2 function
through the repression of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p21WAF1
critical for cell growth control. It appears that the tumour suppression function
of IRF1 is abolished by IRF2. This review focuses on the interaction between IRF1
and IRF2 in myeloid development and leukaemogenesis, particularly in relation to 
the Ras signalling pathway. IRF2 may be a viable and specific therapeutic target 
in human leukaemia.

PMID: 17073600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1335-40. Epub 2006 Oct 15.

Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial morphogenesis in mice deficient for
interferon regulatory factor 6 (Irf6).

Ingraham CR(1), Kinoshita A, Kondo S, Yang B, Sajan S, Trout KJ, Malik MI,
Dunnwald M, Goudy SL, Lovett M, Murray JC, Schutte BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Transcription factor paralogs may share a common role in staged or overlapping
expression in specific tissues, as in the Hox family. In other cases, family
members have distinct roles in a range of embryologic, differentiation or
response pathways (as in the Tbx and Pax families). For the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, mice deficient in Irf1, Irf2, Irf3,
Irf4, Irf5, Irf7, Irf8 or Irf9 have defects in the immune response but show no
embryologic abnormalities. Mice deficient for Irf6 have not been reported, but in
humans, mutations in IRF6 cause two mendelian orofacial clefting syndromes, and
genetic variation in IRF6 confers risk for isolated cleft lip and palate. Here we
report that mice deficient for Irf6 have abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
development. Histological and gene expression analyses indicate that the primary 
defect is in keratinocyte differentiation and proliferation. This study describes
a new role for an IRF family member in epidermal development.

PMCID: PMC2082114
PMID: 17041601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Int J Cancer. 2007 Jan 1;120(1):39-47.

An interferon-sensitive response element is involved in constitutive caspase-8
gene expression in neuroblastoma cells.

De Ambrosis A(1), Casciano I, Croce M, Pagnan G, Radic L, Banelli B, Di Vinci A, 
Allemanni G, Tonini GP, Ponzoni M, Romani M, Ferrini S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunological Therapy, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul
Cancro (IST-Genova) Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132 Genova, Italy.

We previously identified a 1.2 Kb DNA element (P-1161/+16), 5' to caspase-8
exon-1, that acts as promoter in caspase-8-positive, but not in
caspase-8-negative neuroblastoma (NB) cells. The P-1161/+16 DNA element regulates
both constitutive and interferon IFN-gamma-inducible caspase-8 expression. Two
GAS (IFN-activated sequence, STAT-1 binding site) and two ISRE (interferon
sensitive response element, IRF binding site) were present in P-1161/+16.
Deletion studies indicated that elements essential for promoter activity in NB
cells were present in a 167 bp region 5' flanking exon-1 (P-151/+16), which
contains an ISRE at position -32. The transcription initiation site was mapped by
5' rapid amplification of cDNA end (RACE) at position -20 from caspase-8 cDNA
reference sequence. Disruption of the ISRE-32 indicated that it is required for
both constitutive and IFN-gamma-inducible caspase-8 expression. IRF-1 and IRF-2
transcription factors bind to the (-151/+16) DNA fragment in vitro. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed that IRF-1 and IRF-2 bind to the DNA
region at the 5' of caspase-8 gene in NB cells, which show constitutive
expression but not in caspase-8 negative cells. In these last cells,
up-regulation of caspase-8 by IFN-gamma was associated to induction of IRF-1 and 
IRF-2 binding to caspase-8 promoter and increased histone acetylation. Moreover, 
RNA interference experiments also supported the involvement of IRF-1 and IRF-2 in
constitutive caspase-8 expression in NB cells.

PMID: 17036321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 2006 Sep;80(3-4):136-43. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

15-Deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 inhibits interferon gamma induced MHC class II
but not class I expression on ARPE cells through a PPAR gamma independent
mechanism.

Willermain F(1), Dulku S, Gonzalez NS, Blero D, Driessens G, De Graef C, Caspers 
L, Bruyns C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, CHU Saint-Pierre and Brugmann, Belgium.
fwillerm@ulb.ac.be

Retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells constitute the external part of the
blood-retinal-barrier and play a pivotal role in the regulation of retinal
immunity. In the present work, we investigated the effects of
15-deoxy-12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15 PGJ2), an endogenous ligand of PPARgamma, on 
the IFNgamma-induced expression of MHC class II on RPE cells. Indeed,
pathological expression of MHC class II molecules at the surface of RPE cells is 
a common feature of many blinding conditions. We demonstrated that 15 PGJ2
inhibited the IFNgamma-mediated induction of MHC class II on RPE cells without
affecting the level of MHC class I and CD54 expression. The other PPARgamma
agonist rosiglitazone or troglitazone had no similar effects. Moreover, the
inhibitory effect of 15 PGJ2 was not abrogated by co-incubation with PPARgamma
antagonists and did not involve the modulation of STAT-1, AKT or ERK1/2
phosphorylation, nor CIITA, IRF1 or IRF2 transcription. In conclusion, 15 PGJ2
inhibits strongly and specifically the IFNgamma-induced MHC class II expression
on RPE cells by a PPARgamma independent mechanism. Given the differential role of
MHC classes I and II in the development of autoimmune uveitis and the potential
toxicity of 15 PGJ2, our data's suggest that the development of novel small
molecules targeting similar PPARgamma independent pathways would be useful for
the future management of uveitis.

PMID: 16939878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 24;25(37):5113-24. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Nucleolin is involved in interferon regulatory factor-2-dependent transcriptional
activation.

Masumi A(1), Fukazawa H, Shimazu T, Yoshida M, Ozato K, Komuro K, Yamaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Research on Blood and Biological Products, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashimurayama-shi, Tokyo, Japan.
amasumi@nih.go.jp

We have previously shown that interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) is
acetylated in a cell growth-dependent manner, which enables it to contribute to
the transcription of cell growth-regulated promoters. To clarify the function of 
acetylation of IRF-2, we investigated the proteins that associate with acetylated
IRF-2. In 293T cells, the transfection of p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF)
enhanced the acetylation of IRF-2. In cells transfected with both IRF-2 and PCAF,
IRF-2 associated with endogenous nucleolin, while in contrast, minimal
association was observed when IRF-2 was transfected with a PCAF histone acetyl
transferase (HAT) deletion mutant. In a pull-down experiment using stable
transfectants, acetylation-defective mutant IRF-2 (IRF-2K75R) recruited nucleolin
to a much lesser extent than wild-type IRF-2, suggesting that nucleolin
preferentially associates with acetylated IRF-2. Nucleolin in the presence of
PCAF enhanced IRF-2-dependent H4 promoter activity in NIH3T3 cells. Nucleolin
knock-down using siRNA reduced the IRF-2/PCAF-mediated promoter activity.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that PCAF transfection increased
nucleolin binding to IRF-2 bound to the H4 promoter. We conclude that nucleolin
is recruited to acetylated IRF-2, thereby contributing to gene regulation crucial
for the control of cell growth.

PMID: 16582966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Immunogenetics. 2006 Feb;58(1):56-69. Epub 2006 Jan 27.

Identification and regulatory analysis of rainbow trout tapasin and
tapasin-related genes.

Landis ED(1), Palti Y, Dekoning J, Drew R, Phillips RB, Hansen JD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Program, University of Maryland Medical School, Baltimore, 
Maryland, USA.

Tapasin (TAPBP) is a key member of MHC class Ia antigen-loading complexes,
bridging the class Ia molecule to the transporter associated with antigen
presentation (TAP). As part of an ongoing study of MHC genomics in rainbow trout,
we have identified two rainbow trout TAPBP genes (Onmy-TAPBP.a and .b) and a
similar but distinct TAPBP-related gene (Onmy-TAPBP-R) that had previously only
been described in mammals. Physical and genetic mapping indicate that
Onmy-TAPBP.a is on chromosome 18 in the MHC class Ia region and that Onmy-TAPBP.b
resides on chromosome 14 in the MHC class Ib region. There are also at least two 
copies of TAPBP-R, Onmy-TAPBP-R.a and Onmy-TAPBP-R.b, located on chromosomes 2
and 3, respectively. Due to the central role of TAPBP expression during acute
viral infection, we have characterized the transcriptional profile and regulatory
regions for both Onmy-TAPBP and Onmy-TAPBP-R. Transcription of both genes
increased during acute infection with infectious hematapoeitic necrosis virus
(IHNV) in a fashion indicative of interferon-mediated regulation.
Promoter-reporter assays in STE-137 cells demonstrate that the trout TAPBP and
TAPBP-R promoters respond to interferon regulatory factors, Onmy-IRF1 and
Onmy-IRF2. Overall, TAPBP is expressed at higher levels than TAPBP-R in naïve
tissues and TAPBP transcription is more responsive to viral infection and IRF1
and 2 binding.

PMID: 16447046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2005 Oct;25(10):587-94.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 expression in breast cancer
tissue microarrays.

Connett JM(1), Badri L, Giordano TJ, Connett WC, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0654, USA.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is a pleiotropic cytokine with potent antitumor
effects, both in vitro and in vivo. The antitumor activity of IFN-gamma is
mediated in part through IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and may be blocked by
IRF-2. To test our hypothesis that some tumors escape the antitumor effects of
IFN-gamma by cellular changes reflected in IRF-1 and IRF-2 expression, we
examined IRF-1 and IRF-2 expression in tissue microarrays (TMA) containing 187
specimens of clinically defined invasive breast carcinoma. TMAs (Cooperative
Breast Cancer Tissue Resource [CBCTR], National Cancer Institute [NCI]) were
stained and then scored by three evaluators blinded to the patients' clinical
status. After final scoring, the CBCTR provided the available clinical data for
each patient. Whether sorted by carcinoma type or for all data together,
statistical analysis showed a significant positive correlation between IRF-1 and 
IRF-2 expression (p = 0.01) and a negative correlation between IRF-1 expression
and tumor grade (p = 0.005). IRF-1 expression is consistent with its role as a
tumor suppressor; high-grade breast carcinomas were less likely to maintain
expression of IRF-1, a finding consistent with a role for IRF-1 as a tumor
suppressor. Further, tumors maintained expression of IRF-2 if there was
coincident expression of IRF-1. These data support a model in which alterations
of the expression of intracellular effectors of IFN-gamma signaling may diminish 
the immune-mediated tumor control mechanisms of IFN-gamma.

PMID: 16241857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 2005 Dec 15;106(13):4351-8. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

1alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 is a potent suppressor of interferon gamma-mediated
macrophage activation.

Helming L(1), Böse J, Ehrchen J, Schiebe S, Frahm T, Geffers R, Probst-Kepper M, 
Balling R, Lengeling A.

Author information: 
(1)Junior Research Group Infection Genetics, German Research Centre for
Biotechnology, Mascheroder Weg 1, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

1alpha,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1alpha,25(OH)2D3), the activated vitamin D3
hormone, is a key regulator of calcium homeostasis and thereby indispensable for 
bone metabolism. In addition, 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 is known to mediate predominantly 
immunosuppressive responses in vitro and in vivo. It has been demonstrated that
macrophages can produce 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 on activation with interferon gamma
(IFN-gamma), although little is understood about the biologic significance of
this response. We show here that 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 can selectively suppress key
effector functions of IFN-gamma-activated macrophages. Among these are the
suppression of listericidal activity, the inhibition of phagocyte
oxidase-mediated oxidative burst, and the suppression of important
IFN-gamma-induced genes, including Ccl5, Cxcl10, Cxcl9, Irf2, Fcgr1, Fcgr3, and
Tlr2. The deactivation of IFN-gamma-stimulated macrophages is dependent on a
functional vitamin D receptor and 1alpha,25(OH)2D3 acts specifically on
IFN-gamma-activated macrophages, whereas the steroid has no effects on resting
macrophages. Therefore, the 1alpha,25(OH)2D3-mediated suppression of macrophage
functions is distinct from previously described macrophage deactivation
mechanisms. In conclusion, our data indicate that the production of
1alpha,25(OH)2D3 by IFN-gamma-stimulated macrophages might be an important
negative feedback mechanism to control innate and inflammatory responses of
activated macrophages.

PMID: 16118315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 15;65(16):7485-92.

Identification of mechanisms underlying transporter associated with antigen
processing deficiency in metastatic murine carcinomas.

Setiadi AF(1), David MD, Chen SS, Hiscott J, Jefferies WA.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre and Michael Smith Laboratories, Department of
Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia.

Expression of transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) is often lost 
in metastatic carcinomas, resulting in defective antigen processing and
presentation and escape of the cancer cells from immune surveillance. In this
study, the nature of TAP deficiencies in tumors was investigated. By chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, we showed that the recruitment of RNA polymerase II to
the TAP-1 gene was impaired in TAP-deficient cells derived from murine melanoma, 
prostate, and lung carcinomas, compared with TAP-expressing fibroblasts and
lymphoma cells. This suggested that the deficiency in TAP-1 expression resulted, 
at least partially, from a relatively low level of transcription of the TAP-1
gene. Furthermore, levels of TAP-1 promoter activity, as assessed by stable
transfections with a reporter construct containing the TAP-1 promoter, were
relatively low in TAP-deficient cells. To examine genetic heritability of
regulators of TAP-1 promoter activity, TAP- and MHC class I-deficient cells of
H-2b origin were fused with wild-type fibroblasts of H-2k origin. Fusion with
TAP-expressing cells complemented the low levels of TAP-1 promoter activity in
TAP-deficient cells. However, these fused cells exhibited lower levels of TAP-1
mRNA and H-2k than unfused fibroblasts. Further analysis showed that TAP-1 mRNA
stability was lower in fused carcinoma fibroblasts than in unfused fibroblasts.
Based on these results, we propose that TAP deficiency in many carcinomas is
caused by a decrease in activity/expression of trans-acting factors regulating
TAP-1 promoter activity, as well as a decrease in TAP-1 mRNA stability. These
results have significant implications for understanding immune evasion mechanisms
in tumors.

PMID: 16103103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(16):10308-29.

ERK1/2 and MEK1/2 induced by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (human
herpesvirus 8) early during infection of target cells are essential for
expression of viral genes and for establishment of infection.

Sharma-Walia N(1), Krishnan HH, Naranatt PP, Zeng L, Smith MS, Chandran B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Molecular Genetics and Immunology, Mail Stop 3029,
The University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS
66160, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) in vitro target cell infection is 
characterized by the expression of the latency-associated genes ORF 73 (LANA-1), 
ORF 72, and K13 and by the transient expression of a very limited number of lytic
genes such as lytic cycle switch gene ORF 50 (RTA) and the immediate early (IE)
lytic K5, K8, and v-IRF2 genes. During the early stages of infection, several
overlapping multistep complex events precede the initiation of viral gene
expression. KSHV envelope glycoprotein gB induces the FAK-Src-PI3K-RhoGTPase
(where FAK is focal adhesion kinase) signaling pathway. As early as 5 min
postinfection (p.i.), KSHV induced the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1
and 2 (ERK1/2) via the PI3K-PKCzeta-MEK pathway. In addition, KSHV modulated the 
transcription of several host genes of primary human dermal microvascular
endothelial cells (HMVEC-d) and fibroblast (HFF) cells by 2 h and 4 h p.i.
Neutralization of virus entry and infection by PI-3K and other cellular tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors suggested a critical role for signaling molecules in KSHV
infection of target cells. Here we investigated the induction of ERK1/2 by KSHV
and KSHV envelope glycoproteins gB and gpK8.1A and the role of induced ERK in
viral and host gene expression. Early during infection, significant ERK1/2
induction was observed even with low multiplicity of infection of live and
UV-inactivated KSHV in serum-starved cells as well as in the presence of serum.
Entry of UV-inactivated virus and the absence of viral gene expression suggested 
that ERK1/2 induction is mediated by the initial signal cascade induced by KSHV
binding and entry. Purified soluble gpK8.1A induced the MEK1/2 dependent ERK1/2
but not ERK5 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in HMVEC-d and HFF. 
Moderate ERK induction with soluble gB was seen only in HMVEC-d. Preincubation of
gpK8.1A with heparin or anti-gpK8.1A antibodies inhibited the ERK induction.
U0126, a selective inhibitor for MEK/ERK blocked the gpK8.1A- and KSHV-induced
ERK activation. ERK1/2 inhibition did not block viral DNA internalization and had
no significant effect on nuclear delivery of KSHV DNA during de novo infection.
Analyses of viral gene expression by quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase
PCR revealed that pretreatment of cells with U0126 for 1 h and during the 2-h
infection with KSHV significantly inhibited the expression of ORF 73, ORF 50
(RTA), and the IE-K8 and v-IRF2 genes. However, the expression of lytic IE-K5
gene was not affected significantly. Expression of ORF 73 in BCBL-1 cells was
also significantly inhibited by preincubation with U0126. Inhibition of ERK1/2
also inhibited the transcription of some of the vital host genes such as DUSP5
(dual specificity phosphatase 5), ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule 1),
heparin binding epidermal growth factor, and vascular endothelial growth factor
that were up-regulated early during KSHV infection. Several MAPK-regulated host
transcription factors such as c-Jun, STAT1alpha, MEF2, c-Myc, ATF-2 and c-Fos
were induced early during infection, and ERK inhibition significantly blocked the
c-Fos, c-Jun, c-Myc, and STAT1alpha activation in the infected cells. AP1
transcription factors binding to the RTA promoter in electrophoretic mobility
shift assays were readily detected in the infected cell nuclear extracts which
were significantly reduced by ERK inhibition. Together, these results suggest
that very early during de novo infection, KSHV induces the ERK1/2 to modulate the
initiation of viral gene expression and host cell genes, which further supports
our hypothesis that beside the conduit for viral DNA delivery into the cytoplasm,
KSHV interactions with host cell receptor(s) create an appropriate intracellular 
environment facilitating infection.

PMCID: PMC1182676
PMID: 16051824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncogene. 2005 Nov 10;24(49):7327-36.

A retroviral library genetic screen identifies IRF-2 as an inhibitor of
N-ras-induced growth suppression in leukemic cells.

Passioura T(1), Shen S, Symonds G, Dolnikov A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Kensington, Sydney,
Australia.

Activating mutations of the N-ras gene occur at relatively high frequency in
acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. Somewhat paradoxically,
ectopic expression of activated N-ras in primary hematopoietic cells and myeloid 
cell lines (in some cases) can lead to inhibition of proliferation. Expression of
mutant N-ras in murine hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells is sufficient to
induce myeloid malignancies, but these pathologies occur with long latency. This 
suggests that mutations that disable the growth suppressive properties of N-ras
in hematopoietic cells are required for the development of frank malignancy. In
the present work, the growth suppression induced by a mutant N-ras gene in U937
myeloid cells was used as the basis to screen a retroviral cDNA library for genes
that prevent mutant N-ras-induced growth suppression (i.e., putative cooperating 
oncogenes). This screen identified the gene for the transcription factor
interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2), and as confirmation of the screen,
overexpression of this gene in U937 cells was shown to inhibit mutant
N-ras-induced growth suppression. Also recovered from the screen were two
truncated clones of an uncharacterized gene (interim official symbol: PP2135).
Overexpression of this truncated PP2135 gene in U937 cells did not appear to
abrogate mutant N-ras-induced growth suppression, but rather appeared to confer
an increased sensitivity of U937 cells to retroviral infection, accounting for
the recovery of this gene from the genetic screen.

PMID: 16007130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Immunol. 2006 Feb;43(6):519-28. Epub 2005 Jun 13.

Expression of the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA) type IV promoter in B
lymphocytes and regulation by IFN-gamma.

Piskurich JF(1), Gilbert CA, Ashley BD, Zhao M, Chen H, Wu J, Bolick SC, Wright
KL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine, 1550 College
St., Macon, GA 31207, USA. Piskurich_J@Mercer.edu

The MHC class II transactivator (CIITA), the master regulator of MHC class II
(MHC II) expression, is a co-activator that controls MHC II transcription. Human 
B lymphocytes express MHC II constitutively due to persistent activity of CIITA
promoter III (pIII), one of the four potential promoters (pI-pIV) of this gene.
Although increases in MHC II expression in B cells in response to cytokines have 
been observed and induction of MHC II and CIITA by IFN-gamma has been studied in 
a number of different cell types, the specific effects of IFN-gamma on CIITA
expression in B cells have not been studied. To investigate the regulation of
CIITA expression by IFN-gamma in B cells, RT-PCR, in vivo and in vitro
protein/DNA binding studies, and functional promoter analyses were performed.
Both MHC II and CIITA type IV-specific RNAs increased in human B lymphocytes in
response to IFN-gamma treatment. CIITA promoter analysis confirmed that pIV is
IFN-gamma inducible in B cells and that the GAS and IRF-E sites are necessary for
full induction. DNA binding of IRF-1 and IRF-2, members of the IFN regulatory
factor family, was up-regulated in B cells in response to IFN-gamma and increased
the activity of CIITA pIV. In vivo genomic footprint analysis demonstrated
proteins binding at the GAS, IRF-E and E box sites of CIITA pIV. Although CIITA
pIII is considered to be the hematopoietic-specific promoter of CIITA, these
findings demonstrate that pIV is active in B lymphocytes and potentially
contributes to the expression of CIITA and MHC II in these cells.

PMCID: PMC1482792
PMID: 15950283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2005 May;28(5):301-4.

[Study of the expression profile of immunogenesis associated genes in
tuberculosis by microarray].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YL(1), Duanmu HJ, Li L, Song CX, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)National Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory, Beijing Tuberculosis & Thoracic
Tumor Research Institute, Beijing 101149, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the difference of gene expression profile in tuberculosis
patients.
METHODS: mRNA levels of pleural fluid and peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) in tuberculous pleurisy and lung cancer patients were compared by cDNA
microarray. Paired mRNAs from fluid specimens of tuberculosis and lung cancer
cases were labeled with different fluorochromes during cDNA probe synthesis in a 
reverse-transcription reaction. The signal intensity of each spot was measured by
laser scanner and gene expression was quantified as the tubercle-to-normal
fluorescence ratio (T:N ratio). The gene was defined as over expression when the 
T:N ratio was greater than 2.0 and under expression when the ratio was less than 
0.5.
RESULTS: Among 626 immunogenesis associated genes there were 53 differences, of
which 31 (tnf-alpha, ig-lambda, il-17, il-17r, hla-dp, lcp1, tcralpha, tcrbeta,
hsp75, cxcr4, fyb, hla-g, hla-a, il18bp, il-2r, lt-beta, il-8, ip-10, mcp-1,
il-12, il-12r, il-10, canx, irf2, ifn-gamma, tlr, il-1, il-7, tlr, lsp-1,
il-14)were higher and 22 (il-4, il-18, il-15, ifg-1, scya14, ablim, peci, ppid,
hsf 2, actg2, maoa, ttid, gatm, tgfb3, insr, thbd, trap1, tcrgamma, tcrdelta,
il-13r, il-11, igf1, a2m)were lower in tuberculous pleurisy than those in the
control.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunogenesis of tuberculosis involves multi-genetic expression 
changes, such as tnf-alpha, il-17, il-12, tcralpha, tcrbeta, hsp75, cxcr4, il-4, 
il-18, il-15 etc., the expression profile of which changed dramatically. The
results provide new insight for understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms of
tuberculosis and exploring new therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 15949308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Blood. 2005 Sep 15;106(6):2011-7. Epub 2005 May 24.

Negative control of basophil expansion by IRF-2 critical for the regulation of
Th1/Th2 balance.

Hida S(1), Tadachi M, Saito T, Taki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Shinshu University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

Although basophils are known to produce interleukin 4 (IL-4), the roles of these 
cells have been documented only in mice infected with parasites or in the
effector phase of allergic inflammations. Here we show that naive mice lacking
the transcription factor, interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2), exhibited
signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (Stat6)-independent expansion 
of basophils in the periphery. IRF-2 appeared to act autonomously in the cells to
negatively regulate the expansion of, but not cytokine production by, basophils. 
Spontaneous Th2 polarization of CD4+ T cells was observed in these mice and the
genetic reduction of basophil numbers by mutating the Kit gene abolished such a
polarization in vivo. We also found that both basophils and IL-4 derived from
them were indeed essential for Th2 development under neutral conditions in vitro.
Furthermore, neutralization of IL-3 abolished IL-4 production by basophils during
Th1/Th2 differentiation cultures and subsequent Th2 development. These results
indicated that basophils acted as a cellular converter to turn the neutral IL-3
into the Th2-inducing IL-4 during the initiation of Th1/Th2 differentiation.
Thus, the negative regulatory role of IRF-2 on the basophil population size is
critically important for preventing excess Th2 polarization and the Th1/Th2
balance in naive animals.

PMID: 15914553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):6005-12.

IFN regulatory factor-2 deficiency revealed a novel checkpoint critical for the
generation of peripheral NK cells.

Taki S(1), Nakajima S, Ichikawa E, Saito T, Hida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Shinshu University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan. shin-t@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

NK cell development is far less understood compared with that of T and B cells
despite the critical importance of NK cells in innate immunity. Mice lacking the 
transcription factor IFN regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) are known to exhibit NK cell
deficiency. However, the role of IRF-2 in NK cell development has remained
unclear. In this study we found that NK cell deficiency in the periphery in
IRF-2-deficient mice was due to selective loss of mature NK cells, but not to
maturation arrest, and NK cells in these mice exhibited very immature surface
phenotypes (CD11b(low)Dx5(low)) with highly compromised NK receptor expression.
In contrast, IRF-2-deficient NK cells in bone marrow (BM) showed relatively
mature phenotypes (CD11b(low)Dx5(high)) with less compromised NK receptor
repertoire. Furthermore, BM NK cells in IRF-2-deficient mice were found to
proliferate almost normally, but underwent accelerated apoptosis. These
observations indicated that NK cell maturation could advance up to a late, but
not the final, stage in the BM, whereas these cells were incapable of
contributing to the peripheral NK cell pool due to premature death in the absence
of IRF-2. In contrast, NK cell numbers and Ly49 expression were much more
severely reduced in BM in IL-15-deficient mice than in IRF-2(-/-) mice. The
differential peripheral and central NK cell deficiencies in IRF-2(-/-) mice thus 
revealed a novel late checkpoint for NK cell maturation, distinct from the early 
IL-15-dependent expansion stage.

PMID: 15879093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 1;174(7):3948-58.

IFN regulatory factor-2 cooperates with STAT1 to regulate transporter associated 
with antigen processing-1 promoter activity.

Rouyez MC(1), Lestingi M, Charon M, Fichelson S, Buzyn A, Dusanter-Fourt I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.

Class I MHC complexes (MHC(I)) are essential in mediating immune response. The
transport of antigenic peptides (TAP) to MHC(I) and the stable expression of
MHC(I) on the cell surface require the presence of a dedicated TAP. In this study
we report that IFN-gamma and thrombopoietin (TPO) strongly increase TAP1 protein 
expression in megakaryocytes, followed by an enhanced expression of MHC(I) on the
cell surface. This expression parallels the enhanced TAP1 promoter activity and
TAP1 mRNA expression, which are independent of protein synthesis. We also show
that this cytokine-dependent expression of TAP1 transcripts depends on STAT1 and 
IFN regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2), but not on IRF-1, and provide evidence that
IRF-2 constitutively binds to the TAP1 gene promoter and enhances TAP1 promoter
activity. We show that IRF-2 forms a complex with STAT1 and the
cytokine-responsive region of the TAP1 promoter in any TPO or IFN-gamma target
cells tested. Interaction of IRF-2 and STAT1 on the promoter depends on the
DNA-binding domain of IRF-2. Overall, our data indicate that TPO and IFN-gamma
activate the expression of TAP1 via a new mechanism that involves functional
cooperation between STAT1 and IRF-2 on the TAP1 promoter.

PMID: 15778351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 1;174(5):2825-33.

Involvement of TNF and NF-kappa B in the transcriptional control of
cyclooxygenase-2 expression by IFN-gamma in macrophages.

Vila-del Sol V(1), Fresno M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma, Madrid, Spain.

IFN-gamma induces cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression and PG production in mouse
macrophage cells. IFN-gamma activates COX-2 promoter-driven transcription.
Deletion of the IFN sequence regulatory element (ISRE) I -1541/-1522 and ISRE II 
-1215/-1206 sites of the mouse COX-2 promoter minimally decrease this IFN-gamma
induction. In contrast, deletion of the -965/-150 region from the COX-2 promoter 
abrogated IFN-gamma induction. In this region a NF-kappaB site has been described
and mutation of this site impairs the induction of the full COX-2 promoter by
IFN-gamma. Moreover, IFN-gamma induction of the COX-2 promoter was also strongly 
reduced by transfection of plasmid encoding the NF-kappaB inhibitor,
IkappaBalpha. Interestingly, IFN-gamma induction of the COX-2 and PGE(2)
synthesis was absent in macrophages from TNF(-/-) mice, and neutralizing anti-TNF
Abs inhibited COX-2 promoter induction by IFN-gamma in RAW 264.7 macrophages.
Moreover, NF-kappaB activity was induced late after stimulation with IFN-gamma
correlating with the effect of autocrine TNF, and this NF-kappaB activation was
absent in macrophages from TNF(-/-) mice. Taken together our results suggest a
model in which IFN-gamma-induced TNF activates NF-kappaB, which is required for
full COX-2 expression.

PMID: 15728492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12262-70. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Regulation of the transcriptional activity of the IRF7 promoter by a pathway
independent of interferon signaling.

Ning S(1), Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Genes containing an interferon (IFN)-stimulated response element (ISRE) can be
divided into two groups according to their inducibility by IFN and virus
infection: one induced only by IFN and the other induced by both IFN and virus
infection. Although it is now clear that IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a
multifunctional gene essential for induction of type I IFNs, regulation of the
IRF7 promoter (IRF7p) is poorly understood. The IRF7 gene includes two IFN
responsive elements, an IRF-binding element (IRFE) in the promoter region and an 
ISRE in the first intron, and is induced by the IFN-triggered Jak-STAT pathway by
binding of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex to the ISRE. In this 
study, we demonstrate that IRF3 and IRF7, which with the coactivators
CREB-binding protein and P300 form the virus-activated factor (VAF) complex upon 
Sendai virus infection, bind to the IRF7 ISRE and IRFE and can directly activate 
IRF7 transcription. Promoter reporter assays show that both the ISRE and IRFE are
responsive to activation by IRF7 and IRF3. In cells transiently expressing IRF7
or/and IRF3, the VAF level and binding of VAF are clearly increased after Sendai 
virus infection. Studies with Jak1 kinase inactive 293 cells that were stably
transfected with a Jak1 kinase dead dominant negative construct, and the mutant
cell lines SAN (IFNalpha-/beta-), U2A (IRF9-), U4A (Jak1-), and DKO (IRF1-/IRF2-)
show that the IRF7 transcription activated directly by VAF is distinct from and
independent of the IFN signaling pathway. Thus, IRF7 transcription is
autoregulated by binding of the IRF7-containing VAF to its own ISRE and IRFE. The
results show two distinct mechanisms for the activation of the IRF7 promoter, by 
IFN and by virus infection. A regulatory network between type I IFNs and IRF7 is 
proposed. The distinct pathways may reflect special roles for an efficient
antiviral response at different stages of virus infection.

PMID: 15664995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Exp Dermatol. 2004 Dec;13(12):773-9.

Transcriptional regulation of the 230-kDa bullous pemphigoid antigen gene
expression by interferon regulatory factor 1 and interferon regulatory factor 2
in normal human epidermal keratinocytes.

Odanagi M(1), Kikuchi Y, Yamazaki T, Kaneko T, Nakano H, Tamai K, Uitto J, Hanada
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, Aomori,
Japan. derma@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Exp Dermatol. 2005 Feb;14(2):160. Vitto, Joani [corrected to Uitto, Jouni].

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcriptional factors
induced by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). Recent studies have indicated that the
deregulation of IRF system in keratinocytes is responsible, at least in part, for
aberrant proliferation and the differentiation of the psoriatic epidermis.
Previously, we reported that the expression of 230-kDa bullous pemphigoid antigen
(BPAG1) gene, which is strictly restricted to basal keratinocytes, is
transcriptionally suppressed by IFN-gamma, but the contribution of IRFs in such
suppression is still unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of IRFs in 
the regulation of BPAG1 gene expression. Computer analysis identified IRF1 and
IRF2 consensus sequences between -135 and -123 on BPAG1 promoter region.
Transient transfection studies with BPAG1 promoter-luciferase reporter gene
plasmids and IRF1 and IRF2 expression plasmids revealed that IRF1 and IRF2
directly down-regulated BPAG1 gene transcription in cultured normal human
epidermal keratinocytes. Several sets of gel retardation assays with the
BPAG1-IRF binding sequence as a probe indicated that IRF1 and IRF2 could bind to 
the BPAG1-IRF sequence, but some other protein(s), which was induced by IFN-gamma
stimulation and possessed binding activity to IRF consensus sequence, showed
preferential binding to the BPAG1-IRF sequence. Our results suggest that
IFN-gamma-IRF system is involved in BPAG1 gene regulation in type-1 helper T-cell
inflammatory skin conditions, such as psoriasis vulgaris.

PMID: 15560761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 31;279(53):56042-52. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

IRF-2 is involved in up-regulation of nonmuscle myosin heavy chain II-A gene
expression during phorbol ester-induced promyelocytic HL-60 differentiation.

Chung MC(1), Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute/NIH, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Transcription of the nonmuscle myosin heavy chain II-A (NMHC-A) gene is regulated
by various factors, including cell type, proliferation and differentiation stage,
and extracellular stimuli. We have identified an intronic region (designated
32kb-150), which is located 32 kb downstream of the transcription start sites in 
the human NMHC-A gene, as a transcriptional regulatory region. 32kb-150 contains 
an interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE). By using HeLa and NIH3T3 cells,
in which NMHC-A is constitutively expressed, interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-2
was found to be the only major protein, among the IRF family proteins, that bound
to the ISRE in 32kb-150 both in vitro and in intact cells. IRF-2, which is known 
to either repress or activate target gene expression, acts as a transcriptional
activator in the context of the 32kb-150 reporter gene. The carboxyl-terminal
basic region of IRF-2 serves as an activation domain in this context. This is in 
contrast to its acting as a repressor domain in the context of the synthetic core
ISRE. Furthermore, after treatment of promyelocytic HL-60 cells with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), which triggers differentiation into
macrophages, both NMHC-A expression and IRF-2 expression were found to be
up-regulated with a similar time course. TPA treatment leads to recruitment of
IRF-2 to 32kb-150 of the endogenous NMHC-A gene and acetylation of the core
histones surrounding this region. In addition, the ISRE in the 32kb-150 reporter 
gene recruits IRF-2 and mediates TPA-induced activation of a reporter gene in
HL-60 cells. Together, these results indicate that IRF-2 contributes to
transcriptional activation of the NMHC-A gene via 32kb-150 during TPA-induced
differentiation of HL-60 cells.

PMID: 15496418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 1;173(9):5556-63.

B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein (Blimp)-1, IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-1,
and IRF-2 can bind to the same regulatory sites.

Kuo TC(1), Calame KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The transcriptional repressor B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1)
is expressed in some differentiated cells and is required for terminal
differentiation of B cells. To facilitate identification of Blimp-1 target genes,
we have determined the optimal DNA recognition sequence for Blimp-1. The
consensus is very similar to a subset of sites recognized by IFN regulatory
factors (IRFs) that contain the sequence GAAAG. By binding competition and
determination of equilibrium dissociation constants, we show that Blimp-1, IRF-1,
and IRF-2 have similar binding affinities for functionally important regulatory
sites containing this sequence. However, Blimp-1 does not bind to all IRF sites, 
and specifically does not recognize IRF-4/PU.1 or IRF-8 sites lacking the GAAAG
sequence. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed that Blimp-1, IRF-1, and
IRF-2 all bind the IFN-beta promoter in vivo, as predicted by the in vitro
binding parameters, and in cotransfections Blimp-1 inhibits IRF-1-dependent
activation of the IFN-beta promoter. Thus, our data suggest that Blimp-1 competes
in vivo with a subset of IRF proteins and help predict the sites and IRF family
members that may be affected.

PMID: 15494505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jul;24(14):6298-310.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 distinctively up-regulate gene
expression and production of interleukin-7 in human intestinal epithelial cells.

Oshima S(1), Nakamura T, Namiki S, Okada E, Tsuchiya K, Okamoto R, Yamazaki M,
Yokota T, Aida M, Yamaguchi Y, Kanai T, Handa H, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Intestinal epithelial cell-derived interleukin (IL)-7 functions as a pleiotropic 
and nonredundant cytokine in the human intestinal mucosa; however, the molecular 
basis of its production has remained totally unknown. We here showed that human
intestinal epithelial cells both constitutively and when induced by gamma
interferon (IFN-gamma) produced IL-7, while several other factors we tested had
no effect. Transcriptional regulation via an IFN regulatory factor element
(IRF-E) on the 5' flanking region, which lacks canonical core promoter sequences,
was pivotal for both modes of IL-7 expression. IRF-1 and IRF-2, the latter of
which is generally known as a transcriptional repressor, were shown to interact
with IRF-E and transactivate IL-7 gene expression in an IFN-gamma-inducible and
constitutive manner, respectively. Indeed, tetracycline-inducible expression
experiments revealed that both of these IRF proteins up-regulated IL-7 protein
production, and their exclusive roles were further confirmed by small interfering
RNA-mediated gene silencing systems. Moreover, these IRFs displayed distinct
properties concerning the profile of IL-7 transcripts upon activation and
expression patterns within human colonic epithelial tissues. These results
suggest that the functional interplay between IRF-1 and IRF-2 serves as an
elaborate and cooperative mechanism for timely as well as continuous regulation
of IL-7 production that is essential for local immune regulation within human
intestinal mucosa.

PMCID: PMC434253
PMID: 15226432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Mar;122(3):640-3.

Variation at the IRF2 gene and susceptibility to psoriasis in chromosome
4q-linked families.

Parkinson J(1), Charon C, Baker BS, Powles AV, Rogers S, Caird A, Smedley D,
Halford S, Fry L, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine & Imperial College Genetics and Genomics Research
Institute, Imperial College, London, UK.

Evidence, largely from Irish pedigrees, indicates that a susceptibility locus for
psoriasis maps to chromosome 4q. The gene encoding interferon regulatory factor-2
(IRF-2) maps to this region, and, as mice lacking IRF-2 exhibit a dermatologic
phenotype resembling many aspects of human psoriasis, IRF-2 represents an
attractive positional candidate. We set out to establish whether variation in
IRF-2 sequence or expression was related to the development of psoriasis. First, 
the promoter, coding, and adjacent untranslated regions of IRF-2 were screened in
individuals from 4q-linked families. Neither variant identified (IVS1A+29A/G;
IVS3+729T/C), however, had functional credentials or statistical evidence
supporting a susceptibility role. Second, in 62 Irish parent-offspring trios
ascertained for psoriasis, we conducted a linkage-disequilibrium screen of the
IRF2 region using a dense microsatellite map (covering 1.5 Mb from D4S1554 to
D4S1540). Though there was nominal association for D4S1554/D4S2348 haplotypes
(p=0.03) with one haplotype showing particularly skewed transmission to psoriatic
offspring (p=0.0002, uncorrected), these markers lie some distance (500 kb) from 
IRF-2. Finally, we found no abnormalities of IRF-2 protein expression or
distribution in skin biopsies from psoriatic individuals. These diverse lines of 
inquiry allow us to exclude variation in IRF2 as responsible for the 4q-linkage
signal previously identified in Irish pedigrees.

PMID: 15086546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3909-14. Epub 2004 Mar 2.

Defective development of splenic and epidermal CD4+ dendritic cells in mice
deficient for IFN regulatory factor-2.

Ichikawa E(1), Hida S, Omatsu Y, Shimoyama S, Takahara K, Miyagawa S, Inaba K,
Taki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Shinshu University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Asahi 3-1-1, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621, Japan.

Dendritic cells (DCs) play important roles in the initiation and regulation of
immune responses. Although several subsets of DCs were identified according to
their expression of surface molecules such as CD4, CD8, and CD11b, the regulatory
mechanism for the development and homeostasis of these DC subsets remains
unclear. Here we show that mice lacking IFN regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2(-/-) mice)
exhibited a marked and selective defect in splenic CD4(+)CD11b(+)DCs, instead of 
CD8 alpha(+)CD11b(-)DCs that were reported to be missing in mice lacking the
related transcription factor IRF-8. Furthermore, the numbers of epidermal
Langerhans cells in IRF-2(-/-) mice were reduced at least in part because of the 
lack of the CD4(+)CD11b(+) subset. Studies with radiation bone marrow chimeras as
well as in vitro retrovirus-mediated gene transduction showed that IRF-2 was
required cell-autonomously for the development of myeloid-related DCs. Notably,
these abnormalities in DCs diminished in mice lacking both IRF-2 and the
IFN-alpha/beta receptor, indicating that IRF-2 acted through negatively
regulating IFN-alpha/beta signals. In contrast, natural killer cells still showed
developmental arrest in these double mutant mice, indicating that the mode of
action of IRF-2 for CD4(+)DC development is distinct from that for natural killer
cell development. Our current findings thus pointed to a previously unknown
unique cell-type-selective multimode function of IRF-2 in the regulation of
lymphohematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC374343
PMID: 15004277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Feb 24;101(8):2416-21.

Negative regulation of IFN-alpha/beta signaling by IFN regulatory factor 2 for
homeostatic development of dendritic cells.

Honda K(1), Mizutani T, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The development and cooperation of distinct subsets of antigen-presenting cells, 
particularly dendritic cells (DCs), may be critical for maintaining homeostatic
immune responses. Recently, much attention has been focused on IFN-alpha/beta,
the cytokines induced en masse by virus infection or the activation of Toll-like 
receptors, in the context of DC activation. Here, we show that mice deficient in 
IFN regulatory factor 2 exhibit selective loss of CD8alpha- DCs, the so-called
myeloid DCs, which is accompanied by a notable increase in CD11c-CD11bhigh other 
myeloid lineage cells. Such deficiency is intrinsic to the bone marrow
precursors, in which the abnormal induction of IFN-alpha/beta genes causes
excessive IFN signaling. The critical function of IFN regulatory factor 2 in the 
negative regulation of IFN-alpha/beta signaling is underscored by the observation
that the deficiency is rescued by introducing an additional null mutation for the
IFN receptor complex. In view of accumulating evidence of the critical role of
IFN-alpha/beta signaling in DC activation, our present study offers a unique
example in that the magnitude of a cytokine signal should be properly balanced in
a stage-specific manner during the differentiation and activation of DCs.

PMCID: PMC356965
PMID: 14983024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jan;122(1):61-4.

Evaluation of the IRF-2 gene as a candidate for PSORS3.

Foerster J(1), Nolte I, Schweiger S, Ehlert C, Bruinenberg M, Spaar K, van der
Steege G, Mulder M, Kalscheuer V, Moser B, Kijas Z, Seeman P, Ständer M, Sterry
W, te Meerman G.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Dermatologie, Charité, Berlin, Germany. john.foerster@charite.de

Type 1 interferon can trigger flares of psoriasis. Hypersensitivity to type 1
interferon signaling causes a psoriasis-like skin disease in mice deficient for
the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2). The human IRF2
gene is located at a previously identified candidate psoriasis susceptibility
locus on chromosome 4q (PSORS3 at D4S1535). Therefore, we tested association of
psoriasis with IRF2. We generated a sample consisting of 157 families with a
total of 521 individuals. Five novel microsatellite markers were developed and
typed, and complemented with three known markers to yield a set of eight markers 
spaced within 600 kb around the IRF2 gene, three of which are located in the
gene. We detected association of IRF2 with type 1 psoriasis at two markers in the
IRF2 gene. Haplotype sharing analysis confirmed association of IRF2 with type 1
psoriasis (p=0.0017; pcorr=0.03). The 921G/A SNP in exon 9 was found to
obliterate a predicted exon splice enhancer in an allele-specific manner. There
was a suggestive increase of homozygosity for the splicing-deficient allele in
type 1 psoriasis patients. Our data identify IRF2 as a potential susceptibility
gene for psoriasis.

PMID: 14962090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2003 Nov;23(11):621-30.

Localization of IFN-gamma-activated Stat1 and IFN regulatory factors 1 and 2 in
breast cancer cells.

Connett JM(1), Hunt SR, Hickerson SM, Wu SJ, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The aim of the present work was to evaluate the induction and localization of
Stat1, interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), and IRF-2 after IFN-gamma
exposure of human breast cancer cell lines, SKBR3, MDA468, MCF7, and BT20.
Results from growth assays, Western staining, electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA), and immunohistochemical staining were collated to test our
hypothesis that immunohistochemical analysis of Stat1, IRF-1, and IRF-2 would
provide additional information about the functionality of the IFN-gamma signaling
pathway in human tumor lines. EMSA results showed that in each of four cell
lines, Stat1 expression was increased and demonstrated functional activity after 
IFN-gamma stimulation. Western and EMSA analysis showed upregulation of IRF-1 but
not IRF-2 in each cell line. Confocal microscopy of cells stained for Stat1,
IRF-1, and IRF-2 confirmed the results and also provided novel information about 
the intracellular localization of proteins and intercellular variations in
responses. The proportion of cells with IRF-1 stimulation and translocation was
positively correlated with the IFN-gamma growth suppression in vitro. In
conclusion, using four independent assays, we have demonstrated that
heterogeneity in IFN-gamma-mediated upregulation of signal transduction proteins 
can be detected in vitro and that these differences can explain distinct cellular
growth effects.

PMID: 14651776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2003 Sep;23(9):501-11.

The role of interferon regulatory factor-1 and interferon regulatory factor-2 in 
IFN-gamma growth inhibition of human breast carcinoma cell lines.

Yim JH(1), Ro SH, Lowney JK, Wu SJ, Connett J, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 play opposing roles in the
regulation of many IFN-gamma-inducible genes. To investigate the signal
transduction pathway in response to IFN-gamma in light of differences in growth
effects, we selected four human breast carcinoma cell lines based on a spectrum
of growth inhibition by IFN-gamma. MDA468 growth was markedly inhibited by
IFN-gamma, and it showed substantial induction of IRF-1 mRNA but little IRF-2
induction. SKBR3 showed little growth inhibition and little induction of IRF-1
mRNA but significant induction of IRF-2 mRNA. HS578T and MDA436 growth inhibition
and IRF-1/IRF-2 induction were intermediate. All four cell lines showed intact
receptor at the cell surface and Stat1 translocation to the nucleus by
immunostaining. By EMSA, there were marked differences in the induced ratio of
IRF-1 and IRF-2 binding activity between the cell lines that correlated with
growth inhibition. Finally, antisense oligonucleotides specific for IRF-1
attenuated IFN-gamma growth inhibition in MDA436 and MDA468, confirming the
direct role of IRF-1 in IFN-gamma growth inhibition. Induction of IRF-1 causes
growth inhibition in human breast cancer cell lines, and induction of IRF-2 can
oppose this. The relative induction of IRF-1 to IRF-2 is a critical control point
in IFN-gamma response.

PMID: 14565859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Immunol. 2003 Oct 15;171(8):4187-94.

IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II expression: transactivation of class II
transactivator promoter IV by IFN regulatory factor-1 is regulated by protein
kinase C-alpha.

Giroux M(1), Schmidt M, Descoteaux A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut Armand-Frappier,
Université du Québec, Laval, Québec, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2003 Dec 1;171(11):6297.

Previous studies based on pharmacological evidence suggested a requirement for
protein kinase C (PKC) activity in the regulation of IFN-gamma-induced MHC class 
II (MHC-II) expression. In the present study, we investigated the molecular
mechanisms by which PKC-alpha modulates IFN-gamma-induced MHC-II expression in
the mouse macrophage cell line RAW 264.7. Overexpression of a dominant-negative
(DN) mutant of PKC-alpha inhibited the expression of IFN-gamma-induced MHC-II but
had no effect on IFN-gamma-induced STAT1 nuclear translocation and DNA binding
activity, as well as on the expression of inducible NO synthase, IFN consensus
sequence binding protein, MHC class I, IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-1, and
IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10. Further analysis showed that IFN-gamma-induced
expression of the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA), a transcriptional
coactivator essential for MHC-II expression, was inhibited in DN
PKC-alpha-overexpressing cells. Studies with reporter constructs containing the
promoter IV region of CIITA revealed that overexpression of a constitutively
active mutant of PKC-alpha enhanced IRF-1, but not IRF-2, transcriptional
activity. Furthermore, characterization of IRF-1 from both normal and DN
PKC-alpha-overexpressing cells revealed differences in IRF-1 posttranslational
modifications. Collectively, our data suggest a novel regulatory mechanism for
IFN-gamma-induced MHC-II expression, whereby PKC regulates CIITA expression by
selectively modulating the transcriptional activity of IRF-1.

PMID: 14530341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochem J. 2004 Jan 15;377(Pt 2):367-78.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 drives megakaryocytic differentiation.

Stellacci E(1), Testa U, Petrucci E, Benedetti E, Orsatti R, Feccia T, Stafsnes
M, Coccia EM, Marziali G, Battistini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena,
299-00161 Rome, Italy.

IRFs [IFN (interferon) regulatory factors] constitute a family of transcription
factors involved in IFN signalling and in the development and differentiation of 
the immune system. IRF-2 has generally been described as an antagonist of
IRF-1-mediated transcription of IFN and IFN-inducible genes; however, it has been
recently identified as a transcriptional activator of some genes, such as those
encoding histone H4, VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1) and Fas ligand.
Biologically, IRF-2 plays an important role in cell growth regulation and has
been shown to be a potential oncogene. Studies in knock-out mice have also
implicated IRF-2 in the differentiation and functionality of haematopoietic
cells. Here we show that IRF-2 expression in a myeloid progenitor cell line leads
to reprogramming of these cells towards the megakaryocytic lineage and enables
them to respond to thrombopoietin, as assessed by cell morphology and expression 
of specific differentiation markers. Up-regulation of transcription factors
involved in the development of the megakaryocytic lineage, such as GATA-1,
GATA-2, FOG-1 (friend of GATA-1) and NF-E2 (nuclear factor-erythroid-2), and
transcriptional stimulation of the thrombopoietin receptor were also
demonstrated. Our results provide evidence for a key role for IRF-2 in the
induction of a programme of megakaryocytic differentiation, and reveal a
remarkable functional diversity of this transcription factor in the regulation of
cellular responses.

PMCID: PMC1223861
PMID: 14505489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Immunol. 2003 Sep 15;171(6):2937-44.

Assessment of requirements for IL-15 and IFN regulatory factors in uterine NK
cell differentiation and function during pregnancy.

Ashkar AA(1), Black GP, Wei Q, He H, Liang L, Head JR, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada. ashkara@mcmaster.ca

In mouse and human, precursors of NK cell lineage home to decidualizing uteri. To
assess the requirement for IL-15, an essential cytokine for NK differentiation in
lymphoid tissue, on uterine NK (uNK) cell differentiation, implantation sites
from IL-15(-/-) mice were analyzed histologically. IL-15(-/-) implantation sites 
had no uNK cells, no spiral-artery modification, and lacked the decidual
integrity found in normal mice. IL-15(-/-) recipients of C57BL/6 marrow displayed
similar pathology. However, implantation sites from recombination-activating
gene-2(-/-)gamma(c)(-/-) (alymphoid) recipients of IL-15(-/-) marrow showed
normal uNK cells, modified spiral arteries, and well-developed decidua basalis.
Deletion of the IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)-1, but not IRF-2 (factors important
in peripheral NK cell differentiation) limited but did not prevent uNK cell
development. In situ hybridization localized IRF-1 largely to placental
trophoblast cells. IRF-1(-/-) marrow transplanted into recombination-activating
gene-2(-/-)gamma(c)(-/-) displayed competence for full uNK cell differentiation. 
IL-15 mRNA expression at implantation sites of IRF-1(-/-) and C57BL/6 was
similar, suggesting that, unlike in bone marrow and spleen, IRF-1 does not
regulate IL-15 in the pregnant uterus. Terminal differentiation of uNK cells was 
not promoted in pregnant IRF-1(-/-) mice by 5-day infusion of murine rIL-15,
suggesting that IRF-1 deficiency rather than IL-15 deficiency limits uNK cell
differentiation in these mice. Further, IRF-1 regulates placental growth, birth
weight, and postnatal growth of offspring. These studies indicate that uNK cell
development and maturation share some aspects with NK cell development in other
tissues, but also display distinctive tissue-specific regulation.

PMID: 12960317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Mol Vis. 2003 Jun 30;9:277-87.

Interferon-gamma regulation of the human mimecan promoter.

Tasheva ES(1), Conrad GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan 66506-4901, USA.
est@ksu.edu

PURPOSE: The human mimecan/osteoglycin promoter contains multiple
interferon-stimulated response elements (ISRE) and interferon-gamma-activation
sites (GAS). ISRE and GAS motifs are present in a variety of interferon
(IFN)-inducible genes. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
IFN-gamma affects mimecan gene expression and, if so, to determine the
cis-elements and transcription factors that mediate its action.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was used to investigate
whether nuclear proteins from IFN-gamma-treated cells bind to regions of the
human mimecan promoter containing ISRE sites. Incubation of nuclear extracts with
specific antibodies was used to identify transcription factors that bind to these
sites. Transcriptional activity of the promoter was evaluated by transient
transfections of human mimecan promoter/luciferase reporter constructs into
corneal keratocytes and non-corneal cells. Co-transfection experiments were used 
to study the role of transcription factors that bind ISRE elements in the
promoter and mediate the IFN-gamma response. Expression of mRNAs was analyzed by 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Using probes that correspond to two ISRE sites located in the first
intron of the human mimecan gene, we detected specific DNA-protein complexes with
nuclear extracts from IFN-gamma-treated cells. Formation of DNA-protein complexes
was abrogated by competition with unlabeled probe and one of the complexes was
supershifted by the anti-interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) antibody.
Interestingly, when probe that corresponds to a conserved E-box (CACATG) in the
proximal promoter and nuclear extracts from IFN-gamma-treated cells were used in 
EMSA, increased binding of upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF-1) was observed.
Co-transfection of a mimecan promoter construct that contained the entire first
intron with IRF-1, or with both IRF-1 and USF-1 expression plasmids, suppressed
luciferase activity of the promoter in corneal keratocytes and T-47D cells. In
contrast, co-transfection experiments with IRF-2, or with both IRF-2 and USF-1,
led to increased luciferase activity of the same promoter construct. RT-PCR
analyses demonstrate that IFN-gamma rapidly and transiently suppresses mimecan
expression and induces IRF-1 and IRF-2 mRNAs in bovine corneal keratocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF-1 binds to ISRE sites, located in the first intron of the human 
mimecan gene, and negatively regulates mimecan expression at the level of
transcription. Consistent with these observations, an inverse correlation between
the expression of mimecan and IRF-1 in bovine corneal keratocytes and non-corneal
cells was demonstrated. IRF-2 positively regulates mimecan transcription in
corneal keratocytes. Because the intact E-box in the proximal promoter was
required for IRF-1 and IRF-2 effects on mimecan transcription, potential direct
or indirect interactions between USF-1 and IRF-1 and IRF-2 are likely.

PMID: 12835654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Jun 15;31(12):3016-26.

Identification of novel co-repressor molecules for Interferon Regulatory
Factor-2.

Childs KS(1), Goodbourn S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, St George's Hospital Medical
School, University of London, London SW17 0RE, UK.

We have identified two novel proteins that interact specifically with the
C-terminal repression domain of Interferon Regulatory Factor-2 (IRF-2). These
proteins, which we term IRF-2 binding proteins 1 and 2 (IRF-2BP1 and IRF-2BP2,
the latter having two splicing isoforms, A and B), are nuclear proteins, and have
the properties of IRF-2-dependent transcriptional co-repressors that can inhibit 
both enhancer-activated and basal transcription in a manner that is not dependent
upon histone deacetylation. IRF-2BP1 and IRF-2BP2A/B contain an N-terminal zinc
finger and a C-terminal RING finger domain of the C3HC4 subclass, but show no
homology to other known transcriptional regulators; they therefore define a new
family of co- repressor proteins. An alternatively spliced form of IRF-2 that
lacks two amino acids (valines 177 and 178) in the central portion of the protein
(IRF-2[S]) cannot bind to these co-repressors and cannot mediate repression
despite having the same C- terminal repression domain as IRF-2, suggesting that
the relative conformation of the DNA binding domain and the C-terminal region of 
IRF-2 is crucial for transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC162335
PMID: 12799427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 1;170(11):5739-47.

Regulation of lipopolysaccharide sensitivity by IFN regulatory factor-2.

Cuesta N(1), Salkowski CA, Thomas KE, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA.

IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors and include
several members that regulate expression of pro- and anti-inflammatory genes.
Mice with a targeted mutation in IRF-2 (IRF-2(-/-)) were studied after injection 
of LPS to evaluate the importance of IRF-2 in the regulation of endotoxicity.
IRF-2(-/-) mice were highly refractory to LPS-induced lethality. Although hepatic
TNF-alpha mRNA and circulating TNF-alpha were significantly elevated in
LPS-challenged IRF-2(-/-) mice, levels of IL-1, IL-12, and IFN-gamma mRNA and
protein, as well as IL-6 protein, were significantly lower than levels seen in
LPS-challenged IRF-2(+/+) mice. IRF-2(-/-) mice were also more refractory to
TNF-alpha challenge than were control mice, which was consistent with their
diminished sensitivity to LPS, yet no significant difference in the mRNA
expression of TNFRs was observed. IL-12R beta 2 mRNA levels from LPS-challenged
IRF-2(-/-) mice were significantly different after 1, 6, and 8 h, suggesting that
both diminished IL-12 and altered IL-12R expression contribute to the paucity of 
IFN-gamma produced. IRF-2 knockout mice also failed to sustain LPS-inducible
levels of IRF-1 and IFN consensus sequence binding protein mRNA expression, two
transacting factors required for IL-12 transcription, perhaps as a result of
diminished IL-1 beta, IL-6, and IFN-gamma levels. Liver sections from IRF-2(+/+) 
and IRF-2(-/-) mice were analyzed 6 h after a typically lethal injection of LPS. 
IRF-2(-/-) mice exhibited greater numbers of apoptotic Kupffer cells than did
wild-type mice, suggesting a novel anti-apoptotic role for IRF-2. Collectively,
these findings reveal a critical role for IRF-2 in endotoxicity, and point to a
previously unappreciated role for IRF-2 in the regulation of apoptosis.

PMID: 12759457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 11;278(28):25401-7. Epub 2003 May 7.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 regulates cell growth through its acetylation.

Masumi A(1), Yamakawa Y, Fukazawa H, Ozato K, Komuro K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Research on Biologics, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan. amasumi@nih.go.jp

We have previously shown that interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) is
acetylated by p300 and PCAF in vivo and in vitro. In this study we identified, by
mass spectrometry, two lysine residues in the DNA binding domain (DBD), Lys-75
and Lys-78, to be the major acetylation sites in IRF-2. Although acetylation of
IRF-2 did not alter DNA binding activity in vitro, mutation of Lys-75 diminished 
the IRF-2-dependent activation of histone H4 promoter activity. Acetylation of
IRF-2 and IRF-2-stimulated H4 promoter activity were inhibited by the adenovirus 
E1A, indicating the involvement of p300/CBP. Mutation of Lys-78, a residue
conserved throughout the IRF family members, led to the abrogation of DNA binding
activity independently of acetylation. H4 is transcribed only in rapidly growing 
cells and its promoter activity is dependent on cell growth. Consistent with a
role for acetylated IRF-2 in cell growth control, IRF-2 was acetylated only in
growing NIH 3T3 cells, but not in growth-arrested counterparts. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that IRF-2 interacted with p300 and bound to
the endogenous H4 promoter only in growing cells, although the levels of total
IRF-2 were comparable in both growing and growth-arrested cells. These results
indicate that IRF-2 is acetylated in a cell growth-dependent manner, which
enables it to contribute to transcription of cell growth-regulated promoters.

PMID: 12738767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26589-96. Epub 2003 May 5.

The tumor suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 interferes with SP1
activation to repress the human CDK2 promoter.

Xie RL(1), Gupta S, Miele A, Shiffman D, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Cell growth control by interferons (IFNs) involves up-regulation of the tumor
suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1). To exert its anti-proliferative
effects, this factor must ultimately control transcription of several key genes
that regulate cell cycle progression. Here we show that the G1/S phase-related
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) gene is a novel proliferation-related downstream
target of IRF1. We find that IRF1, but not IRF2, IRF3, or IRF7, selectively
represses CDK2 gene transcription in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We
delineate the IRF1-responsive repressor element between nt -68 to -31 of the CDK2
promoter. For comparison, the tumor suppressor p53 represses CDK2 promoter
activity independently of IRF1 through sequences upstream of nt -68, and the
CDP/cut/Cux1 homeodomain protein represses transcription down-stream of -31.
Thus, IRF1 repression represents one of three distinct mechanisms to attenuate
CDK2 levels. The -68/-31 segment lacks a canonical IRF responsive element but
contains a single SP1 binding site. Mutation of this element abrogates
SP1-dependent enhancement of CDK2 promoter activity as expected but also
abolishes IRF1-mediated repression. Forced elevation of SP1 levels increases
endogenous CDK2 levels, whereas IRF1 reduces both endogenous SP1 and CDK2 protein
levels. Hence, IRF1 represses CDK2 gene expression by interfering with
SP1-dependent transcriptional activation. Our findings establish a causal series 
of events that functionally connect the anti-proliferative effects of interferons
with the IRF1-dependent suppression of the CDK2 gene, which encodes a key
regulator of the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 12732645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 13;278(24):21502-9. Epub 2003 Apr 2.

Species-specific regulation of Toll-like receptor 3 genes in men and mice.

Heinz S(1), Haehnel V, Karaghiosoff M, Schwarzfischer L, Müller M, Krause SW,
Rehli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University of Regensburg, 93042
Regensburg, Germany.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) belongs to a family of evolutionary conserved innate 
immune recognition molecules and recognizes double-stranded RNA, a molecular
pattern associated with viral infections. Earlier studies suggested a
differential expression pattern in men and mice; the molecular basis for this
observation, however, was unknown. Here we demonstrate that species-specific
differences in tissue expression and responses to lipopolysaccaride (LPS)
coincide with the presence of different, evolutionary non-conserved promoter
sequences in both species. Despite the overall unrelatedness of TLR3 promoter
sequences, mRNA expression of both TLR3 orthologues was induced by interferons,
particularly by interferon (IFN)-beta. The basal and IFN-beta-induced activation 
of promoters from both species largely depended on similar interferon regulatory 
factor (IRF) elements, which constitutively bound IRF-2 and recruited IRF-1 after
stimulation. In murine macrophages, IFN-beta-induced TLR3 up-regulation required 
IFNAR1, STAT1, and in part IRF-1, but not the Janus kinase (Jak) family member
Tyk2. We also show that LPS specifically up-regulates TLR3 expression in murine
cells through the induction of autocrine/paracrine IFN-beta. In humans, however, 
IFN-beta-induced up-regulation of TLR3 was blocked by pretreatment with LPS,
despite the efficient induction of IRF-1. Our findings reveal a mechanistic basis
for the observed differences as well as similarities in TLR3 expression in men
and mice. The IFN-beta-TLR3 link further suggests a role of TLR3 in innate and
adaptive immune responses to viral infections. It will be interesting and
important to clarify whether the observed differences in the transcriptional
regulation of TLR3 influence innate immune responses in a species-specific
manner.

PMID: 12672806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biol Reprod. 2003 Mar;68(3):1015-26.

Transcriptional regulation of the bovine oxytocin receptor gene.

Telgmann R(1), Bathgate RA, Jaeger S, Tillmann G, Ivell R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research University of Hamburg, 22529
Hamburg, Germany.

The oxytocin receptor (OTR) is expressed in the cow uterus at high levels at
estrus and at term of pregnancy. This expression appears to be controlled mostly 
at the transcriptional level and correlates with increasing estrogen
concentration and progesterone withdrawal. Approximately 3200 base pairs of the
upstream region of the bovine OTR gene were cloned and analyzed using a
combination of bioinformatic, electrophoretic mobility shift (EMSA), and
transfection analyses. Using nuclear proteins from high- and low-expressing
tissues, EMSA indicated no significant quantitative or qualitative changes in
specific DNA-protein binding, suggesting that transcription is probably
controlled by signalling systems targeting constitutive factors. Using various
cell types, including primary and immortalized ruminant endometrial epithelial
cells, as hosts for transfection of promoter-reporter constructs showed that
endogenous activity resided only in the longest, i.e., 3.2-kb, construct but not 
in those shorter than 1.0 kb. While estrogen appears to be important in vivo, no 
effect of estradiol was found on any construct directly; only when the longest
3.2-kb construct was used in combination with some cotransfected steroid receptor
cofactors, e.g., SRC1e, was an estradiol-dependent effect observed. A putative
interferon-responsive element (IRE) was found at approximately -2,400 from the
transcription start site. This element was shown to bind mouse IRF1 and IRF2 as
well as similar proteins from bovine endometrial and myometrial nuclear extracts.
This element also responded to these factors when cotransfected into various cell
types. The bovine equivalents to IRF1 and IRF2 were molecularly cloned from
endometrial tissue and shown to be expressed in a temporal fashion, supporting
the role of interferon-tau in maternal recognition of pregnancy. Of many factors 
tested or analyzed, these components of the IFN system are the only ones found to
significantly influence the transcription of the bovine OTR gene.

PMID: 12604656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Feb;73(2):263-72.

Characterization of promoter elements directing Mona/Gads molecular adapter
expression in T and myelomonocytic cells: involvement of the AML-1 transcription 
factor.

Guyot B(1), Mouchiroud G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR CNRS 5534, Université
Claude Bernard Lyon-1, Bâtiment Gregor Mendel, 16 rue Raphael Dubois, 69622
Villeurbanne Cedex, France.

Monocytic adaptor (Mona, also called Gads) is a molecular adaptor implicated in T
cell activation and macrophage differentiation. The objective of this study was
to identify elements regulating specific expression of Mona/Gads in human T cell 
and myelomonocytic cell lines. We first confirmed that the -2000 to +150 genomic 
region relative to the Mona gene transcription start site is sufficient to direct
specific reporter gene expression in T cell lines, Jurkat, and MOLT-4 and in the 
immature myeloid cell lines, KG1a and RC2A. Deletion analysis and electrophoresis
mobility shift assay identified several cis regulatory elements: overlapping
initiator sequences, one interferon response factor-2 (IRF-2)-binding site at
position -154, one GC box recognized by Sp1 and Sp3 at position -52, and two
acute myeloid leukemia (AML)-1 binding sites at positions -70 and -13.
Site-directed mutagenesis experiments indicated a key role of AML-1 for driving
Mona expression in T cells and myeloid cells, and involvement of Sp1/Sp3 and
IRF-2 transcription factors to modulate Mona expression in a cell-specific
manner.

PMID: 12554803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Endotoxin Res. 2002;8(5):379-88.

The role of the interferon regulatory factors, IRF-1 and IRF-2, in LPS-induced
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression in vivo and in vitro.

Zhang S(1), Thomas K, Blanco JC, Salkowski CA, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21201, USA.

Cyclooxygenase (COX) exists as two isoforms: COX-1, which is constitutively
expressed in most cell types; and COX-2, which is inducible by lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) and cytokines in a variety of cell types. Although previous studies have
implicated two DNA binding proteins, interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and
IRF-2, in the regulation of LPS- and IFN-gamma-induced COX-2, their effects in
vivo and in vitro are not well-defined. Using real-time PCR, COX-2 gene
expression in the livers and lungs of mice challenged in vivo and in macrophages 
stimulated with LPS in vitro was investigated in wild-type and in IRF-1 and IRF-2
knockout mice. In response to 35 mg/kg LPS, IRF-1-, but not IRF-2-deficient mice,
exhibited much poorer induction of COX-2 gene expression in both the livers and
lungs. In vitro, COX-2 mRNA levels were also poorly induced in IRF-1-deficient
macrophages, while IRF-2- deficient macrophages exhibited higher levels than in
normal macrophages. IRF-1 and IRF-2 were confirmed to activate and repress
expression of the COX-2 promoter, respectively, in a transient transfection
system and the role of specific DNA binding sites confirmed by site-specific
mutagenesis. Collectively, these data provide evidence for an important role for 
IRF-1 in vivo and in vitro and for IRF-2 in vitro in the regulation of COX-2
expression by LPS.

PMID: 12537697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2002 Dec;47(16 Suppl):2343-8.

[Abnormalities on physiological IFN signal as the cause of the skin disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Hida S(1), Taki S.

Author information: 
(1)hida@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

PMID: 12518459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Immunol. 2003 Jan;39(11):677-84.

The IRF-2 DNA binding domain facilitates the activation of the class II
transactivator (CIITA) type IV promoter by IRF-1.

Xi H(1), Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd., Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

IFN-gamma induced transcription of class II transactivator (CIITA), a major
regulator of MHC class II gene expression, is directed by the CIITA type IV
promoter. The IFN-gamma activation of the CIITA type IV promoter is mediated by
STAT1 and IRF-1, which bind to the GAS and IRF-E of the promoter, respectively.
We and others have determined that IRF-2, another member of the IRF family, also 
activates the CIITA type IV promoter, by binding to the IRF-E. Also, IRF-2
cooperates with IRF-1 to activate the promoter. DNA binding analyses determined
that IRF-1 and IRF-2 can co-occupy the IRF-E of the CIITA type IV promoter. To
further understand the mechanism of IRF-1 and IRF-2 cooperativity in the
activation of CIITA type IV promoter, we characterized the binding of IRF-1 and
IRF-2 to the CIITA IRF-E and mapped the domains of IRF-2 required for the
cooperative transactivation. Off-rate experiments revealed that the IRF-2/IRF-E
complex was more stable than the IRF-1/IRF-E complex and that the affinity of
IRF-1 for the IRF-E was increased when IRF-1 co-occupied the IRF-E with IRF-2.
Deletion analysis of functional domains of IRF-2 revealed that a previously
described latent activation domain of IRF-2 was essential for IRF-2
transactivation and participated in cooperative activation of the CIITA promoter 
by IRF-1 and IRF-2. However, the DNA binding domain of IRF-2 was sufficient for
cooperativity with IRF-1 in the activation of the CIITA type IV promoter. DNA
binding assay demonstrated that, like the full-length IRF-2, the IRF-2 DNA
binding domain could co-occupy the CIITA IRF-E with IRF-1.

PMID: 12493643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3058-64. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Regulation of human beta 2-microglobulin transactivation in hematopoietic cells.

Gobin SJ(1), Biesta P, Van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

beta(2)-Microglobulin (beta(2)m) is a chaperone of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I (-like) molecules that play a central role in antigen
presentation, immunoglobulin transport, and iron metabolism. It is therefore of
importance that beta(2)m is adequately expressed in cells that perform these
functions, such as hematopoietic cells. In this study, we investigated the
transcriptional regulation of beta(2)m in lymphoid and myeloid cell lines through
a promoter containing a putative E box, Ets/interferon-stimulated response
element (ISRE), and kappa B site. Here we show that upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1) and USF2 bind to the E box and regulate beta(2)m transactivation. The
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) subunits p50 and p65 bind to the kappa B box 
and p65 transactivates beta(2)m. Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), IRF2,
IRF4, and IRF8, but not PU.1, bind to the Ets/ISRE, and IRF1 and IRF3 are strong 
transactivators of beta(2)m. Together, all 3 boxes are important for the
constitutive and cytokine-induced levels of beta(2)m expression in lymphoid and
myeloid cell types. As such, beta(2)m transactivation is under the control of
important transcriptional pathways, which are activated during injury, infection,
and inflammation.

PMID: 12480693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Immunity. 2002 Dec;17(6):703-12.

IFN-gamma represses IL-4 expression via IRF-1 and IRF-2.

Elser B(1), Lohoff M, Kock S, Giaisi M, Kirchhoff S, Krammer PH, Li-Weber M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumorimmunology Program, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Polarization of CD4(+) T helper cells toward either a Th1 or Th2 response can
significantly influence host immunity to pathogens. IL-4 and IFN-gamma are the
signature cytokines of Th2 and Th1 cells, respectively. IFN-gamma was shown to
assist Th1 development by promoting IL-12 and IL-12 receptor expression. So far, 
direct influence of Th2 cytokine expression by IFN-gamma has not been described. 
We show here that IFN-gamma directly suppresses IL-4 gene expression. IRF-1 and
IRF-2 induced by IFN-gamma bind to three distinct IL-4 promoter sites and
function as transcriptional repressors. Our data demonstrate a direct negative
feedback of IFN-gamma on expression of the Th2 cytokine gene IL-4 and, thus,
provide evidence for another important mechanism by which IFNgamma assists Th1
and attenuates Th2 responses.

PMID: 12479817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Pathol. 2003 Jan;199(1):107-14.

Psoriatic lesional skin exhibits an aberrant expression pattern of interferon
regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2).

van der Fits L(1), van der Wel LI, Laman JD, Prens EP, Verschuren MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. vanderfits@immu.fgg.eur.nl

Psoriasis is a T-cell-mediated inflammatory skin disease. A Th1 cytokine profile 
with increased levels of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is predominant in skin and 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from psoriasis patients. Furthermore, 
psoriatic keratinocytes exhibit an aberrant sensitivity and response to
IFN-gamma. The transcriptional activator interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1)
plays a crucial role in the activation of IFN-gamma-induced gene expression.
Recently it was shown that mice deficient in IRF-2, a transcriptional repressor
of IFN signalling and thereby acting as an IRF-1 antagonist, display
psoriasis-like skin abnormalities. It was therefore hypothesized that a
dysbalance between IRF-1 and IRF-2, the activator and repressor of IFN responses,
respectively, contributes to the altered IFN-gamma signalling observed in
patients with psoriasis. In the epidermis of patients with psoriasis and healthy 
controls, similar IRF-1 and IRF-2 mRNA expression levels were observed.
Furthermore, it was not possible to detect any differences in IRF-1 and IRF-2
protein levels in nuclear extracts from the epidermis of controls and psoriasis
patients by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and western blot analysis. Using
double immunofluorescence labelling, it was observed that in normal skin IRF-1
was expressed in keratinocytes throughout the epidermis, whereas IRF-2 was
restricted to the basal cell layer. In psoriatic skin, IRF-1 expression was
comparable to normal skin, whereas IRF-2 was expressed in both basal and
suprabasal cell layers. This altered IRF-2 expression in suprabasal cell layers
may therefore result in a dysbalance between the activator and repressor of IFN
responses in these cell layers, putatively contributing to aberrant responses to 
IFN-gamma and eventually to the psoriatic skin phenotype.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 12474233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Semin Immunol. 2002 Dec;14(6):453-60.

Murine natural killer cell progenitors and their requirements for development.

Lian RH(1), Kumar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. rlian@bsd.uchicago.edu

Molecules that are essential to natural killer (NK) cell development have been
identified mostly through characterizing knock-out mice that exhibit NK
deficiencies. Such studies have shown that the interaction of membrane
lymphotoxin (LT) on NK cells with its receptor on stromal elements is necessary
for inducing a permissive microenvironment for NK development. Also,
transcription factors such as Id2, interferon regulatory factors-1 (IRF-1),
IRF-2, and Ets-1 are indispensable while PU.1 has a somewhat selective role. In
addition, recent studies have identified T/NK progenitors (T/NKPs) in the fetal
liver that precede migration to the fetal thymus as well as the earliest
committed NK precursors in the bone marrow.

PMID: 12457618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Psychiatry. 2002;7(8):891-8.

Regulatory region variability in the human presenilin-2 (PSEN2) gene: potential
contribution to the gene activity and risk for AD.

Riazanskaia N(1), Lukiw WJ, Grigorenko A, Korovaitseva G, Dvoryanchikov G,
Moliaka Y, Nicolaou M, Farrer L, Bazan NG, Rogaev E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Brain Genetics, Research Center of Mental Health,
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences of Russia, Moscow 113152, Russia.

We have analyzed the 5'-upstream promoter region of the presenilin 2 gene (PSEN2)
for regulatory elements and examined Alzheimer disease (AD) patients and
non-demented individuals for polymorphisms in the 5' upstream promoter region of 
the PSEN2 gene. Direct sequencing analysis detected a common single adenine (A)
nucleotide deletion polymorphism in the upstream promoter region of the PSEN2
gene. Examination of cohorts of AD patients and age-matched control individuals
revealed no statistically significant differences in the frequency of this
polymorphism when compared with the total sample of AD patients and control
individuals. However, subgroup and regression analysis suggested that the
relatively rare -A/-A genotype increases risk of AD among subjects lacking
apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon4 and among persons ages 65 years and younger. DNA
sequence and DNA-protein binding analysis demonstrated that this mutation negates
binding with putative repressor transcription factor (TF), interferon regulatory 
factor 2 (IRF2), in nuclear extracts prepared from the aged human brain
neocortex. However this mutation creates a potential regulatory element,
C/EBPbeta, that is responsive to pro-inflammatory (PI) induction. The expression 
activity assay with luciferase reporter gene into normal human neural progenitor 
cells in primary culture shows that the mutant PSEN2 regulatory region exhibits a
1.8-fold higher level of basal expression and is sensitive to IL-1beta and
Abeta42, but that it is synergistically induced 3.2-fold over the wild-type PSEN2
by [IL-1beta+Abeta42]. These results suggest that under Pl and oxygen stress
conditions relatively minor variations in PSEN2 promoter DNA sequence structure
can enhance PSEN2 gene expression and that consequently these may play a role in 
the induction and/or proliferation of a Pl response in AD brain.

PMID: 12232783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2002 Aug-Oct;13(4-5):379-91.

Type I interferons and autoimmunity: lessons from the clinic and from
IRF-2-deficient mice.

Taki S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. shin-t@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

Type I interferons (IFN-alpha/beta) are produced upon viral and bacterial
infections and play essential roles in host defense. However, since
IFN-alpha/beta have multiple regulatory functions on innate and adoptive
immunity, dysregulation of the IFN-alpha/beta system both in uninfected hosts and
during immune responses against infection can result in immunopathologies. In
fact, IFN-alpha/beta therapy often accompanies autoimmune-like symptoms. In this 
regard, we have recently found that mice lacking IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-2, a
negative regulator of IFN-alpha/beta signaling, develop spontaneous, CD8(+) T
cell-dependent skin inflammation. This unique animal model, together with other
animal models, highlights the importance of the mechanism maintaining the
homeostasis in the IFN-alpha/beta system even in the absence of infection.

PMID: 12220551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(4):1065-70.

Gene expression analysis of 1,25(OH)2D3-dependent differentiation of HL-60 cells:
a cDNA array study.

Savli H(1), Aalto Y, Nagy B, Knuutila S, Pakkala S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

The alterations in gene expression associated with 1,25(OH)2D3-induced
differentiation of HL-60 cells were studied in order to identify potential
targets for further investigation of the genetic basis of acute myeloid
leukaemia. Atlas human haematology filters, including 406 genes (Clontech), were 
used to study gene expression in response to 1,25(OH)2D3 (concentration, 5 x 10-8
mol/l) for 24 and 72 h. Compared with untreated cells, expression differences
were found in 43 genes. Downregulated genes at both time-points were: IL2RA,
CMYC, NPM, DEK, AF4, FLI1, htlf, MNDA, BCR, IKAROS, BPI and NFAT4. Upregulated
genes at both time-points were IL1B, CD14 and MCL1. CD55, CD58, IRF2, CREB1,
ATF4, RAC1, TIAR, KIAA0053, BAT2, BTK, RCK, EV12B and EDN were downregulated at
24 h, while SPI1, MKK3, BTG1 and IL8 were upregulated. At 72 h the upregulated
genes were IL1RA, IL2RG, CXCR4, SCYA1, SCYA3, SCYA4, SCYA5, SCYA22, ANX2, CD83
and UPAR. cDNA array results were confirmed on randomly selected genes using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction for three upregulated (CXCR4,
IL1B and CD14) and three downregulated (DEK, AF4 and FLI1) genes. Gene expression
analysis after differentiation induction may provide a tool to study the roles of
DEK, AF4 and FLI1 in cell proliferation and differentiation. To demonstrate the
genes that initiate differentiation, sequential gene expression analysis has to
be performed during the first 24 h of the differentiation process.

PMID: 12199786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2002 May;12(5):389-97.

Type I-interferon signalling in fish.

Collet B(1), Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Aberdeen, Tillydrone Avenue, Aberdeen
AB24 2TZ, U.K.

Type I interferon (IFN) signalling uses a dual mechanism of action. A Jak-Stat
pathway extensively described in mammals involves a cascade of reactions from the
interaction of the IFN molecule with its membrane receptor to the stimulation of 
IFN-induced gene promoters leading in turn to an antiviral state. Regulation of
IFN activity is also mediated by two DNA-binding transcription factors called
interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and -2, that respectively stimulate and
repress the promoter of IFN-induced genes. By gene walking with trout genomic DNA
the regulatory sequence of the IRF-1 gene was cloned and sequenced. Sequence
analysis showed that this 1 Kb 5' flanking region has a structure which is
typical for an IFN-induced gene promoter. It contains a TATA box between -28 to
-31, and a NF kappa B site between -41 and -52. No complete interferon
stimulatory response element (ISRE) could be found, but ten GAAA motifs, which
are characteristic of IFN-induced gene promoters, were found. In rainbow trout
gonad (RTG) cells, IRF-1 is expressed constitutively and up-regulated by poly I:C
but not by LPS. Transient transfections of RTG cells with a reporter construct
based on the luciferase gene show that the IRF1 5' flanking region described
above, is sufficient to allow the expression of luciferase and is capable of
induction by dsRNA (poly I:C).

PMID: 12194451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Neuroimmunol. 2002 Aug;129(1-2):205-15.

Low expression of interferon-stimulated genes in active multiple sclerosis is
linked to subnormal phosphorylation of STAT1.

Feng X(1), Petraglia AL, Chen M, Byskosh PV, Boos MD, Reder AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, MC-2030, University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland
Ave., Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Multiple sclerosis is an immune-mediated brain disease ameliorated by
interferon-beta therapy. Immune responses to IFN-alpha and IFN-beta are sometimes
subnormal in MS peripheral blood mononuclear cells (MNCs), suggesting an
underlying defect in type I IFN signaling. We studied IFN-beta regulation of mRNA
and protein induction for IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2, which
control multiple IFN-stimulated genes, and for 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase
(2',5'-OAS) and MxA, which are antiviral proteins. First, mRNA levels in resting 
MNC from untreated patients with clinically active MS contained IRF-1 at 38% of
normal controls, 45% for IRF-2, 44% for 2',5'-OAS (all p<0.005), and 46% for MxA 
protein (p<0.007). Stable MS patients had intermediate levels of 2',5'-OAS and
MxA. IFN-beta-1b therapy increased IRF-1, IRF-2, and 2',5'-OAS mRNA in resting
MNC-but only up to levels seen in unstimulated control cells. In untreated
patients with active MS, serine phosphorylation of the STAT1 transcription factor
was markedly reduced, suggesting a mechanism for the low levels of IFN-induced
genes. Secondly, in untreated patients with stable MS, culture with IFN-beta
induced excessive tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1, and this correlated with low
SHP1 tyrosine phosphatase levels. Excessive P-Tyr-STAT1 responses could induce
inflammatory cytokines and demyelination in MS, as in motheaten mice, which have 
defects in SHP-1 function. Abnormal IFN signaling may predict the course of MS
and responses to therapy.

PMID: 12161037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Exp Med. 2002 May 20;195(10):1359-70.

Modulation of human immunodeficiency virus 1 replication by interferon regulatory
factors.

Sgarbanti M(1), Borsetti A, Moscufo N, Bellocchi MC, Ridolfi B, Nappi F, Marsili 
G, Marziali G, Coccia EM, Ensoli B, Battistini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.

Transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 is controlled by the
cooperation of virally encoded and host regulatory proteins. The Tat protein is
essential for viral replication, however, expression of Tat after virus entry
requires HIV-1 promoter activation. A sequence in the 5' HIV-1 LTR, containing a 
binding site for transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factors (IRF)
family has been suggested to be critical for HIV-1 transcription and replication.
Here we show that IRF-1 activates HIV-1 LTR transcription in a dose-dependent
fashion and in the absence of Tat. This has biological significance since IRF-1
is produced early upon virus entry, both in cell lines and in primary CD4+ T
cells, and before expression of Tat. IRF-1 also cooperates with Tat in amplifying
virus gene transcription and replication. This cooperation depends upon a
physical interaction that is blocked by overexpression of IRF-8, the natural
repressor of IRF-1, and, in turn is released by overexpression of IRF-1. These
data suggest a key role of IRF-1 in the early phase of viral replication and/or
during viral reactivation from latency, when viral transactivators are absent or 
present at very low levels, and suggest that the interplay between IRF-1 and
IRF-8 may play a key role in virus latency.

PMCID: PMC2193759
PMID: 12021315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Res. 2002 May 1;62(9):2510-5.

Forced expression of the interferon regulatory factor 2 oncoprotein causes
polyploidy and cell death in FDC-P1 myeloid hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Xie RL(1), van Wijnen AJ, van der Meijden CM, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

The IFN regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) oncoprotein controls the cell cycle-dependent
expression of histone H4 genes during S phase and may function as a component of 
an E2F-independent mechanism to regulate cell growth. To investigate the role of 
IRF-2 in control of cell proliferation, we have constructed a stable FDC-P1 cell 
line (F2) in which expression of IRF-2 is doxycycline (DOX)-inducible, and a
control cell line (F0). Both the F2 and F0 cell lines were synchronized in the G1
phase by isoleucine deprivation, and IRF-2 was induced by DOX on release of cells
from the cell cycle block. Flow cytometric analyses indicated that forced
expression of IRF-2 has limited effects on cell cycle progression before the
first mitosis. However, continued cell growth in the presence of elevated IRF-2
levels results in polyploidy (>4n) or genomic disintegration (<2n) and cell
death. Western blot analyses revealed that the levels of the cell cycle
regulatory proteins cyclin B1 and the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-inhibitory
protein p27 are selectively increased. These changes occur concomitant with a
significant elevation in the levels of the FAS-L protein, which is the ligand of 
the FAS (Apo1/CD95) receptor. We also found a subtle change in the ratio of the
apoptosis-promoting Bax protein and the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 protein. Hence, IRF-2
induces a cell death response involving the Fas/FasL apoptotic pathway in FDC-P1 
cells. Our data suggest that the IRF-2 oncoprotein regulates a critical cell
cycle checkpoint that controls progression through G2 and mitosis in FDC-P1
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMID: 11980642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Immunol. 2002 May 1;168(9):4488-94.

IFN regulatory factor-1 regulates IFN-gamma-dependent cathepsin S expression.

Storm van's Gravesande K(1), Layne MD, Ye Q, Le L, Baron RM, Perrella MA,
Santambrogio L, Silverman ES, Riese RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cathepsin S is a cysteine protease with potent endoproteolytic activity and a
broad pH profile. Cathepsin S activity is essential for complete processing of
the MHC class II-associated invariant chain within B cells and dendritic cells,
and may also be important in extracellular matrix degradation in atherosclerosis 
and emphysema. Unique among cysteine proteases, cathepsin S activity is
up-regulated by IFN-gamma. Given its importance, we sought to elucidate the
pathway by which IFN-gamma increases cathepsin S expression. Our data demonstrate
that the cathepsin S promoter contains an IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) 
that is critical for IFN-gamma-induced gene transcription in a cell line derived 
from type II alveolar epithelial (A549) cells. IFN response factor (IRF)-2
derived from A549 nuclear extracts associates with the ISRE oligonucleotide in
gel shift assays, but is quickly replaced by IRF-1 following stimulation with
IFN-gamma. The time course of IRF-1/ISRE complex formation correlates with
increased levels of IRF-1 protein and cathepsin S mRNA. Overexpression of IRF-1, 
but not IRF-2, markedly augments cathepsin S promoter activity in A549 cells.
Furthermore, overexpression of IRF-1 increases endogenous cathepsin S mRNA levels
in 293T epithelial cells. Finally, freshly isolated bone marrow cells from
IRF-1(-/-) mice fail to up-regulate cathepsin S activity in response to
IFN-gamma. Thus, IRF-1 is the critical transcriptional mediator of
IFN-gamma-dependent cathepsin S activation. These data elucidate a new pathway by
which IRF-1 may affect MHC class II processing and presentation.

PMID: 11970993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Viral Immunol. 2002;15(1):17-28.

The role of interferon regulatory factors in the cardiac response to viral
infection.

Sherry B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pathology and Parasitology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27606, USA.
Barbarasherry@ncsu.edu

Reovirus-induced murine myocarditis provides an excellent model for the human
disease. Cardiac tissue damage varies between reovirus strains, and is caused by 
a direct viral cytopathogenic effect. One determinant of virus-induced cardiac
tissue damage is the cardiac interferon-beta (IFN-beta) response to viral
infection. Nonmyocarditic reoviruses induce more IFN-beta and/or are more
sensitive to the antiviral effects of IFN-beta in cardiac cells than myocarditis 
reoviruses. The roles of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) in the cardiac
response to viral infection are reviewed, and results suggest possible
cardiac-specific variations in IRF-3 and IRF-1 function. In addition, data are
presented indicating that the role of IRF-2 in regulation of IFN-beta expression 
is cell type-specific and differs between skeletal and cardiac muscle cells.
Together, results suggest that the heart may provide a unique environment for IRF
function, critical for protection against virus-induced cardiac damage.

PMID: 11952139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Cell Biochem. 2002;85(2):369-80.

Interferon regulatory factor-1 mediates interferon-gamma-induced apoptosis in
ovarian carcinoma cells.

Kim EJ(1), Lee JM, Namkoong SE, Um SJ, Park JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Bioscience, Graduate School, Catholic University, Seoul,
Korea.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), as one of interferon family that regulates
antiviral, antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory responses, has been implicated
for the growth regulation of ovarian cancer cells. However, the molecular
mechanisms are not yet fully defined. To analyze detailed mechanisms, the ovarian
cancer cell lines (2774, PA-1, OVCAR-3, and SKOV-3) were treated with IFN-gamma. 
The growth of 2774 was most effectively suppressed than that of other cells in
both time-course and dose-dependent experiments. The order of sensitivity in
other cells was PA-1 >> OVCAR-3 > SKOV-3 (not responded at all). The DNA
fragmentation and DAPI staining assays suggested that the IFN-gamma-mediated
cytotoxicity could be triggered by apoptosis. The treatment induced IFN
regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) in two IFN-gamma-sensitive cells (2774, PA-1),
whereas IRF-1 was not induced in two IFN-gamma-resistant cells (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3).
The levels of p53 and p21WAF1 were not strikingly changed in all four cells.
Interestingly, the expression of interleukin-converting enzyme (ICE, or
caspase-1) was increased by the treatment in a kinetically consistent manner to
the induction of IRF-1. However, CD95 (Fas/APO-1) was not changed. Apoptosis was 
greatly induced, when IRF-1 was transiently expressed in PA-1 without the
treatment of IFN-gamma. However, it was repressed when IRF-1 together with IRF-2,
an antagonist of IRF-1, were coexpressed. In addition, the effect of IFN-gamma
was reduced in the 2774 and PA-1 cells stably expressing either IRF-1 antisense
or IRF-2 sense, as shown by the cytotoxicity and FACS analysis. Furthermore, the 
IFN-gamma-induced apoptosis was greatly reduced, when inhibitors of ICE were
treated into PA-1 cells. Taken together, these results suggest that IRF-1
directly mediates the IFN-gamma-induced apoptosis via the activation of caspase-1
gene expression in IFN-gamma-sensitive ovarian cancer cells.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11948692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Immunol. 2002 Mar 1;168(5):2433-40.

Susceptibility of IFN regulatory factor-1 and IFN consensus sequence binding
protein-deficient mice to brucellosis.

Ko J(1), Gendron-Fitzpatrick A, Splitter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Department of Animal Health
and Biomedical Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

IFN-gamma is a key cytokine controlling Brucella infection, and the diverse
functions of this cytokine are mediated by IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) such as 
IRF-1, IRF-2, and IFN consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP). However, the
roles of these three IRFs in Brucella infection have not been investigated. The
infection of each IRF-deficient mouse strain provides an opportunity to determine
not only the significance of each IRF molecule but also the crucial immune
components necessary for host defense during in vivo infection, because
respective IRF-deficient mouse strains contain unique immunodeficient phenotypes.
Brucella abortus S2308-infected IRF-1-/- mice were dead within 2 wk
postinfection, while IRF-2-/- mice contained less splenic Brucella CFU than
wild-type mice at the early stage of infection. Infected ICSBP-/- mice maintained
a plateau of splenic Brucella CFU throughout the infection. Additional infection 
of IL-12p40-, NO synthase 2-, and gp91(phox)-deficient mice indicates that these 
immune components are crucial for Brucella immunity and may contribute to the
susceptibility of IRF-1-/- and ICSBP-/- mice. Immunologic and histopathological
analyses of infected IRF-1-/- mice indicate that the absence of IL-12p40
induction and serious hepatic damage are involved in the death of IRF-1-/- mice. 
These results indicate that 1) IRF-1 and ICSBP are essential transcriptional
factors for IFN-gamma-mediated protection against Brucella; 2) IL-12, reactive
nitrogen intermediates, and reactive oxygen intermediates are crucial immune
components against Brucella, and their absence may contribute to the
susceptibility of IRF-1-/- and ICSBP-/- mice; and 3) hepatic damage caused by
Brucella virulence contributes to the death of IRF-1-/- mice.

PMID: 11859135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):27-37.

IRF regulation of HIV-1 long terminal repeat activity.

Battistini A(1), Marsili G, Sgarbanti M, Ensoli B, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Rome, Italy.
battist@iss.it

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF) constitute a family of transcriptional 
activators and repressors implicated in multiple biologic processes, including
regulation of immune responses and host defense, cytokine signalling, cell growth
regulation, and hematopoietic development. All members are characterized by
well-conserved DNA binding domains at the N-terminal region that recognize
similar DNA sequences termed IRF-binding element/IFN-stimulated response element 
(IRF-E/ISRE) present on the promoter of the IFN-alpha/beta genes and of some
IFN-stimulated genes (ISG). Recently, a sequence homologous to the ISRE has been 
identified downstream of the 5' human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) long 
terminal repeat (LTR). This sequence is a binding site for IRF-1 and IRF-2.
Deletion of the LTR-ISRE results in impaired LTR promoter activity and decreased 
synthesis of viral RNA and proteins. Here, we briefly summarize characteristics
of IRF-1 and IRF-2 binding to the HIV-1 LTR-ISRE and the data obtained to date on
the functionality of this cis-element and on the role of IRF in the regulation of
HIV-1 LTR transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11846973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Nov;268(22):5947-54.

The interferon alpha induced protein ISG12 is localized to the nuclear membrane.

Martensen PM(1), Søgaard TM, Gjermandsen IM, Buttenschøn HN, Rossing AB,
Bonnevie-Nielsen V, Rosada C, Simonsen JL, Justesen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of. Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Aarhus, Aarhus,
Denmark. pips@biobase.dk

Interferons exert their biological function mainly through the activation of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). ISG12 (originally designated p27) belongs to 
a family of small, interferon alpha inducible genes of unknown function. We have 
determined the 5' end sequence of ISG12 cDNA from the human cell lines HeLa and
AMA by RACE. Comparing this sequence to ISG12 sequences in the expressed sequence
tag (EST) database revealed the presence of two alternative splice variants of
ISG12 in human cells exhibiting the same open reading frame. We have sequenced
the promoter region of the ISG12 gene and found ISRE, IRF1/IRF2, and STAT
elements correlating to the interferon alpha inducibility of the gene.
Subsequently, we have expressed human ISG12, a 12-kDa hydrophobic protein in the 
baculovirus expression system and with a C-terminal FLAG-tag in the human cell
line 293. Recombinant ISG12 sediments in the nuclear envelope in both cell types.
Finally, we have been able to demonstrate the prevalence of the ISG12 gene
product in the nuclear envelope of HeLa cells treated with interferon alpha by
immunocytochemical analyses. ISG12 is the first interferon induced protein found 
localizing to the nuclear envelope.

PMID: 11722583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(11):664-7.

Mutation and association analysis of the interferon regulatory factor 2 gene
(IRF2) with atopic dermatitis.

Nishio Y(1), Noguchi E, Ito S, Ichikawa E, Umebayashi Y, Otsuka F, Arinami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics. Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Tsukuba, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2) is a member of a family of transcriptional
factors involved in the modulation of cellular responses to interferons (IFNs)
and viral infection as well as in the regulation of cell growth and
transformation. Irf2 knockout mice show T helper 1 (Th1) cell development defect 
and spontaneous development of an inflammatory skin disease. To determine if
there are any mutations in IRF2 associated with development of atopic dermatitis 
(AD), we screened for mutations in the 5' flanking and coding regions of IRF2 in 
AD patients and control subjects by single-strand conformational polymorphism
(SSCP) analysis. We found three mutations in the promoter region ([-829C>T,
-830C>T], -684C>T, and -467G>A), one silent mutation in exon 9 (921G>A), and a
10-bp deletion in the 3' untranslated region (1739[ATCCC]8>6). Among them, the
-467G allele and the haplotype of the -467G, 921A, and 1739(ATCCC)8 alleles were 
transmitted preferentially to AD-affected children (P = 0.02 and P = 0.007,
respectively). Our data suggest that IRF-2 plays some role in the development of 
AD in the Japanese population.

PMID: 11721886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem J. 2001 Dec 1;360(Pt 2):285-94.

Ectopic expression of interferon regulatory factor-1 potentiates granulocytic
differentiation.

Coccia EM(1), Stellacci E, Valtieri M, Masella B, Feccia T, Marziali G, Hiscott
J, Testa U, Peschle C, Battistini A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena,
299-00161 Rome, Italy.

Numerous transcription factors allow haematopoietic cells to respond to lineage- 
and stage-specific cytokines and to act as their effectors. It is increasingly
evident that the interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) transcription factor can 
selectively regulate different sets of genes depending on the cell type and/or
the nature of cellular stimuli, evoking distinct responses in each. In the
present study, we investigated mechanisms underlying the differentiation-inducing
properties of granulocytic colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and whether IRF
transcription factors are functionally relevant in myeloid differentiation. Both 
normal human progenitors and murine 32Dcl3 myeloblasts induced to differentiate
along the granulocytic pathway showed an up-regulation of IRF-1 expression.
Ectopic expression of IRF-1 did not abrogate the growth factor requirement of
32Dcl3 cells, although a small percentage of cells that survived cytokine
deprivation differentiated fully to neutrophils. Moreover, in the presence of
G-CSF, granulocytic differentiation of IRF-1-expressing cells was accelerated, as
assessed by morphology and expression of specific differentiation markers.
Down-modulation of c-Myb protein and direct stimulation of lysozyme promoter
activity by IRF-1 were also observed. Conversely, constitutive expression of
IRF-2, a repressor of IRF-1 transcriptional activity, completely abrogated the
G-CSF-induced neutrophilic maturation. We conclude that IRF-1 exerts a pivotal
role in granulocytic differentiation and that its induction by G-CSF represents a
limiting step in the early events of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1222228
PMID: 11716756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Hematol. 2001 Sep;68(1):23-31.

Alterations in IRF1/IRF2 expression in acute myelogenous leukemia.

Preisler HD(1), Perambakam S, Li B, Hsu WT, Venugopal P, Creech S, Sivaraman S,
Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Rush Cancer Institute, Rush Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois 60612, USA. hpreisler@rush.edu

The interferon response genes 1 and 2 have been shown to be involved in the
regulation of differentiation and proliferation of cells of the myeloid series,
with the former functioning as an anti-oncogene and the latter as an oncogene. In
the study described here, the levels of expression of these two genes and the
ratio of their expression were compared in AML and normal marrow. The ratio of
gene expression was significantly less in AML marrow cells as compared to normal 
marrow cells [med ratio = 1.33 vs. 2.97, P = 0.003]. While the expression ratio
was unaffected by the presence or absence of either ras or fms mutations, p53
mutations were associated with higher IRF1:IRF2 expression ratios that wt p53
genes [med = 1.701 vs. 1.135, P = 0.014]. Given the functional characteristics
and the competitive nature of these two genes, it is possible that leukemic
transformation is associated with a fall in IRF1:IRF2 ratios. Finally, the
administration of IL4 can result in the normalization of the IRF1:IRF2 ratio in
the marrow cells of some patients with AML.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11559933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Biochemistry. 2001 Sep 4;40(35):10693-9.

Purification and functional analysis of a novel leucine-zipper/nucleotide-fold
protein, BZAP45, stimulating cell cycle regulated histone H4 gene transcription.

Mitra P(1), Vaughan PS, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655-0106, USA.

Regulation of histone gene transcription at the G1/S phase transition via the
Site II cell cycle control element is distinct from E2F-dependent mechanisms
operative at the growth factor-related restriction point. E2F-independent
activation of histone H4 gene expression combines contributions of several
promoter factors, including HiNF-M/IRF2 and the HiNF-D/CDP-cut complex which
contains pRB, CDK1, and cyclin A as non-DNA binding subunits. Mutational analyses
suggest additional rate-limiting factors for Site II function. Using
sequence-specific Site II DNA affinity chromatography, we identified a 45 kDa
protein (KIAA0005 or BZAP45) that is embryonically expressed and phylogenetically
conserved. Based on amino acid sequence analysis, BZAP45 contains a unique
decapeptide that is part of a putative leucine-zipper protein with a nucleotide
(ATP or GTP) binding fold. Bacterial expression of a full-length cDNA produces a 
45 kDa protein. Binding studies reveal that highly purified BZAP45 does not
interact with Site II, suggesting that BZAP45 function may require partner
proteins. Forced expression of BZAP45 strongly stimulates H4 promoter (nt -215 to
-1)/CAT reporter gene activity. Deletion analyses and point mutations indicate
that BZAP45 enhances H4 gene transcription through Site II. Thus, BZAP45 is a
novel regulatory factor that contributes to transcriptional control at the G1/S
phase transition.

PMID: 11524015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncogene. 2001 Jul 12;20(31):4219-27.

Impaired class II transactivator expression in mice lacking interferon regulatory
factor-2.

Xi H(1), Goodwin B, Shepherd AT, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, FL33612, USA.

Class II transactivator (CIITA) is required for both constitutive and inducible
expression of MHC class II genes. IFN-gamma induced expression of CIITA in
various cell types is directed by CIITA type IV promoter. The two
transactivators, STAT1 and IRF-1, mediate the IFN-gamma activation of the type IV
promoter by binding to the GAS and IRF-E of the promoter, respectively. In
addition to IRF-1, IRF-2, another member of the IRF family, also activates the
human CIITA type IV promoter, and IRF-2 cooperates with IRF-1 to activate the
promoter in transient transfection assays. IRF-1 and IRF-2 can co-occupy the
IRF-E of the human CIITA type IV promoter. To understand the effect of loss of
IRF-2 on the endogenous CIITA expression, we assayed for CIITA expression in
IRF-2 knock-out mice. Both basal and IFN-gamma induced CIITA expression were
reduced in IRF-2 knock-out mice. At least half of the amount of inducible CIITA
mRNA depends on IRF-2. The reduction of IFN-gamma induced CIITA mRNA in IRF-2
knock-out mice was due to the reduction of the type IV CIITA mRNA induction. The 
reduction of basal CIITA mRNA was apparently due to the reduction of CIITA mRNA
originating from other promoters. These data indicate that IRF-2, like IRF-1,
plays a critical role in the regulation of the endogenous CIITA gene. The
implications in understanding the previously described phenotypes of IRF-2
defective mice are discussed.

PMID: 11464288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Cancer Invest. 2001;19(4):346-51.

Quantitation of interferon regulatory factor transcripts in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia.

Perambakam S(1), Li B, Preisler H.

Author information: 
(1)Rush Cancer Institute, Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF-1 and IRF-2, the two mutually antagonistic
factors, fluctuate during the cell cycle and play an important role in normal and
neoplastic growth processes. The relative levels of these two transcripts were
analyzed in 5 normal and 43 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) bone marrow (BM)
specimens by a semiquantitative RT-PCR method. IRF-1 and IRF-2 cDNA sequences
were coamplified using primers that were designed to span regions of high
homology between the genes. Each primer can anneal equally to both IRF-1 and
IRF-2 sequences. Hence, the relative amount of amplified products from each cDNA 
species provides an estimation of proportional concentration of the RNA
transcripts in the test sample. Results indicate expression of both the
transcripts on all the leukemia and lymphoma cell lines tested, normal and AML
BM. Significantly higher IRF-1:IRF-2 ratio was observed in normal as compared to 
AML BM (p = 0.007). There was no correlation with clinical factors such as FAB
subtype. A single dose of amifostine or three daily doses of recombinant IL-4
were administered to 5 and 8 AML patients, respectively. The changes in the
expression of these transcripts were studied prior to administration of the agent
(d0) and after 3 days (d3). IL-4 treatment showed significant increase in the
IRF-1:IRF-2 ratio in 4 of 8 patients (p = 0.05); amifostine treatment did not
show any appreciable change.

PMID: 11405174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Immunol. 2001 Jun 1;166(11):6829-38.

PU.1 and multiple IFN regulatory factor proteins synergize to mediate
transcriptional activation of the human IL-1 beta gene.

Marecki S(1), Riendeau CJ, Liang MD, Fenton MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Center and Department of Pathology, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston MA 02118, USA.

Both lymphoid and myeloid cells express two related members of the IFN regulatory
factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, specifically IRF-4 and IFN
consensus binding protein (ICSBP or IRF-8). We previously reported that
macrophages express IRF-4 and in combination with the ETS-like protein PU.1 can
synergistically activate a human IL-1beta reporter gene. Here we report that this
synergy is mediated by a composite PU.1/IRF element located within an upstream
enhancer known to confer cytokine- and LPS-inducible expression. In macrophages, 
synergistic activation of IL-1beta reporter gene expression was preferentially
mediated by IRF-4, whereas IRF-4 and ICSBP were equally capable of synergizing
with PU.1 when coexpressed in fibroblasts. Furthermore, coexpression of IRF-1 and
IRF-2 dramatically increased the capacity of both PU.1/IRF-4 and PU.1/ICSBP to
induce IL-1beta reporter gene expression in fibroblasts. The additional synergy
observed with IRF-1 and IRF-2 coexpression is mediated by a region of DNA
distinct from either the IL-1beta enhancer or promoter. We also assessed the
capacity of these transcription factors to activate endogenous IL-1beta gene when
overexpressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Although ectopic expression of
PU.1 alone was sufficient to activate modest levels of IL-1beta transcripts,
endogenous IL-1beta expression was markedly increased following coexpression of
additional IRF proteins. Thus, maximal expression of both a human IL-1beta
reporter gene and the endogenous IL-1beta gene was observed in cells that
coexpressed PU.1, IRF-4 (or ICSBP), IRF1, and IRF2. Together, our observations
suggest that these factors may function together as an enhanceosome.

PMID: 11359842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Ann Surg. 2001 May;233(5):623-9.

Interferon regulatory factor expression in human breast cancer.

Doherty GM(1), Boucher L, Sorenson K, Lowney J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA. dohertyg@msnotes.wustl.edu

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2
(IRF-1 and IRF-2) in human breast cancer.
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2 are transcription 
factors in the interferon gamma signal transduction pathway. IRF-1 acts as the
effector arm of the interferon gamma response; IRF-2 binds to the same DNA
consensus sequence and opposes IRF-1 activity. Previous work in the authors'
laboratory has shown the tumor suppressor activity of IRF-1 expression and the
oncogenic effect of IRF-2 in human and murine tumor models, including human
breast cancer cell lines. The authors' hypothesis is that this pathway is
involved in human tumor development, and alterations in the expression of IRF-1
and IRF-2 may occur in breast cancer tissue compared with normal breast tissue,
and between more and less differentiated breast cancers.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded human archival tissue specimens were
obtained from 33 patients with pure ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and 49 women 
with invasive ductal cancer. Adjacent areas of normal breast tissue were assayed 
in 31 women. These specimens were stained with polyclonal IRF-1 and IRF-2
antibodies using an avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex technique after epitope
retrieval.
RESULTS: Most normal breast tissue showed expression of IRF-1 and no expression
of IRF-2 by immunohistochemistry. High-grade DCIS or node-positive invasive
ductal cancers were less likely to express the tumor suppressor IRF-1 than normal
tissue. More strikingly, high-grade DCIS and invasive ductal cancers were much
more likely to express the oncogenic IRF-2 protein than was normal tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of IRF-1 and IRF-2 is altered in human breast cancer
compared with normal adjacent tissue. The loss of IRF-1 expression is consistent 
with tumor suppressor loss and the development of IRF-2 expression with oncogenic
activation. These data support the hypothesis that this pathway is involved in
human breast oncogenesis, which warrants further investigation regarding
prognostic and therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC1421301
PMID: 11323500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):20973-80. Epub 2001 Apr 13.

Coactivator p300 acetylates the interferon regulatory factor-2 in U937 cells
following phorbol ester treatment.

Masumi A(1), Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Research on Biologics, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Tokyo 208-0011, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) is a transcription factor of the IRF
family that represses interferon-mediated gene expression. In the present study, 
we show that human monocytic U937 cells express truncated forms of IRF-2
containing the DNA binding domain but lacking much of the C-terminal regulatory
domain. U937 cells are shown to respond to phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) to induce expression of histone
acetylases p300 and p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF). In addition, TPA treatment
led to the appearance of full-length IRF-2, along with a reduction of the
truncated protein. Interestingly, full-length IRF-2 in TPA-treated U937 cells
occurred as a complex with p300 as well as PCAF and was itself acetylated.
Consistent with these results, recombinant IRF-2 was acetylated by p300 and to a 
lesser degree by PCAF in vitro. Another IRF member, IRF-1, an activator of
interferon-mediated transcription, was also acetylated in vitro by these
acetylases. Finally, we demonstrate that the addition of IRF-2 but not IRF-1
inhibits core histone acetylation by p300 in vitro. The addition of IRF-2 also
inhibited acetylation of nucleosomal histones in TPA-treated U937 cells.
Acetylated IRF-2 may affect local chromatin structure in vivo by inhibiting core 
histone acetylation and may serve as a mechanism by which IRF-2 negatively
regulates interferon-inducible transcription.

PMID: 11304541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Viral Hepat. 2001 Mar;8(2):103-10.

Expression of interferon-alpha subtypes in peripheral mononuclear cells from
patients with chronic hepatitis C: a role for interferon-alpha5.

Larrea E(1), Alberdi A, Castelruiz Y, Boya P, Civeira MP, Prieto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Liver Unit, Clínica Universitaria, University of
Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.

Interferon (IFN)-alpha is a family of antiviral proteins encoded by different
genes. The biological significance of the existence of various IFN-alpha subtypes
is not clear. We have investigated the interferon system in chronic hepatitis C
virus (HCV) infection, a disease that responds to interferon-alpha2 therapy in
only a limited proportion of cases. We analysed the expression of interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-1, IRF-2, and IFN-alpha subtypes in nonstimulated and
Sendai virus-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from HCV
infected patients and healthy controls. We observed that the IRF-1 mRNA and
IRF-1/IRF-2 ratios were increased in PBMC from hepatitis C patients with respect 
to normal subjects. Sendai virus stimulation of PBMC led to a significant
increase in the levels of IRF-1, IRF-2 and IFN-alpha mRNAs and in the production 
of IFN-alpha protein with respect to basal values in healthy controls as well as 
in patients with HCV infection. In addition, we found that while natural HCV
infection induced increased IFN-alpha5 expression in PBMC, in vitro infection of 
these cells with Sendai virus caused a raise in the expression of IFN-alpha8 in
both patients and normal controls. In summary, our results indicate that
virus-induced activation of the IFN system in human PBMC is associated with
selective expression of individual IFN-alpha subtypes, IFN-alpha5 being the
specific subtype induced in PBMC from patients with chronic HCV infection.

PMID: 11264730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Annu Rev Immunol. 2001;19:623-55.

IRF family of transcription factors as regulators of host defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Ogasawara K, Takaoka A, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) constitute a family of transcription factors
that commonly possess a novel helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Following the
initial identification of two structurally related members, IRF-1 and IRF-2,
seven additional members have now been reported. In addition, virally encoded
IRFs, which may interfere with cellular IRFs, have also been identified. Thus
far, intensive functional analyses have been done on IRF-1, revealing a
remarkable functional diversity of this transcription factor in the regulation of
cellular response in host defense. Indeed, IRF-1 selectively modulates different 
sets of genes, depending on the cell type and/or the nature of cellular stimuli, 
in order to evoke appropriate responses in each. More recently, much attention
has also been focused on other IRF family members. Their functional roles,
through interactions with their own or other members of the family of
transcription factors, are becoming clearer in the regulation of host defense,
such as innate and adaptive immune responses and oncogenesis.

PMID: 11244049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001 Mar;107(3):499-504.

Association of IFN-gamma and IFN regulatory factor 1 polymorphisms with childhood
atopic asthma.

Nakao F(1), Ihara K, Kusuhara K, Sasaki Y, Kinukawa N, Takabayashi A, Nishima S, 
Hara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: IFN-gamma and related molecules play important roles in the
differentiation and function of TH2 cells.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine whether IFNG and related genes contribute to
any susceptibility to atopic asthma, a representative TH2-dominant disorder.
METHODS: We investigated the association of IFNG (CA repeat polymorphism within
the first intron), IRF1 (GT repeat polymorphism within the intron 7), IFNGR1 (Val
14 Met), and IFNGR2 (Gln 64 Arg) gene polymorphisms with atopic asthma in the
Japanese child population.
RESULTS: A significant association (P =.0018) was observed between IFNG gene
polymorphism and atopic asthma. The tendency was more prominent in patients with 
age of onset of 3 years or younger (P =.0004) or patients with a family history
of allergic diseases (P =.0038). Furthermore, there was a significant association
between IRF1 gene whole-allele distribution and atopic asthma (P =.044). The
tendency was more prominent in patients with onset at 3 years of age or less (P
=.0058). On the other hand, IFNGR1 and IFNGR2 gene polymorphisms showed no
association with atopic asthma.
CONCLUSION: These results suggested that among IFNG and related genes, IFNG and
IRF1 genes confer genetic susceptibility to atopic asthma in Japanese children.

PMID: 11240951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Immunol. 2001 Mar 15;166(6):3942-51.

Organization and functional analysis of the mouse transporter associated with
antigen processing 2 promoter.

Arons E(1), Kunin V, Schechter C, Ehrlich R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Research and Immunology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.

In accordance with the key role of MHC class I molecules in the adaptive immune
response against viruses, they are expressed by most cells, and their expression 
can be enhanced by cytokines. The assembly and cell surface expression of class I
complexes depend on a continuous peptide supply. The peptides are generated
mainly by the proteasome and are transported to the endoplasmic reticulum by a
peptide transport pump consisting of two subunits, TAP1 and TAP2. The proteasome 
low molecular weight polypeptide (2 and 7), as well as TAP (1 and 2) genes, are
coordinately regulated and are induced by IFNs. Despite this coordinate
regulation, examination of tumors shows that these genes can be discordantly
down-regulated. In pursuing a molecular explanation for these observations, we
have characterized the mouse TAP2 promoter region and 5'-flanking sequence. We
show that the 5' untranslated regions of TAP2 genes have a characteristic genomic
organization that is conserved in both the mouse and the human. The mouse TAP2
promoter belongs to a class of promoters that lack TATA boxes but contain a MED1 
(multiple start site element downstream) sequence. Accordingly, transcription is 
initiated from multiple sites within a 100-nucleotide window. An IFN regulatory
factor 1 (IRF1)/IRF2 binding site is located in this region and is involved in
both basal and IRF1-induced TAP2 promoter activity. The implication of the
extensive differences found among the promoters of class I heavy chain, low
molecular weight polypeptide, and TAP genes, all encoding proteins involved in Ag
presentation, is discussed.

PMID: 11238639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(5):2345-52.

Latently expressed human herpesvirus 8-encoded interferon regulatory factor 2
inhibits double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase.

Burýsek L(1), Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8; Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus) encodes four open
reading frames with homology to cellular proteins of interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) family. Three of them, viral IRF-1 (vIRF-1), vIRF-2, and vIRF-3, have been 
cloned and found, when overexpressed, to down-regulate the transcriptional
activity of interferon type I gene promoters in infected cells by interfering
with the transactivating activity of cellular IRFs. In this study, we have
further characterized vIRF-2 and shown that it is a nuclear protein which is
constitutively expressed in HHV-8-positive pleural effusion lymphoma cell lines. 
Nuclear localization of vIRF-2 was confirmed by in situ detection of ectopically 
expressed enhanced green fluorescent protein/vIRF-2 fusion protein. We found that
the expression of vIRF-2 in HEK293 cells inhibited the antiviral effect of
interferon and rescued translation of vesicular stomatitis virus mRNA from
interferon-induced translational block. To provide insight into the mechanism of 
this effect we have demonstrated that vIRF-2 physically interacts with PKR
consequently inhibiting autophosphorylation of double-stranded RNA-activated
protein kinase (PKR) and blocking phosphorylation of PKR substrates histone 2A
and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2alpha. These results suggest that
the latently expressed vIRF-2 has a role in viral mimicry which targets the
activity of interferon-induced PKR kinase. By inhibiting the kinase activity of
PKR and consequent down-modulation of protein synthesis, HHV-8 has evolved a
mechanism by which it can overcome the interferon-mediated antiviral effect.
Thus, the anti-interferon functions of vIRF-2 may contribute to the establishment
of a chronic or latent infection.

PMCID: PMC114818
PMID: 11160738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):L18-29.

Reovirus triggers cell type-specific proinflammatory responses dependent on the
autocrine action of IFN-beta.

Hamamdzic D(1), Phillips-Dorsett T, Altman-Hamamdzic S, London SD, London L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Resident cells of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, including
epithelial and fibroblast cells, are the initial sites of entry for many viral
pathogens. We investigated the role that these cells play in the inflammatory
process in response to infection with reovirus 1/L. In A549 human bronchial or
HT-29 human colonic epithelial cells, interferon (IFN)-beta, regulated on
activation T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), IFN-gamma-inducible protein
(IP)-10, and interleukin-8 were upregulated regardless of whether cells were
infected with replication-competent or replication-deficient reovirus 1/L.
However, in CCD-34Lu human lung fibroblast cells, IFN-beta, IP-10, and RANTES
were expressed only after infection with replication-competent reovirus 1/L.
Expression of interleukin-8 in CCD-34Lu fibroblast cells was viral replication
independent. This differential expression of IFN-beta, RANTES, and IP-10 was
shown to be due to the lack of induction of IFN regulatory factor-1 and -2 in
CCD-34Lu fibroblast cells treated with replication-deficient reovirus 1/L. We
have shown that cytokine and/or chemokine expression may not be dependent on
viral replication. Therefore, treatment of viral infections with inhibitors of
replication may not effectively alleviate inflammatory mediators because most
viral infections result in the generation of replication-competent and
replication-deficient virions in vivo.

PMID: 11133491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Immunity. 2000 Nov;13(5):643-55.

CD8(+) T cell-mediated skin disease in mice lacking IRF-2, the transcriptional
attenuator of interferon-alpha/beta signaling.

Hida S(1), Ogasawara K, Sato K, Abe M, Takayanagi H, Yokochi T, Sato T, Hirose S,
Shirai T, Taki S, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The balanced action of cytokines is known to be critical for the maintenance of
homeostatic immune responses. Here, we report the development of an inflammatory 
skin disease involving CD8(+) T cells, in mice lacking the transcription factor, 
interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2). CD8(+) T cells exhibit in vitro
hyper-responsiveness to antigen stimulation, accompanied with a notable
upregulation of the expression of genes induced by interferon-alpha/beta
(IFN-alpha/beta). Furthermore, both disease development and CD8(+) T cell
abnormality are suppressed by the introduction of nullizygosity to the genes that
positively regulate the IFN-alpha/beta signaling pathway. IRF-2 may represent a
unique negative regulator, attenuating IFN-alpha/beta-induced gene transcription,
which is necessary for balancing the beneficial and harmful effects of
IFN-alpha/beta signaling in the immune system.

PMID: 11114377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell. 2000 Oct;6(4):931-7.

Gene repression by coactivator repulsion.

Senger K(1), Merika M, Agalioti T, Yie J, Escalante CR, Chen G, Aggarwal AK,
Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, New York 10032, USA.

We show that the IRF-2 oncoprotein represses virus-induced IFN-beta gene
transcription via a novel mechanism. Virus infection induces recruitment of IRF-2
to some of the endogenous IFN-beta enhancers as part of the enhanceosome.
Enhanceosomes bearing IRF-2 cannot activate transcription, due to the presence of
a domain in IRF-2 that prevents enhanceosome-dependent recruitment of the CBP-Pol
II holoenzyme complex. As a consequence, IRF-2 incorporation into enhanceosomes
restricts the number of IFN-beta promoters directing transcription. Remarkably,
deletion of the IRF-2 gene increases IFN-beta expression by expanding the number 
of cells capable of inducing IFN-beta gene transcription in response to virus
infection.

PMID: 11090630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Nov 1;28(21):4219-24.

Cloning of an interferon regulatory factor 2 isoform with different regulatory
ability.

Koenig Merediz SA(1), Schmidt M, Hoppe GJ, Alfken J, Meraro D, Levi BZ, Neubauer 
A, Wittig B.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Molekularbiologie, Biochemie und Bioinformatik, Fachbereich
Humanmedizin, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Interferons (IFNs) are a family of multifunctional proteins involved in immune
activation, regulation of cell growth and antiviral response. They exert their
functions by induction of several IFN-stimulated genes, including IFN regulatory 
factors (IRFs), a family of transcriptional regulators. One of these factors,
IRF-2, was initially cloned as an antagonistic counterpart to IRF-1 with
oncogenic potential. Here we describe a second isoform of IRF-2, termed IRF-2s,
cloned from human and murine cells. This isoform lacks two amino acids located
C-terminal of the DNA-binding domain, which is conserved in all IRF family
members, leading to a change in the predicted secondary structure. Both isoforms 
have similar binding affinities to known target sequences in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. Using reporter gene constructs with the type IV promoter
region of the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA), which is the essential factor 
for IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II expression, we show that the short isoform
IRF-2s exhibits a weaker activation ability compared to IRF-2. Thus, our data
present the first evidence of two IRF-2 isoforms with different regulatory
ability.

PMCID: PMC113119
PMID: 11058120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Cell Physiol. 2000 Nov;185(2):269-79.

Molecular characterization of celtix-1, a bromodomain protein interacting with
the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 2.

Staal A(1), Enserink JM, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

Transcriptional control at the G1/S-phase transition of the cell cycle requires
functional interactions of multimeric promoter regulatory complexes that contain 
DNA binding proteins, transcriptional cofactors, and/or chromatin modifying
enzymes. Transcriptional regulation of the human histone H4/n gene (FO108) is
mediated by Interferon Regulatory Factor-2 (IRF-2), as well as other histone gene
promoter factors. To identify proteins that interact with cell-cycle regulatory
factors, we performed yeast two-hybrid analysis with IRF-2 and identified a novel
human protein termed Celtix-1 which binds to IRF-2. Celtix-1 contains several
phylogenetically conserved domains, including a bromodomain, which is found in a 
number of transcriptional cofactors. Using a panel of IRF-2 deletion mutants in
yeast two-hybrid assays, we established that Celtix-1 contacts the C-terminus of 
IRF-2. Celtix-1 directly interacts with IRF-2 based on binding studies with
glutathione S-transferase (GST)/IRF-2 fusion proteins, and immunofluorescence
studies suggest that Celtix-1 and IRF-2 associate in situ. Celtix-1 is
distributed throughout the nucleus in a heterodisperse pattern. A subset of
Celtix-1 colocalizes with the hyperacetylated forms of histones H3 and H4, as
well as with the hyperphosphorylated, transcriptionally active form of RNA
polymerase II. We conclude that the bromodomain protein Celtix-1 is a novel IRF-2
interacting protein that associates with transcriptionally active chromatin in
situ.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11025449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Cancer. 2000 Sep 15;87(6):803-8.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 point mutations in human pancreatic tumors.

Xi H(1), Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-2, a member of the IRF family, is a
transcription factor involved in the regulation of various interferon and
virus-stimulated genes and other genes. For example, IRF-2 is an activator of the
interferon (IFN)-gamma-inducible MHC class II transactivator (CIITA) type IV
promoter. It cooperates with IRF-1 in the activation of the CIITA type IV
promoter and can co-occupy the IRF-E of the promoter with IRF-1. In a previous
study, we identified an inactivating point mutation in the DNA binding domain of 
IRF-2 expressed in a human pancreatic tumor cell line that does not express CIITA
or MHC class II in response to IFN-gamma. To further assess the potential impact 
of IRF-2 mutations in tumorigenesis, we screened fresh pancreatic tumor explants 
and identified 2 IRF-2 point mutations in the 2 alleles of IRF-2 from a single
tumor specimen. Both mutations occurred in the DNA binding domain of IRF-2. DNA
binding assays demonstrated that the IRF-2 point mutations impaired IRF-2 DNA
binding. The transactivation function of the mutant IRF-2s was similarly
impaired. This is the first report of IRF-2 mutations in human tumor explants.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10956389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Ann Oncol. 2000 Jun;11(6):707-14.

The interferon-alpha regulation of interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and
IRF-2 has therapeutic implications in carcinoid tumors.

Zhou Y(1), Wang S, Gobl A, Oberg K.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Oncology Unit of Internal Medicine, Uppsala University Hospital,
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) has been demonstrated to
possess antiproliferative and tumor suppressor functions, on the contrary. IRF-2 
has been suggested to induce oncogenetic effect in some cell lines, but not
evaluated in tumor patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 35 carcinoid tumor patients, expressions of IRF-1 and
IRF-2 were investigated by immunohistochemistry and their values were analyzed
with clinical treatment response. In carcinoid tumor cell line, Bonl, effects of 
IFN-alpha on the expression of both IRF-1 and IRF-2 mRNAs and proteins were
determined by Northern blot, RNase protection assays and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: IFN-alpha up-regulated the expression of IRF-1 and IRF-2 both in vivo
and in vitro. In carcinoid tumors, IFN-alpha treatment led to a significant
increase in the expression of IRF-1 (P < 0.001) and IRF-2 (P < 0.001). Moreover, 
the IRFs induction was correlated with the clinical response of IFN-alpha
treatment, although their baseline values were not predictive. In addition,
expressions of IRF-1 and IRF-2 were significantly correlated with the p68 kinase 
expression (P = 0.032 and P = 0.0176, respectively) and the expression of IRF-1
protein was positively correlated with that of IRF-2 (r = 0.671, P = 0.0001)
tested in the same specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF-1 as well as IRF-2 have therapeutic implications in carcinoid
tumors during treatment with interferon-alpha and IRFs induction might be used as
indicators of response to treatment with interferon-alpha.

PMID: 10942060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Exp Med. 2000 Aug 7;192(3):325-36.

Deficiency in the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-2 leads
to severely compromised development of natural killer and T helper type 1 cells.

Lohoff M(1), Duncan GS, Ferrick D, Mittrücker HW, Bischof S, Prechtl S,
Röllinghoff M, Schmitt E, Pahl A, Mak TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie und Immunologie, Universität Erlangen,
91054 Erlangen, Germany.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)-2 was originally described as an
antagonist of IRF-1-mediated transcriptional regulation of IFN-inducible genes.
IRF-1(-/)- mice exhibit defective T helper type 1 (Th1) cell differentiation. We 
have used experimental leishmaniasis to show that, like IRF-1(-/)- mice,
IRF-2(-/)- mice are susceptible to Leishmania major infection due to a defect in 
Th1 differentiation. Natural killer (NK) cell development is compromised in both 
IRF-1(-/)- and IRF-2(-/)- mice, but the underlying mechanism differs. NK (but not
NK(+) T) cell numbers are decreased in IRF-2(-/)- mice, and the NK cells that are
present are immature in phenotype. Therefore, like IRF-1, IRF-2 is required for
normal generation of Th1 responses and for NK cell development in vivo. In this
particular circumstance the absence of IRF-2 cannot be compensated for by the
presence of IRF-1 alone. Mechanistically, IRF-2 may act as a functional agonist
rather than antagonist of IRF-1 for some, but not all, IFN-stimulated regulatory 
element (ISRE)-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC2193225
PMID: 10934221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jun;45(9 Suppl):1551-9.

[Functional role of IRF--family transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Japan. nobtanak@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

PMID: 10879133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Antiviral Res. 2000 Jun;46(3):207-13.

Loss of interferon alpha and interferon tau-induced antiviral protection in
interferon regulatory factor-2 DNA-binding domain dominant negative mutants.

Rubinstein YR(1), Pontzer CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland,
College Park 20742, USA.

The role of the interferon regulatory factory (IRF) family of transcription
factors in regulation of interferon alpha and interferon tau antiviral activity
was investigated using a dominant negative mutant of IRF-2. The IRF-2 DNA binding
domain (DBD), without the C-terminal regulatory region, was stably transfected
into myeloid U937 cells. Expression of the IRF-2 DBD resulted in an increase in
constitutive 2'5' oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) levels, indicative of an active
repressive mechanism, but was not sufficient to protect cells from challenge with
vesicular stomatitis virus. Treatment of the DBD clones with interferons alpha A 
and tau failed to upregulate 2'5' OAS expression and did not elicit an antiviral 
response. While interferon alpha A was more sensitive than interferon tau to the 
inhibitory effects of the IRF-2 DBD, IRF-mediated gene induction is involved in
successful interferon alpha and tau-induced anti-VSV activity.

PMID: 10867158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Immunol. 2000 Jul 1;165(1):271-9.

An IFN-gamma-inducible transcription factor, IFN consensus sequence binding
protein (ICSBP), stimulates IL-12 p40 expression in macrophages.

Wang IM(1), Contursi C, Masumi A, Ma X, Trinchieri G, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IL-12 is a cytokine that links innate and adaptive immunity. Its subunit p40 is
induced in macrophages following IFN-gamma/LPS stimulation. Here we studied the
role for IFN consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP), an
IFN-gamma/LPS-inducible transcription factor of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF)
family in IL-12 p40 transcription. Macrophage-like cells established from
ICSBP-/- mice did not induce IL-12 p40 transcripts, nor stimulated IL-12 p40
promoter activity after IFN-gamma/LPS stimulation, although induction of other
inducible genes was normal in these cells. Transfection of ICSBP led to a marked 
induction of both human and mouse IL-12 p40 promoter activities in ICSBP+/+ and
ICSBP-/- cells, even in the absence of IFN-gamma/LPS stimulation. Whereas IRF-1
alone was without effect, synergistic enhancement of promoter activity was
observed following cotransfection of ICSBP and IRF-1. Deletion analysis of the
human promoter indicated that the Ets site, known to be important for activation 
by IFN-gamma/LPS, also plays a role in the ICSBP activation of IL-12 p40. A DNA
affinity binding assay revealed that endogenous ICSBP is recruited to the Ets
site through protein-protein interaction. Last, transfection of ISCBP alone led
to induction of the endogenous IL-12 p40 mRNA in the absence of IFN-gamma and
LPS. Taken together, our results show that ICSBP induced by IFN-gamma/LPS, acts
as a principal activator of IL-12p40 transcription in macrophages.

PMID: 10861061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Exp Med. 2000 Jun 19;191(12):2131-44.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 regulate interferon
gamma-dependent cyclooxygenase 2 expression.

Blanco JC(1), Contursi C, Salkowski CA, DeWitt DL, Ozato K, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

Cyclooxygenases (Cox) are rate-limiting enzymes that initiate the conversion of
arachidonic acid to prostanoids. Cox-2 is the inducible isoform that is
upregulated by proinflammatory agents, initiating many prostanoid-mediated
pathological aspects of inflammation. In this study, we demonstrate that
interferon (IFN)-gamma alone or in synergy with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or
interleukin 1alpha induces Cox-2 expression in mouse peritoneal macrophages,
which is paralleled by changes in Cox-2 protein levels and prostaglandin E(2)
(PGE(2)) release. Induction of Cox-2 was abrogated in macrophages that lack IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)-1, consistent with an attenuated hepatic mRNA response in
IRF-1(-/-) mice injected with LPS. Conversely, the absence of IRF-2 in
macrophages resulted in a significant increase in both basal and inducible Cox-2 
gene and protein expression as well as IFN-gamma-stimulated PGE(2) release,
identifying IRF-2 as negative regulator of this promoter. Two IFN stimulation
response elements were identified in the mouse Cox-2 promoter that were highly
conserved in the human Cox-2 gene. Both bind endogenous IRF-1 and IRF-2 and
regulate transcription in an IRF-1/2-dependent manner. Our data demonstrate
conclusively the importance of IFN-gamma as a direct activator and coactivator of
the Cox-2 gene, and the central role of IRF-1/2 family members in this process.

PMCID: PMC2193204
PMID: 10859338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000 Jul;44(7):1869-73.

Correlation between pretreatment levels of interferon response genes and clinical
responses to an immune response modifier (Imiquimod) in genital warts.

Arany I(1), Tyring SK, Brysk MM, Stanley MA, Tomai MA, Miller RL, Smith MH,
McDermott DJ, Slade HB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. iarany@utmb.edu

Imiquimod (IQ) has been successfully used in treatment of genital warts. In
clinical settings, patients responded well but wart reduction rates varied. Our
aim was to find a correlation between clinical responses and pretreatment
(constitutive) levels of genes that might be involved in the molecular action of 
IQ. Since IQ is a cytokine inducer, we analyzed levels of expression of genes of 
the JAK/STAT signaling pathway and their inhibitors as well as interferon
response factors (IRFs) in pretreatment biopsy specimens from complete responders
(99 to 100% wart reduction rate) versus incomplete responders (75 to 92% wart
reduction rate) by reverse transcription-PCR. We found that mRNA levels of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and IRF1 were higher in
complete responders than in incomplete responders. Incomplete responders
expressed larger amounts of STAT3, IRF2, and protein inhibitor of activated STAT1
(PIAS1) mRNAs compared to complete responders before IQ treatment. We hypothesize
that high-level expression of STAT1 and IRF1 is advantageous for a better IQ
response. The observed differences in constitutive mRNA levels of these genes may
be the consequence of alterations in cellular differentiation and/or variable
expression of endogenous interferons. Previous in vitro studies showed that
keratinocyte differentiation coordinates the balance between positive and
negative signals along the JAK/STAT pathway by regulating the IRF1:IRF2 and
STAT1:PIAS1 ratios and thus affecting induction of IQ-inducible genes.
Specifically, differentiation supports constitutive expression of STAT1 and IRF1 
mRNAs but not expression of IRF2 and PIAS1. Our data are in good agreement with
studies that showed the importance of STAT1 in cytokine induction and activation 
of interferon-responsive genes by IQ.

PMCID: PMC89977
PMID: 10858346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4814-25.

Assembly of a functional beta interferon enhanceosome is dependent on ATF-2-c-jun
heterodimer orientation.

Falvo JV(1), Parekh BS, Lin CH, Fraenkel E, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Heterodimeric transcription factors, including the basic region-leucine zipper
(bZIP) protein ATF-2-c-jun, are well-characterized components of an enhanceosome 
that mediates virus induction of the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene. Here 
we report that within the IFN-beta enhanceosome the ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer binds
in a specific orientation, which is required for assembly of a complex between
ATF-2-c-jun and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). We demonstrate that
correct orientation of the ATF-2-c-jun binding site is required for virus
induction of the IFN-beta gene and for IRF-3-dependent activation of a composite 
ATF-2- c-jun-IRF site in the IFN-beta promoter. We also show that in vitro the
DNA-bound ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer adopts a fixed orientation upon the binding of 
IRF-3 at an adjacent site in the IFN-beta enhancer and that the DNA-binding
domain of IRF-3 is sufficient to mediate this effect. In addition, we show that
the DNA-binding domain of ATF-2 is necessary and sufficient for selective
protein-protein interactions with IRF-3. Strikingly, in vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments with IFN-beta reporter constructs reveal that
recruitment of IRF-3 to the IFN-beta promoter upon virus infection is dependent
on the orientation of the ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer binding site. These
observations demonstrate functional and physical cooperativity between the bZIP
and IRF transcription factor families and illustrate the critical role of
heterodimeric transcription factors in formation of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

PMCID: PMC85927
PMID: 10848607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Int J Mol Med. 2000 Jun;5(6):661-6.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 impairs the activation of the interferon
regulatory factor-1.

Perea SE(1), Massimi P, Banks L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Biology, Center for Biological Research, Cubanacan,
Havana 6996, Cuba.

We had previously observed that HPV-16 E7 disturbs the Guanylate Binding Protein 
(GBP)-ISRE reporter activation by IFN-gamma thus suggesting an alteration of the 
IRF-1 function. In this study we examined the mechanism by which E7 affects the
IFN-gamma signals driving the activation of gene transcription. Using 14/2 BRK
cells containing dexamethasone-inducible HPV-16 E7 gene, we observed a large
inhibition of the IRF-1 DNA binding activity upon E7 induction. Concomitantly,
there was no significant change in the levels of IRF-1, indicating that this was 
not due to reduced levels of IRF-1 expression. Likewise, in vitro translated E7
did not affect the IRF-1 DNA binding activity in nuclear extracts derived from
IFN-induced cells, thus indicating that the effects of E7 are upstream of IRF-1's
binding to its DNA recognition site. Finally, NFkappaB DNA binding activity was
also inhibited under conditional expression of E7. These data indicate that
HPV-16 E7 inhibits the IRF-1 and NFkappaB function and this could lead to the
impairment of the IFN response in HPV-infected cells. Furthermore, the findings
suggest that different events of the IFN inducible signal cascade seem to be
target for HPV-16 E7.

PMID: 10812019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Apr 10;256(1):248-56.

The interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2 bind to a segment of the human c-myb
first intron: possible role in the regulation of c-myb expression.

Manzella L(1), Gualdi R, Perrotti D, Nicolaides NC, Girlando G, Giuffrida MA,
Messina A, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Kimmel Cancer Institute, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Bluemle Life Sciences Building, 233 South 10th Street,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The preferential expression of the protooncogene c-myb in hematopoietic cells is 
in part regulated by a mechanism of transcriptional block in the first intron. By
electrophoresis mobility shift assays using probes corresponding to different
segments of the putative human c-myb intron 1 transcription pause region and
nuclear extracts from myeloid leukemia HL 60 and fibroblast WI 38 cells, we
detected a HL-60-specific DNA-protein complex with a 123-bp fragment containing
binding sites for the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) nuclear proteins.
Formation of the DNA-protein complex was abrogated by competition with an
oligomer containing the wild-type, but not the mutated, IRF binding site and the 
complex was specifically supershifted by the anti-IRF-1 or the anti-IRF-2
antibody. Moreover, in vitro translated IRF-1 or IRF-2 protein did interact with 
the 123-bp c-myb intron 1 fragment. Upon TPA-induced differentiation, c-myb
expression was readily down-modulated in parental HL 60 cells, but not in cells
transfected with an antisense IRF-1 plasmid. Moreover, chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase activity driven by a c-myb promoter containing the entire
intron 1 was suppressed upon IRF-1, but not IRF-2 expression. Together, these
results are consistent with the existence of a functional relationship between
IRF-1 and c-myb in which IRF-1 negatively regulates c-myb expression at the
transcriptional level by a mechanism that may depend on the interaction of IRF-1 
with a segment of the c-myb gene implicated in transcription pausing.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10739671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Immunol. 2000 Apr 1;164(7):3512-8.

The IFN regulatory factor family participates in regulation of Fas ligand gene
expression in T cells.

Chow WA(1), Fang JJ, Yee JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, 
CA 91010, USA. wchow@coh.org

TCR engagement leads to the transcriptional activation of cytokine genes and
activation-induced cell death. Activated T cells undergo apoptosis upon
expression and ligation of Fas ligand (FasL) to Fas/APO-1 (CD95) receptor. FasL
expression is under the transcriptional regulation of multiple factors. The
present study demonstrates that TCR-inducible FasL expression is also under the
direct influence of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) transcription factor family. 
Deletion and mutagenesis of a putative IRF-1 binding site in the FasL promoter
results in deficient expression of FasL. EMSAs demonstrate specific FasL promoter
binding by IRF-1 and IRF-2. Forced expression of either IRF-1 or IRF-2 leads to
FasL promoter activation in T cells and FasL expression in heterologous cells.
Finally, suppression of IRF-1 expression in T cells results in deficient
TCR-induced FasL expression. These results confirm that the IRF family
participates in the regulation of FasL gene expression.

PMID: 10725705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Oncogene. 2000 Mar 9;19(11):1411-8.

An IFN regulatory factor-2 DNA-binding domain dominant negative mutant exhibits
altered cell growth and gene expression.

Rubinstein YR(1), Driggers PH, Ogryzko VV, Thornton AM, Ozato K, Pontzer CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland,
College Park, Maryland, MD 20742, USA.

In order to study interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family mediation of cell
growth regulation, we established U937 cell lines stably transfected with a
truncated form of IRF-2 lacking the transcriptional repressor domain. The
truncated IRF-2 contained the DNA binding domain (DBD) and bound the ISRE.
Phenotypically, the IRF-2 DBD transfectants exhibited reduced cell growth,
altered morphology and increased cell death. Consistent with alterations in
growth characteristics, the IRF-2 DBD transfectants constitutively expressed
higher levels of the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p21WAF1/Cip1 than did
control clones. The level of p21WAF1/Cip1 expression was positively correlated
with the level of DBD expressed, as well as with the level of growth inhibition
in these clones. DBD expression also correlated with expression of other members 
of the growth regulatory complex, cyclin dependent kinase 2 and cyclin A, but not
proliferating cell nuclear antigen. These results imply active repression by
IRF-2 to keep p21WAF1/Cip1 transcriptionally silent.

PMID: 10723132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2000 Feb;20(2):205-15.

Early expression of IFN-alpha/beta and iNOS in the brains of Venezuelan equine
encephalitis virus-infected mice.

Schoneboom BA(1), Lee JS, Grieder FB.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of 
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799, USA.

To investigate the roles of type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) and other
mediators of innate immune responses (e.g., inducible nitric oxide synthase
[iNOS]) in early dissemination of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEE)
infection, we used mice with targeted deletions in either their
IFN-alpha/beta-receptor (IFNAR-1-/-) or interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2-/-)
genes. Following footpad infection, both IFNAR-1-/- and IRF-2-/- mice were more
susceptible than control mice to VEE. The IFNAR-1-/- mice also exhibit
accelerated VEE dissemination to serum, spleen, and brain, and compared with
control mice, they evidenced faster kinetics in the upregulation of
proinflammatory genes. In contrast, in IRF-2-/- mice, iNOS gene induction was
completely absent following peripheral virulent VEE infection. In evaluating the 
role of cells involved in iNOS production, primary microglial cell cultures were 
found to be highly permissive to VEE infection. Moreover, VEE infection increased
levels of nitric oxide (NO) in resting microglial cultures but decreased NO
production in IFN-gamma-stimulated microglia. Thus, these findings suggest that
reactive nitrogen species play an important contributory role in VEE
dissemination and survival of the host. Our results further suggest the necessity
for a carefully balanced host response that follows a middle course between
immunopathology and insufficient inflammatory response to VEE infection.

PMID: 10714557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2000 Feb;20(2):133-42.

Analysis of transcription factors regulating induction of indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase by IFN-gamma.

Du MX(1), Sotero-Esteva WD, Taylor MW.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of
Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington 47405, USA.

IFN-gamma treatment of the human carcinoma cell line ME180 causes cell death due 
to induction of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and resulting starvation for
tryptophan. A mutant cell line 3B6A derived from ME180 was resistant to IFN-gamma
because of loss of IDO activity. Cotransfecting an IDO promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (CAT) construct with IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) resulted 
in induction of CAT activity in both ME180 and 3B6A cells even in the absence of 
IFN-gamma. This induction was reduced by cotransfection with IRF-2. However,
IRF-1 was not able to restore IDO activity, suggesting a possible repressor site 
outside the IDO promoter region. Stat1alpha (p91) restored both CAT and IDO
activities in 3B6A cells following IFN-gamma treatment. 3B6A cells doubly treated
with IFN-gamma and IFN-alpha or IFN-beta restored IDO activity, although neither 
cytokine on its own could induce IDO. Western blot analysis showed that both
constitutive expression and induction of Stat1alpha by IFN-gamma were reduced in 
3B6A cells, and double treatment of IFN-gamma with IFN-alpha or IFN-beta restored
the expression level of Statla. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated
that Stat1 binds to the IFN-gamma-activated sequence (GAS) region in the IDO
promoter in ME180 cells following IFN-gamma treatment. Our results indicated that
the defect in 3B6A cells was reduced expression of Stat1alpha and that IRF-1,
NF-kappaB, and PKR were all involved to some extent in the induction of IDO
following IFN-gamma treatment.

PMID: 10714548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Leuk Lymphoma. 1999 Nov;35(5-6):507-11.

Expression of interferon regulatory factor 1 and 2 in hematopoietic cells of
children with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

Mild GC(1), Schmahl GE, Shayan P, Niemeyer CM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Freiburg, Germany.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) is a transcriptional activator in the
interferon system and acts as a tumor suppressor. The structurally related IRF-2 
represses the effects of IRF-1 by competitive binding to the same DNA sequence
elements. Changes in the relative balance between IRF-1 and IRF-2 lead to
dysregulation of cell growth and may play a role in the development of
neoplasias. The loss of functional IRF-1 has been observed in a number of
patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and leukemia, suggesting a
potentially critical role of IRF-1 in leukemogenesis. We studied the expression
of both transcription factors in peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM) cells
of children with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) using RT-PCR and
Southern blot hybridization. No significant difference between the expression
levels of IRF-1 and IRF-2 could be detected in PB and BM of patients with JMML
and normal donors. Although our results are preliminary they suggest that neither
the tumor suppressor gene IRF-1 nor the oncogene IRF-2 is involved in the
pathogenesis of JMML.

PMID: 10609788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Immunol. 1999 Dec 15;163(12):6468-78.

Protein-protein and DNA-protein interactions affect the activity of
lymphoid-specific IFN regulatory factors.

Meraro D(1), Hashmueli S, Koren B, Azriel A, Oumard A, Kirchhoff S, Hauser H,
Nagulapalli S, Atchison ML, Levi BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) constitute a family of transcription factors that
are involved in IFN signaling and the development and differentiation of the
immune system. Targeted gene disruption studies in mice assigned their primary
role to the immune system. Two lymphoid-specific IRF members, IFN consensus
sequence binding protein (ICSBP) and IRF-4, bind target DNA with greater
efficiency following interaction with two transcription factors, PU.1 and E47,
leading to transcriptional synergy. PU.1 and E47 are essential for proper
differentiation and maturation of lymphoid cells. In addition, ICSBP interacts
with two IRF members, IRF-1 and IRF-2, which also have central roles in the
regulation of cell-mediated immunity. Previously, we identified a region in
ICSBP, termed the IRF association domain (IAD), that is conserved in all IRFs
(excluding IRF-1 and IRF-2) and is essential for its interactions with other IRF 
proteins. Here we show that the IAD is an independent module used by ICSBP and
IRF-4 for protein-protein interactions. In addition, an IAD of IRF-2 (IAD2),
necessary for interaction with ICSBP, was identified and found to be conserved in
IRF-1. The IAD2 shares similar characteristics with the PEST domain that is
essential for the interaction of PU.1 with IRF-4. We also show that the ICSBP DNA
binding domain is indispensable for the formation of DNA binding heterocomplexes 
and transcriptional activity. Therefore, our results shed light on the molecular 
mechanisms that affect IRF activities in the immune system via discrete
functional domains.

PMID: 10586038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 3;274(49):35196-202.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 mediates the interferon-gamma induction of the
human immunoproteasome subunit multicatalytic endopeptidase complex-like 1.

Foss GS(1), Prydz H.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, P. O. Box 1125 Blindern,
N-0316 Oslo, Norway.

Proteasomes generate antigenic peptides from intracellular proteins for
presentation to the immune system by the major histocompatibility complex class I
molecules. The antiviral cytokine IFN-gamma alters the catalytic specificity of
proteasomes by inducing the synthesis of an alternative set of three
proteolytically active proteasome subunits. We have analyzed the mechanism of
IFN-gamma induction for the IFN-gamma-induced subunit multicatalytic
endopeptidase complex-like 1 (MECL1). The human MECL1 promoter contains two
interferon-stimulated response elements (ISREs), generally known to bind members 
of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family. The importance of these
elements for IFN-gamma induction of MECL1 was addressed by transfecting an
endothelial cell line with MECL1 promoter constructs. By deletions and mutations 
of the ISRE sequences, we demonstrated that both ISREs were needed for full
IFN-gamma induction of the reporter gene. The second (downstream) ISRE was
essential for both IFN-gamma-induced and basal transcriptional activity of the
promoter. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, anti-IRF-1 antibodies
supershifted an IFN-gamma-induced protein binding specifically to both ISRE
sequences, whereas IRF-2 bound the second ISRE before induction. Co-transfection 
of IRF-1 resulted in induced MECL1 promoter activity in the absence of IFN-gamma.
These data indicate that the IFN-gamma induction of human MECL1 is mediated by
IFN-gamma-induced IRF-1.

PMID: 10575004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 21;18(43):5889-903.

Co-occupancy of the interferon regulatory element of the class II transactivator 
(CIITA) type IV promoter by interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2.

Xi H(1), Eason DD, Ghosh D, Dovhey S, Wright KL, Blanck G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, Florida, FL 33612, USA.

Class II transactivator (CIITA) activates the expression of major
histocompatibility class II genes, which encode antigen-presenting molecules
recognized by the T-cell receptor of CD4+ T cells. IFN-gamma induced CIITA
transcription in many cell types is directed by the CIITA Type IV promoter. Here 
we report that the human CIITA Type IV promoter IRF-E binds IRF-1 and can be
activated by exogenous expression of IRF-1. Surprisingly, the CIITA Type IV
promoter IRF-E is also activated by IRF-2, another member of the IRF family that 
generally acts as a transcriptional repressor. In addition, we found that IRF-1
and IRF-2 synergistically activate the CIITA Type IV promoter. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays revealed that IRF-1 and IRF-2 can simultaneously occupy the
IRF-E of the CIITA Type IV promoter, suggesting a novel mechanism for the role of
these two proteins in promoter activation. Our results also indicate that IRF-1
and IRF-2 can cooperatively activate and co-occupy the IRF-E of the guanylate
binding protein (GBP) promoter. Finally, CIITA induction by IFN-gamma does not
occur in a pancreatic tumor cell line that expresses a mutated IRF-2,
representing the first IRF-2 mutation identified in a human tumor cell line.

PMID: 10557076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):1-14.

Interferon regulatory factors: the next generation.

Mamane Y(1), Heylbroeck C, Génin P, Algarté M, Servant MJ, LePage C, DeLuca C,
Kwon H, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Canada.

Interferons are a large family of multifunctional secreted proteins involved in
antiviral defense, cell growth regulation and immune activation. Viral infection 
induces transcription of multiple IFN genes, a response that is in part mediated 
by the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). The initially characterized members 
IRF-1 and IRF-2 are now part of a growing family of transcriptional regulators
that has expanded to nine members. The functions of the IRFs have also expanded
to include distinct roles in biological processes such as pathogen response,
cytokine signaling, cell growth regulation and hematopoietic development. The aim
of this review is to provide an update on the novel discoveries in the area of
IRF transcription factors and the important roles of the new generation of
IRFs--particularly IRF-3, IRF-4 and IRF-7.

PMID: 10524230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 23;18(39):5455-63.

Identification of the secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI) as a target
of IRF-1 regulation.

Nguyen H(1), Teskey L, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Sir Mortimer B Davis Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec
H3T 1E2, Canada.

Interferon Regulatory Factor (IRF)-1 is a multifunctional transcription factor,
involved in cell growth regulation, pathogen response and immune activation. To
identify novel gene targets that may contribute to IRF-1 mediated activities, RNA
fingerprinting was performed using NIH3T3 cells that inducibly express a hybrid
form of IRF-1 under tetracycline regulated control. Secretory leukocyte protease 
inhibitor (SLPI) - a regulator of inflammation and an inhibitor of the LPS
response - was identified as a gene repressed after doxycycline induced IRF-1
expression. Preliminary analysis of the human SLPI promoter identified an
ISRE-like site located within the -221 to -200 region to which IRF-1 binds and a 
second, putative IRF-1 binding site upstream of the TATA box. Furthermore,
co-transfection studies demonstrated that SLPI expression was inhibited by IRF-1 
co-expression. The identification of SLPI as a target of IRF-1 regulation reveals
a unique involvement of IRF-1 in repression of gene transcription and assigns a
novel role for IRF-1 in inflammation.

PMID: 10498899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Ann Surg Oncol. 1999 Sep;6(6):604-8.

Interferon regulatory factor-1 and -2 expression in human melanoma specimens.

Lowney JK(1), Boucher LD, Swanson PE, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

BACKGROUND: Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 are nuclear
transcription factors that respond to interferon-gamma. IRF-1 acts as the
effector arm of the interferon-gamma response in tumor cells, whereas IRF-2 binds
to the same DNA consensus sequence and opposes IRF-1 activity. This effect is
intact in human and murine tumor models, including melanomas; previous work in
our laboratory demonstrated the tumor-suppressing activity of IRF-1 expression in
in vivo models and the opposing effect of IRF-2. The expression of IRF-1 and -2
in human solid tumors had not been previously investigated.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, archival tissue specimens from 38
human melanomas were obtained and stained with polyclonal anti-IRF-1 and
anti-IRF-2 antibodies, using an avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex technique with
epitope retrieval.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine specimens showed granular cytoplasmic staining with the
anti-IRF-1 or anti-IRF-2 antibodies. IRF-1 staining was correlated with less
advanced disease. Superficial spreading and in situ lesions exhibited more
frequent IRF-1 staining, compared with nodular or metastatic disease. Only more
advanced lesions showed neither IRF-1 nor IRF-2 staining.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemical staining of archival tissue identified IRF-1 and
-2 in human melanomas; this had not been previously demonstrated. IRF-1 staining 
was correlated with the morphologic characteristics of less advanced disease.
Tumor-suppressing effects of IRF-1 may account for the less aggressive biologic
features of IRF-1-expressing melanomas, as we would predict from the experimental
data.

PMID: 10493631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. EMBO J. 1999 Sep 15;18(18):5028-41.

Crystal structure of an IRF-DNA complex reveals novel DNA recognition and
cooperative binding to a tandem repeat of core sequences.

Fujii Y(1), Shimizu T, Kusumoto M, Kyogoku Y, Taniguchi T, Hakoshima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Nara Institute of Science and Technology,
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, USA.

There has been growing interest in the role of the IRF (interferon regulatory
factor) family of transcription factors in the regulation of immune responses,
cytokine signaling, and oncogenesis. These members are characterized by their
well-conserved DNA binding domains at the N-terminal regions. Here we report the 
2.2 A resolution crystal structure of the DNA binding domain of one such family
member, IRF-2, bound to DNA. The structure reveals its recognition sequence,
AANNGAAA (here, recognized bases are underlined and in bold, and N indicates any 
base), and its cooperative binding to a tandem repeat of the GAAA core sequence
induced by DNA structure distortions. These facts explain well the diverse
binding properties of the IRF family members, which bind to both single and
tandemly repeated sequences. Furthermore, we also identified the
'helix-hairpin-strand motif' at the C terminus of the recognition helix as a
metal binding site that is commonly found in certain classes of DNA-interactive
proteins. Our results provide new insights into the structure and function of
this family of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1171574
PMID: 10487755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1999 Jul;19(7):723-9.

Enhancing in vivo tumorigenicity of B16 melanoma by overexpressing interferon
regulatory factor-2: resistance to endogenous IFN-gamma.

Yim JH(1), Wu SJ, Lowney JK, Vander Velde TL, Doherty GM.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine and Tumor Biology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Washington
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.

We investigated the role of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) as an
oncoprotein in vivo, opposing endogenous IFN-gamma suppression of tumor growth.
Using syngeneic IFN-gamma knockout mice, we show that endogenous IFN-gamma slows 
growth of the mouse melanoma cell line B16-F10 in immunocompetent mice,
suggesting that tumor cell resistance to IFN-gamma may lead to greater
tumorigenicity. IRF-2 is a nuclear transcription factor induced by IFN-gamma that
represses numerous IFN-inducible genes, including genes that regulate cell
growth, in opposition to the transcriptional activator IRF-1. B16-F10 has a
marked growth inhibitory response to IFN-gamma in vitro and has very little IRF-2
induction compared with other murine tumor cell lines. We engineered B16-F10
cells to stably overexpress murine IRF-2. In vitro, these transfected cells
showed a marked resistance to the growth-inhibitory effect of IFN-gamma. In
normal mice the IRF-2-transfected cells grew much faster than control tumors. In 
syngeneic IFN-gamma knockout mice, control cells grew at a rate similar to that
of IRF-2-transfected cells, implicating resistance to endogenous IFN-gamma as
playing the major role in enhanced growth of IRF-2-transfected tumors in intact
mice. These experiments demonstrate that (1) IRF-2 enhances B16 melanoma growth
and increases resistance to IFN-gamma in vitro, and (2) IRF-2 opposes the growth 
suppression mediated by endogenous IFN-gamma in vivo.

PMID: 10454342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7334-42.

Functional analysis of human herpesvirus 8-encoded viral interferon regulatory
factor 1 and its association with cellular interferon regulatory factors and
p300.

Burýsek L(1), Yeow WS, Lubyová B, Kellum M, Schafer SL, Huang YQ, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi sarcoma-associated virus (HHV-8/KSHV) contains, in
addition to genes required for viral replication, a unique set of nonstructural
genes which may be part of viral mimicry and contribute to viral replication and 
pathogenesis in vivo. Among these, HHV-8 encodes four open reading frames (ORFs) 
that showed homology to the transcription factors of the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family. The ORF K9, viral IRF 1 (vIRF-1), has been cloned, and it
was shown that, when overexpressed, it down modulates the interferon-mediated
transcriptional activation of the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG 15)
promoter, and the role of vIRF-1 in viral mimicry was implied. However, the
molecular mechanism of this effect has not been clarified. Here, we extend this
observation and show that vIRF-1 also downregulates the transcriptional activity 
of IFNA gene promoter in infected cells by interfering with the transactivating
activity of cellular IRFs, including IRF-1 and IRF-3. We further show that
ectopic expression of vIRF-1 in NIH 3T3 cells confers resistance to tumor
necrosis factor alpha-induced apoptosis. While vIRF-1 is unable to bind DNA with 
the same specificity as cellular IRFs, we demonstrate by in vitro binding assay
that it can associate with the family of cellular IRFs, such as IRF-1 and the
interferon consensus sequence binding protein. vIRF-1 interaction domain was
localized between amino acids (aa) 152 and 243. While no binding between the
full-size IRF-3 and vIRF-1 could be detected by the same assay, we show that
vIRF-1 also targets the carboxy-terminal region (aa 1623 to 2414) of the
transcriptional coactivator p300 which could also bind IRF-3 and IRF-1. These
results demonstrate that vIRF-1 can modulate the transcription of the IFNA genes 
by direct heterodimerization with members of the IRF family, as well as by
competitive binding with cellular transcription factors to the carboxy-terminal
region of p300.

PMCID: PMC104259
PMID: 10438822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 1;163(3):1529-36.

IL-12 is dysregulated in macrophages from IRF-1 and IRF-2 knockout mice.

Salkowski CA(1), Kopydlowski K, Blanco J, Cody MJ, McNally R, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Macrophages derived from IFN-regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 knockout (-/-)
and wild-type (+/+) mice were utilized to examine the role of these transcription
factors in the regulation of IL-12 mRNA and protein expression. Induction of
IL-12 p40 mRNA by LPS was markedly diminished in both IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-)
macrophages. In contrast, IRF-1(-/-), but not IRF-2(-/-), macrophages exhibited
impaired LPS-induced IL-12 p35 mRNA expression. The ability of IFN-gamma to
augment LPS-induced IL-12 p40 mRNA further when both stimuli were present
simultaneously was significantly diminished in both IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-)
macrophages, with the most profound impairment observed for IRF-1(-/-)
macrophages. Reductions in IL-12 mRNA expression after stimulation with LPS or
LPS plus IFN-gamma were accompanied by substantial reductions in IL-12 p40 and
IL-12 p70 protein in both IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-) macrophages. Priming
IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-) macrophages with IFN-gamma for 24 h before LPS
treatment partially restored impaired IL-12 mRNA and protein production in both
IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-) macrophages. Depressed IL-12 levels were paralleled by 
significant reductions in IFN-gamma mRNA expression in IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-) 
macrophages. These results indicate that both IRF-1 and IRF-2 are critical
transcription factors in the regulation of macrophage IL-12 and consequently
IFN-gamma production.

PMID: 10415056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jul;13(7):1197-206.

Cloning of interferon-stimulated gene 17: the promoter and nuclear proteins that 
regulate transcription.

Perry DJ(1), Austin KJ, Hansen TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Wyoming, Laramie 82071-3684, USA.

A member of the interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) family encodes a 17-kDa
ubiquitin homolog called ISG17 that is induced in the bovine uterine endometrium 
by interferon-tau (IFN-tau) during early pregnancy. The bovine (b) ISG17 cDNA
shares 30% identity with a tandem ubiquitin repeat and 70% identity with human
(h) ISG15. The present experiments were designed to sequence the bISG17 gene,
compare general structure with the hISG15 gene, and to identify transcription
factors that were induced by IFN-tau in bovine endometrial (BEND) cells. The
promoter of the bISG17 gene was similar to the hISG15 gene in placement of a
tandem IFN-stimulatory response element (ISRE) at position -90, but unique in the
presence of three additional ISREs at positions -123, -332, and -525. IFN-tau (25
nM) induced nuclear proteins in BEND cells that interacted with a tandem bISG17
ISRE in electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). IFN-regulatory factor-1
(IRF-1) bound to this ISRE based upon supershift EMSA using antiserum against
IRF-1. IFN-tau activated STAT-1 (signal transducer and activator of
transcription-1) and -2 by 0.5 h, and IRF-1 by 2 h in BEND cells. It is concluded
that the bISG17 gene is similar to the hISG15 gene, retains an ISRE that
interacts with IRF-1, and is possibly induced initially by the STATs and later by
IRF-1 in response to IFN-tau during early pregnancy.

PMID: 10406469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Biochem. 1999 Apr;194(1-2):79-91.

Epigenetic inhibition of lysyl oxidase transcription after transformation by ras 
oncogene.

Contente S(1), Kenyon K, Sriraman P, Subramanyan S, Friedman RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814-4799, USA.

Lysyl oxidase is an extracellular enzyme involved in connective tissue maturation
that also acts as a phenotypic suppressor of the ras oncogene. To understand how 
this suppressor is controlled, gene transcription was studied and the promoter
was characterized. Nuclear runoff transcription assays indicated that the
markedly reduced amounts of lysyl oxidase message detected after ras
transformation resulted from inhibition of lysyl oxidase transcription.
Interferon-mediated phenotypic reversion of ras transformed cells, in which the
ras oncogene continued to be expressed, was accompanied by the restoration of
lysyl oxidase transcription. Reporter gene assay of a transfected mouse lysyl
oxidase promoter indicated that it was active in the transformed background,
despite the silencing of the endogenous lysyl oxidase promoter. The detection of 
comparable amounts of mRNA for transcription factors IRF-1 and IRF-2 in normal
and ras-transformed cell lines suggests that the differential transcription of
lysyl oxidase was not due to regulation of IRFs. Lysyl oxidase promoter activity 
was localized to a 126 bp region that includes two consensus TATA boxes with
associated confirmed cap signals. Analysis of a human lysyl oxidase promoter
sequence indicated similar promoter elements and extensive sequence identity with
the mouse promoter. The binding of transcription factor AP2 to sites predicted in
the control region was confirmed by DNase footprinting. Lysyl oxidase
transcription was stimulated by dexamethasone treatment of cells, but this effect
could not be assigned within the approximately 3 kb region tested in reporter
gene constructs. The promoter activity of the lysyl oxidase reporter gene
construct was completely abolished by in vitro DNA methylation, suggesting that
the transcriptional suppression after transformation by the ras oncogene may
involve DNA methylation.

PMID: 10391127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 1999 May;57(3):283-90.

[Anti-viral proteins: from interferon alpha to its receptor].

[Article in French]

Chieux V(1), Hober D, Chehadeh W, Wattr P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de virologie, Institut Gernez-Rieux, Centre hospitalier et
universitaire, Lille.

The immune response against viral pathogens include specific and non specific
mechanisms. Cytokines are peptides which can play a role in the non specific
immunity. Type I interferons (IFNalpha/beta) are the most effective antiviral
cytokines. Interferons alpha are represented by a large familly of structurally
related genes while the IFNbeta is encoded by a single gene. Type I interferon
genes are located on the chromosome 9, and are segregated in a "modern" and an
"ancestral" group with distinctive effects onto the cells. Type I interferons
consist of 5 alpha helices, 4 of which are closely held together. Type I
interferons receptor is a member of the class II cytokine receptor familly. It is
a heterodimer composed of polypeptidic chains naimed IFNAR-1 and IFNAR-2. The
type I interferons inducers are viruses, inactivated viruses and certain
synthetic molecules. The molecular mechanisms of the induction of IFNbeta have
been extensively described whereas the factors that play a role in the regulation
of IFNalpha are not so well characterized. Two regulating domains located on the 
IFNbeta gene promotor are involved. The activation of these regulating domains
leads to adverse effects by interacting with two intracellular factors (IRF1 and 
IRF2). IRF1 enhances the synthesis of IFNbeta but other pathways may be involved 
as well. The different IFNalpha sub-types have not only synergistic but also
antagonistic effects. The synthesis of the different subtypes depends on cell
lines and IFNalpha inducers. The N terminal part of IFNalpha is a major
determinant in the diversity of the biological effects of IFNalpha sub-types
which probably involve changes of the conformation of the type I receptor
resulting from interactions between the receptor and its ligand. The type I
interferons confer resistance to viruses, especially by enhancing the synthesis
of intracellular antiviral proteins.

PMID: 10377478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Dev Biol. 1999 Jun 1;210(1):44-55.

Interferon regulatory transcription factors are constitutively expressed and
spatially regulated in the mouse lens.

Li W(1), Nagineni CN, Efiok B, Chepelinsky AB, Egwuagu CE.

Author information: 
(1)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland,
20892, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors
involved in regulation of cell growth and immunological responses. Nine IRFs have
been described and they are expressed in a variety of cells, except for ICSBP and
LSIRF/Pip, which are thought to be expressed exclusively in immune cells. Here,
we show that IRF-1, IRF-2, ICSBP, and LSIRF/Pip are constitutively expressed in
the mouse lens. These IRFs are present in both the cytoplasm and the nuclei of
lens cells. However, the nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins exhibit distinct
mobilities on SDS/PAGE. We further show that in the developing mouse lens, IRF-1 
and IRF-2 are expressed at high levels in differentiated lens fiber cells with
very low and barely detectable levels in undifferentiated lens epithelial cells. 
Although the level of ICSBP expression is very low in the normal mouse lens, in
transgenic mice with constitutive expression of interferon gamma in the lens, its
level is markedly elevated and ICSBP expression is detected exclusively in the
nuclei of undifferentiated lens cells. Taken together, our data suggest that
expression of IRF transcription factors is spatially regulated in the lens and
that distinct IRFs may contribute to differential gene regulation in the
epithelial and fiber compartments of the vertebrate lens.

PMID: 10364426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. FEBS Lett. 1999 May 7;450(3):263-7.

Defective binding of IRFs to the initiator element of
interleukin-1beta-converting enzyme (ICE) promoter in an interferon-resistant
Daudi subline.

Iwase S(1), Furukawa Y, Kikuchi J, Saito S, Nakamura M, Nakayama R,
Horiguchi-Yamada J, Yamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine (Aoto), Jikei University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

To investigate mechanisms of interferon (IFN) resistance, we have established an 
IFN-resistant Daudi subline (Daudi(res)), which is 1 X 10(4) times more resistant
to IFN-alpha than parental cells. Among the IFN-inducible genes examined, only
ICE mRNA expression was deficient in Daudi(res) cells. We then analyzed the
regulatory mechanisms of ICE transcription, and found that IFN-induced activation
of the ICE promoter was dependent on the binding of IRFs to its initiator (Inr)
element. Inr binding of IRFs was markedly diminished in Daudi(res) cells, and
forced expression of IRF-1 was able to activate the ICE promoter to the level of 
parental cells. These results suggest that IRFs and their target genes, as
represented by ICE in this study, are involved in IFN resistance.

PMID: 10359086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Virology. 1999 Apr 25;257(1):106-18.

Role of interferon and interferon regulatory factors in early protection against 
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus infection.

Grieder FB(1), Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland, 20814, USA. fgrieder@mxb.usuhs.mil

To investigate the role of type I interferon (IFN) and its regulatory transacting
proteins, interferon regulatory factors (IRF-1 and IRF-2), in early protection
against infection with virulent Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEE), we
utilized mice with targeted mutations in the IFN-alpha/beta receptor, IRF-1, or
IRF-2 genes. IFN-alpha/beta-receptor knockout mice are highly susceptible to
peripheral infection with virulent or attenuated VEE, resulting in their death
within 24 and 48 h, respectively. Treatment of normal macrophages with
anti-IFN-alpha/beta antibody prior to and during infection with molecularly
cloned virulent VEE resulted in increased VEE replication. However, treatment
with high doses of IFN or IFN-inducing agents failed to alter percentage
mortality or average survival times in mice challenged with a low dose of
virulent VEE. In IRF-1 and IRF-2 knockout mice (IRF-1(-/-) and IRF-2(-/-)), the
100% protection against virulent VEE that is conferred by attenuated VEE within
24 h in control C57BL/6 mice was completely absent in IRF-2(-/-) mice, whereas
50% of IRF-1(-/-) mice were protected. IRF-2(-/-) mice were deficient in clearing
VEE virus from the spleen and the brain compared to the heterozygous IRF-2(+/-)
knockout or C57BL/6 (+/+) mice. Furthermore, a distinct pattern of
histopathological changes was observed in brains of IRF-2(-/-) mice after VEE
exposure. Taken together, these findings imply that the altered immune response
in IRF-1 and IRF-2 knockout mice results in altered virus dissemination, altered 
virus clearance, and altered virus-induced pathology. Thus, type I interferon, as
well as IRF-1 and IRF-2, appears to play an important and necessary role in the
pathogenesis of, and protection against, VEE infection.

PMID: 10208925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Hum Virol. 1999 Jan-Feb;2(1):19-32.

Unique properties of a second human herpesvirus 8-encoded interferon regulatory
factor (vIRF-2).

Burysek L(1), Yeow WS, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (HHV-8/KSHV)
contains, in addition to genes required for viral replication, an unique set of
nonstructural genes which may be part of viral mimicry and contribute to viral
replication and pathogenesis in vivo. Among these, HHV-8 encodes four open
reading frames (ORFs) that show homology to the transcription factors of the
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family. In this study we demonstrate that one 
of these ORFs (vIRF-2) encodes a protein with mobility of 18 kd which has
distinct pattern of expression and properties from the cellular IRFs and the
previously characterized vIRF-1.
METHODS: We cloned vIRF-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and studied its
expression by Northern blot and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Biologic activities were tested by chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) assay in transiently transfected mammalian cells. We characterized its DNA 
binding specificity by electrophoretic mobility shift analysis (EMSA) and its
protein-protein interactions by in vitro pull-down assay.
RESULTS: Although low levels of vIRF-2 mRNAs can be detected in the
HHV-8-positive BCBL-1 tumor cell line, 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)
treatment does not stimulate expression of vIRF-2 gene together with primary
lytic cycle genes. Recombinant vIRF-2, which can form homodimers, does not bind
specifically to the oligodeoxynucleotide repeats corresponding to the
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), but it does bind to the NF-kappa B
binding site. The fusion protein generated from vIRF-2 and the RelA (p65)
activation domain stimulates transcriptional activity of HIV LTR, which contains 
two NF-kappa B sites, but does not stimulate the interferon-beta (IFNB) promoter,
which contains only one NF-kappa B site. Interaction between recombinant vIRF-2
and cellular IRFs such as IRF-1, IRF-2, and ICSBP was detected by in vitro
binding assay, but no interaction between IRF-3 and vIRF-2 was found. Interaction
of vIRF-2 with RelA (p65) and the carboxy-terminal part of p300 was also
observed. In a transient transfection assay, vIRF-2 inhibits the IRF-1- or
IRF-3-mediated transcriptional activation of interferon-alpha (IFNA) gene
promoter in infected cells and downmodulates RelA (p65)-stimulated activity of
HIV LTR.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that, by interacting with cellular
transcription factors and cofactors, vIRF-2 may modulate the expression of the
early inflammatory genes and potentially deregulate the immune system.

PMID: 10200596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Immunogenetics. 1999 Apr;49(4):287-94.

Role of the interferon-stimulated response element in HLA-B downregulation in
human melanoma cell lines.

Griffioen M(1), Ouwerkerk IJ, Harten V, Gobin SJ, van den Elsen PJ, Schrier PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, P. O. Box
9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Tumor cells are thought to escape immune surveillance from T cells by suppressing
expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules at their
cell surface. Human MHC class I molecules are encoded by three different loci
(HLA-A, -B, and -C). In primary human melanomas as well as melanoma cell lines,
HLA class I expression is frequently downregulated in a B locus-specific manner. 
To study the involvement of promoter elements in HLA-B locus-specific
downregulation, a series of reporter constructs containing 5'-flanking sequences 
of the HLA-A2 and -B7 genes were transfected into melanoma cell lines expressing 
high and low levels of HLA-B antigens. It is shown that enhancer A, which is
generally believed to be a potent enhancer in HLA class I gene transcription,
only weakly activates transcription in melanoma cell lines. In contrast, the
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), known to induce MHC class I
expression in response to IFNs, as well as a region comprising site
alpha/enhancer B significantly stimulate constitutive transcription of HLA class 
I genes. Although none of the promoter elements tested could be demonstrated to
mediate HLA-B locus-specific downregulation, high and low HLA-B melanoma cell
lines do differ in ISRE activity as well as in ISRE-binding nuclear factors. The 
finding that high and low HLA-B melanoma cell lines contain different
transcription factors binding to elements not actively involved in the process of
HLA-B locus abrogation suggests that these cell lines originate from distinct
types of melanocyte precursor cells expressing a different set of transcription
factors.

PMID: 10079292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Scand J Immunol. 1999 Feb;49(2):169-76.

Interleukin-4-mediated inhibition of nitric oxide production in
interferon-gamma-treated and virus-infected macrophages.

Paludan SR(1), Ellermann-Eriksen S, Lovmand J, Mogensen SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Aarhus,
Denmark.

Upon interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) stimulation, murine macrophages (Mphi) produce 
nitric oxide (NO) through expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS).
Interleukin (IL)-4 treatment, even delayed 12 h relative to IFN-gamma,
antagonized this induction, whereas infection with herpes simplex virus type 2
(HSV-2) or treatment with tumour necrosis factor-alpha exerted a synergistic
effect, which partly compensated for the antagonistic effect of IL-4. Neither
IL-4 nor HSV-2 affected the IFN-gamma-activated Jak-STAT (Janus kinase-signal
transducer and activator of transcription) pathway or altered the levels of
IFN-gamma-induced interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 expression, which is
STAT1-dependent and known to play a central role in IFN-gamma-mediated gene
induction. The effect of IL-4 was completely dependent on de novo protein
synthesis, indicating that a direct activation of latent inhibitors is not
sufficient to explain the inhibitory effect of IL-4. Furthermore, IL-4
substantially augmented the IFN-gamma-induced expression of IRF-2, which is known
to compete with IRF-1 for the DNA recognition site, ISRE (interferon-stimulated
response element). Our findings could indicate that IL-4 suppresses
IFN-gamma-stimulated iNOS transcription by elevating the level of IRF-2 which,
through competition, prevents IRF-1 from binding to ISRE in the iNOS promoter.
The virus-induced effects on iNOS and NO levels in IFN-gamma-stimulated Mphi do
not seem to involve the Jak/STAT pathway or a differential expression of IRF-1
and IRF-2.

PMID: 10075021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):1810-20.

The histone acetylase PCAF is a phorbol-ester-inducible coactivator of the IRF
family that confers enhanced interferon responsiveness.

Masumi A(1), Wang IM, Lefebvre B, Yang XJ, Nakatani Y, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-2753, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family bind to
the type I interferon (IFN)-responsive element (ISRE) and activate transcription 
from IFN-inducible genes. To identify cofactors that associate with IRF proteins,
DNA affinity binding assays were performed with nuclear extracts prepared from
tissue culture cells. The results demonstrated that the endogenous IRFs bound to 
the ISRE are complexed with the histone acetylases, PCAF, GCN5, and p300/CREB
binding protein and that histone acetylase activities are accumulated on the
IRF-ISRE complexes. By testing recombinant proteins, we show that PCAF directly
binds to some but not all members of the IRF family through distinct domains of
the two proteins. This interaction was functionally significant, since
transfection of PCAF strongly enhanced IRF-1- and IRF-2-dependent promoter
activities. Further studies showed that expression of PCAF and other histone
acetylases was markedly induced in U937 cells upon phorbol ester treatment, which
led to increased recruitment of PCAF to the IRF-ISRE complexes. Coinciding with
the induction of histone acetylases, phorbol ester markedly enhanced
IFN-alpha-stimulated gene expression in U937 cells. Supporting the role for PCAF 
in conferring IFN responsiveness, transfection of PCAF into U937 cells led to a
large increase in IFN-alpha-inducible promoter activity. These results
demonstrate that PCAF is a phorbol ester-inducible coactivator of the IRF
proteins which contributes to the establishment of type I IFN responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC83974
PMID: 10022868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Biochimie. 1998 Aug-Sep;80(8-9):641-50.

The role of interferon regulatory factors in the interferon system and cell
growth control.

Harada H(1), Taniguchi T, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Complex cellular responses are often coordinated by a genetic regulatory network 
in which a given transcription factor controls the expression of a diverse set of
target genes. Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 have originally been
identified as a transcriptional activator and repressor, respectively, of the
interferon-beta (IFN-beta) as well as of IFN-inducible genes. However, these
factors have since been shown to modulate not only the cellular response to IFNs,
but also cell growth, susceptibility to transformation by oncogenes, induction of
apoptosis, and development of the T cell immune response. Furthermore, the
evidence suggests that deletion and/or inactivation of the IRF-1 gene may be a
critical step in the development of some human hematopoietic neoplasms.
Subsequently, these factors have been shown to constitute a family of
transcription factors, termed the IRF-family. Recent studies indicate that other 
IRF family members also involve the regulation of the IFN system and cell
transformation. The IRF-family may be examples of transcription factors which can
selectively modulate several sets of genes depending on the cell type and/or
nature of the cellular stimuli, so as to evoke host defense mechanisms against
infection and oncogenesis.

PMID: 9865486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 1998;(22 Pt 3):183-6.

[Refractory anemia: the entity and recent findings].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimamoto T(1), Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical College.

PMID: 9851116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Br J Haematol. 1998 Nov;103(2):518-29.

Human myeloma cell apoptosis induced by interferon-alpha.

Otsuki T(1), Yamada O, Sakaguchi H, Tomokuni A, Wada H, Yawata Y, Ueki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Kawasaki Medical School, Okayama, Japan.

Although there have been reports regarding the clinical effectiveness of IFN
alpha in the treatment of myeloma patients during this decade, its biological
effects on human myeloma cells have still not been clarified. Recently, apoptosis
has been considered as one of the most important mechanisms in the programmed
cell death of malignant tumour cells induced by chemotherapeutic agents or
cytotoxic immunological defence in malignancy-carrying hosts. Among the several
pathways which function to induce apoptosis, Fas and the Fas ligand system have
been thought to play an important role in inducing tumour-cell apoptosis,
particularly in immunological prevention. In this study we investigated myeloma
cell apoptosis induced by IFN alpha using five human myeloma cell lines which
were established without any additional supplementation of IL-6. In addition, the
mRNA expression levels of apoptosis-related genes employing the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were also analysed with the
KMS-12-PE cell line, which was the most sensitive of the five cell lines in terms
of apoptosis induced by IFN alpha. Based on the results, it was determined that
IFN alpha induced myeloma cell apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner, but the
sensitivity to IFN alpha in the cell lines examined varied and one cell line
revealed growth stimulation by IFN alpha. In addition, the apoptosis induced by
IFN alpha did not seem to be mediated by the Fas/Fas ligand pathway. Finally, the
IL-6, IL-6R, IRF1 and IRF2 genes were up-regulated in KMS-12-PE cells cultured
with IFN alpha. Therefore these genes may play an important role during apoptosis
induced by IFN alpha.

PMID: 9827928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Int J Oncol. 1998 Dec;13(6):1207-16.

Interferon regulatory factor-1 gene abnormality and loss of growth inhibitory
effect of interferon-alpha in human hepatoma cell lines.

Tada S(1), Saito H, Tsunematsu S, Ebinuma H, Wakabayashi K, Masuda T, Ishii H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo
160, Japan.

The effect of IFN-alpha on the growth of 5 hepatoma cell lines and a normal
liver-derived cell line were examined. IFN dose-dependently inhibited the growth 
of cell lines except for HLE and PLC/PRF/5 in which the inhibition only occurred 
at a high concentration over 10,000 IU/ml. IFN-alpha induced the G1 arrest of
these cells according to upregulation of p21WAF-1 expression, which is induced in
PLC/PRF/5 and HLE only at a high IFN concentration. The receptor for IFN-alpha
was well expressed in all the cell lines. DNA rearrangement of IRF-1 was detected
in HLE and PLC/PRF/5 by Southern blotting, while IRF-2 gene was preserved.
IFN-induced gene expressions were compared between HCC-T, HCC-M and PLC/PRF/5.
RT-PCR demonstrated that the full-length IRF-1 and -2 mRNA was transcribed in all
cell lines, but the mRNA amount of former gene in PLC/PRF/5 was less than that in
HCC-T and HCC-M, about 1/10 by competitive RT-PCR. The sequence analysis of IRF-1
cDNA was performed and the full-length mRNA transcription was reconfirmed in
PLC/PRF/5, but no significant point mutation was detected. These results suggest 
that IFN-alpha inhibits hepatoma growth by increasing p21WAF-1 expression only
when the IRF-1 gene is preserved normally.

PMID: 9824633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Dec;177(3):453-64.

HiNF-D (CDP-cut/CDC2/cyclin A/pRB-complex) influences the timing of
IRF-2-dependent cell cycle activation of human histone H4 gene transcription at
the G1/S phase transition.

Aziz F(1), van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Cell cycle control of histone H4 gene transcription is mediated by the
multipartite promoter domain H4-Site II, which supports transcriptional
activation at the G1/S phase transition and modulates basal H4 gene
transcription. Proliferation-specific transcription is determined by the
integrated activities of three distinct promoter factors interacting with H4-Site
II: the interferon regulatory factor IRF-2 (synonymous with HiNF-M), HiNF-D (a
complex between the homeodomain protein CDP-cut and the cell cycle mediators
CDC2, cyclin A and pRB), as well as HiNF-P/H4TF-2. However, the contribution of
HiNF-D to the enhancement and/or suppression of H4 gene transcription at specific
cell cycle stages remains to be established. We used a panel of synchronized HeLa
S3 cell lines containing stably integrated H4 promoter/CAT reporter gene
constructs with mutations in H4-Site II. The temporal regulation of CAT mRNA
accumulation under the control of the H4 promoter was analyzed by RNase
protection analysis. Our main finding is that mutation of the HiNF-D/CDP-cut
binding site alters the timing of histone gene activation during the cell cycle. 
Furthermore, our data indicate that HiNF-P/H4TF-2 may functionally compensate for
HiNF-M/IRF-2 at Site II to regulate histone H4 gene transcription in HeLa S3
cervical carcinoma cells during early S phase. We postulate that HiNF-D
(CDP-cut/cyclin A/CDC2/pRB containing complex) promotes HiNF-M/IRF-2 (and/or
HiNF-P/H4TF-2) dependent histone H4 gene activation at the G1/S phase transition 
and attenuates H4 gene transcription at later cell cycle stages. The mechanistic 
division in the gene regulatory functions of the three H4-Site II binding
proteins may ensure that histone H4 gene expression is stringently coupled with
the onset of S phase in response to growth factor/cytokine-induced cell cycle
progression.

PMID: 9808153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Oct 23;1442(1):82-100.

Selective expression of specific histone H4 genes reflects distinctions in
transcription factor interactions with divergent H4 promoter elements.

van der Meijden CM(1), Vaughan PS, Staal A, Albig W, Doenecke D, Stein JL, Stein 
GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Expression of many histone H4 genes is stringently controlled during the cell
cycle to maintain a functional coupling of histone biosynthesis with DNA
replication. The histone H4 multigene family provides a paradigm for
understanding cell cycle control of gene transcription. All functional histone H4
gene copies are highly conserved in the mRNA coding region. However, the putative
promoter regions of these H4 genes are divergent. We analyzed three
representative mouse H4 genes to assess whether variation in H4 promoter
sequences has functional consequences for the relative level and temporal control
of expression of distinct H4 genes. Using S1 nuclease protection assays with
gene-specific probes and RNA from synchronized cells, we show that the mRNA level
of each H4 gene is temporally coupled to DNA synthesis. However, there are
differences in the relative mRNA levels of these three H4 gene copies in several 
cell types. Based on gel shift assays, nucleotide variations in the promoters of 
these H4 genes preclude or reduce binding of several histone gene transcription
factors, including IRF2, HiNF-D, SP-1 and/or YY1. Therefore, differential
regulation of H4 genes is directly attributable to evolutionary divergence in H4 
promoter organization which dictates the potential for regulatory interactions
with cognate H4 transcription factors. This regulatory flexibility in H4 promoter
organization may maximize options for transcriptional control of histone H4 gene 
expression in response to the onset of DNA synthesis and cell cycle progression
in a broad spectrum of cell types and developmental stages.

PMID: 9767124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Leuk Lymphoma. 1998 Jun;30(1-2):63-71.

Regulation of IRF and STAT gene expression by retinoic acid.

Matikainen S(1), Lehtonen A, Sareneva T, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
sampsa.matikainen@ktl.fi

Retinoic acid has antiproliferative and differentiative effects on many cell
types. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in ATRA (all-trans retinoic
acid) -dependent growth inhibition and cell differentiation are poorly
understood. On the other hand, several different cytokine specific transcription 
factors such as signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) and
interferon regulatory factors (IRF) are known to be instrumental in mediating
differentiative, growth regulatory and antiproliferative effects in cells. The
IRF family consists of six different proteins, of which IRF-1 has been
demonstrated to have antiproliferative and tumor suppressive functions. We have
shown that ATRA activates IRF-1 gene expression in several myeloid leukemia cell 
lines (HL-60, NB4, THP-1, U937), all of which respond to ATRA by growth
inhibition. In addition, during ATRA-induced myeloid differentiation, gene
expression of STAT1, STAT2, and p48 was upregulated. These proteins are involved 
in IFN-alpha specific signaling. ATRA-induced expression of IRF and/or STAT
transcription factors may be one of the molecular mechanisms mediating growth
inhibition by ATRA.

PMID: 9669677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Br J Cancer. 1998 Jun;77(12):2081-7.

Regulation of interferon responses in medulloblastoma cells by interferon
regulatory factor-1 and -2.

Park KC(1), Shimizu K, Hayakawa T, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Osaka University, Japan.

Transcriptional activator interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and repressor
IRF-2 are known to play a critical role in the regulation of interferon (IFN)
responses and oncogenesis in fibroblasts. Although these two factors are
expressed in many tissues, including the brain, the role of IRFs in the central
nervous system (CNS) has not been elucidated. We analysed a medulloblastoma cell 
line, ONS-76, as a CNS-derived model system and generated its derivatives, R1 and
R2 cells, which constitutively expressed each mouse IRF-1 and IRF-2 cDNA at high 
levels. By viral infection, R1 and R2 cells showed IFN-beta gene expression 3 h
earlier than the control ONS-76 (C-76) cells, with 2.46- and 2.24-fold increase
in IFN-beta production respectively. In the presence of cycloheximide, virally
induced IFN-beta gene expression of C-76 cells was suppressed, whereas R1 and R2 
cells produced IFN-beta 7.5- and 2.2-fold higher than C-76 cells respectively. On
the other hand, induction of IFN-inducible genes was enhanced in R1 cells but was
suppressed in R2 cells compared with C-76 cells. These results demonstrate that
IRF-1 and IRF-2 may play an important role in the regulation of IFN-beta and
IFN-inducible genes and that IRF-2 may have dual functions as an activator and
repressor in CNS-derived cells.

PMCID: PMC2150382
PMID: 9649118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):3796-802.

Cytomegalovirus activates interferon immediate-early response gene expression and
an interferon regulatory factor 3-containing interferon-stimulated response
element-binding complex.

Navarro L(1), Mowen K, Rodems S, Weaver B, Reich N, Spector D, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

Interferon establishes an antiviral state in numerous cell types through the
induction of a set of immediate-early response genes. Activation of these genes
is mediated by phosphorylation of latent transcription factors of the STAT
family. We found that infection of primary foreskin fibroblasts with human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) causes selective transcriptional activation of the
alpha/beta-interferon-responsive ISG54 gene. However, no activation or nuclear
translocation of STAT proteins was detected. Activation of ISG54 occurs
independent of protein synthesis but is prevented by protein tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Further analysis revealed that HCMV infection induced the DNA binding
of a novel complex, tentatively called cytomegalovirus-induced
interferon-stimulated response element binding factor (CIF). CIF is composed, at 
least in part, of the recently identified interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), 
but it does not contain the STAT1 and STAT2 proteins that participate in the
formation of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3. IRF3, which has previously been
shown to possess no intrinsic transcriptional activation potential, interacts
with the transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein, but not with p300, to 
form CIF. Activating interferon-stimulated genes without the need for prior
synthesis of interferons might provide the host cell with a potential shortcut in
the activation of its antiviral defense.

PMCID: PMC108963
PMID: 9632763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Virol. 1998 Jul;72(7):5433-40.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus viral interferon regulatory factor.

Li M(1), Lee H, Guo J, Neipel F, Fleckenstein B, Ozato K, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)New England Regional Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School,
Southborough, Massachusetts 01772, USA.

Interferons (IFNs) are a family of multifunctional cytokines with antiviral
activities. The K9 open reading frame of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus 
(KSHV) exhibits significant homology with cellular IFN regulatory factors (IRFs).
We have investigated the functional consequence of K9 expression in IFN-mediated 
signal transduction. Expression of K9 dramatically repressed transcriptional
activation induced by IFN-alpha, -beta, and -gamma. Further, it induced
transformation of NIH 3T3 cells, resulting in morphologic changes, focus
formation, and growth in reduced-serum conditions. The expression of antisense K9
in KSHV-infected BCBL-1 cells consistently increased IFN-mediated transcriptional
activation but drastically decreased the expression of certain KSHV genes. Thus, 
the K9 gene of KSHV encodes the first virus-encoded IRF (v-IRF) which functions
as a repressor for cellular IFN-mediated signal transduction. In addition, v-IRF 
likely plays an important role in regulating KSHV gene expression. These results 
suggest that KSHV employs an unique mechanism to antagonize IFN-mediated
antiviral activity by harboring a functional v-IRF.

PMCID: PMC110176
PMID: 9620998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1997 Dec;8(4):293-312.

The growing family of interferon regulatory factors.

Nguyen H(1), Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Interferons (IFN) exert their multiple biological effects through the induction
of expression of over 30 genes encoding proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory functions. Among the many IFN-inducible
proteins are the Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs), a family of transcription 
regulators, originally consisting of the well-characterized IRF-1 and IRF-2
proteins; the family has now expanded to over 10 members and is still growing.
The present review provides a detailed description of recently characterized IRF 
family members. Studies analyzing IRF-expressing cell lines and IRF knockout mice
reveal that each member of the IRF family exerts distinct roles in biological
processes such as pathogen response, cytokine signalling, cell growth regulation 
and hematopoietic development. Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which
the IRFs affect these important cellular events and IFN expression will
contribute to a greater understanding of events leading to various viral, immune 
and malignant disease states and will suggest novel strategies for antiviral and 
immune modulatory therapy.

PMID: 9620643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Structure. 1998 Apr 15;6(4):491-500.

Solution structure of the IRF-2 DNA-binding domain: a novel subgroup of the
winged helix-turn-helix family.

Furui J(1), Uegaki K, Yamazaki T, Shirakawa M, Swindells MB, Harada H, Taniguchi 
T, Kyogoku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 565, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The transcription of interferon (IFN) and IFN-inducible genes is
mainly regulated by the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of proteins,
which recognize a unique AAGTGA hexamer repeat motif in the regulatory region of 
IFN genes. A DNA-binding domain of approximately 100 amino acids has been
commonly found in the IRF family of proteins, but it has no sequence homology to 
known DNA-binding motifs. Elucidation of the structures of members of the IRF
family is therefore useful to the understanding of the regulation and evolution
of the immune system at the structural level.
RESULTS: The solution structure of the DNA-binding domain of interferon
regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) has been determined by NMR spectroscopy. It is
composed of a four-stranded antiparallel beta sheet and three alpha helices, and 
its global fold is similar to those of the winged helix-turn-helix (wHTH) family 
of proteins. A long loop (Pro37-Asp51) is found immediately before the HTH motif,
which is not found in other wHTH proteins. The NMR signals of residues in this
long loop, as well as the second helix of the HTH motif, are strongly affected
upon the addition of the hexamer repeat DNA, suggesting that these structural
elements participate in DNA recognition and binding.
CONCLUSIONS: The structural similarity of the DNA-binding domain of IRF-2 with
those of proteins in the wHTH family shows that the IRF proteins belong to the
wHTH family, even though there is no apparent sequence homology among proteins of
the two families. The sequential structure alignment program (SSAP) shows that
IRF-2 has a slightly different structure from typical wHTH proteins, mainly in
the orientation of helix 2. The IRF family of proteins should therefore be
categorized into a subfamily of the wHTH family. The evidence here implies that
the evolutional pathway of the IRF family is distinct from that of the other wHTH
proteins, in other words, the immune system diverged from an evolutional stem at 
an early stage.

PMID: 9562558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Mar 27;1402(2):139-50.

Lack of 2',5'-oligoadenylate-dependent RNase expression in the human hepatoma
cell line HepG2.

Tnani M(1), Bayard BA.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 5539 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université de
Montpellier II, France.

2',5'-adenylate oligonucleotide (2-5A)-dependent RNase and 2-5A-synthetase are
two enzymes of the 2-5A system strongly implicated in the basal control of RNA
decay of both interferon-treated and untreated cells. RNase is activated by a
2-5A produced by 2-5A-synthetase, both enzymes being overexpressed by type
I-interferon (alpha/beta). We described here for the first time a cell line
completely deficient in RNase and its mRNA, while p69 2-5A-synthetase was
normally interferon alpha/beta-induced. The complete absence of this RNase in
human hepatoma cells (HepG2) was shown using three different methods based on the
binding of a [32P]-labeled 2-5A probe of high specific activity to its binding
site. Negative Western blotting assay with a specific monoclonal antibody
correlated the previous findings. RNase-specific mRNA was not detectable even
after treatment of cells with 1000 units/ml of interferon alpha/beta. This is not
due to a mutation of the gene because an intronless genomic DNA sequence encoding
2-5A-binding site was cloned and expressed. It is likely that the expression of
2-5A-dependent RNase was impaired at the transcriptional level while having the
known IFN alpha/beta-transcriptional regulatory factors as revealed by induction 
of p69 2-5A-synthetase gene. This may account for a differential activation of
2-5A-dependent RNase and 2-5A-synthetase genes by type I-interferon, and suggests
that other members of regulatory transcription factors, different from IRF-1 and 
STAT proteins, may participate in two different interferon alpha/beta signaling
pathways.

PMID: 9561800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Cell Biol. 1998 Mar 9;140(5):1265-76.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 is a transcriptional activator in muscle where It 
regulates expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1.

Jesse TL(1), LaChance R, Iademarco MF, Dean DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Cell Biology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Previously, we have suggested that vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and
its integrin receptor alpha4beta1 mediate cell-cell interactions important for
skeletal myogenesis. Expression of the receptors subsequently subsides in muscle 
after birth. Here, we examine the mechanism regulating VCAM-1 gene expression in 
muscle. An enhancer located between the TATA box and the transcriptional start
site is responsible for VCAM-1 gene expression in muscle-this element is inactive
in endothelial cells where VCAM-1 expression is dependent on nuclear factor
kappaB sites and inflammatory cytokines. We identify interferon regulatory
factor-2 (IRF-2), a member of the interferon regulatory factor family, as the
enhancer-binding transcription factor and show that expression of IRF-2 parallels
that of VCAM-1 during mouse skeletal myogenesis. IRF-2 is not dependent upon
cytokines for expression or activity, and it has been shown to act as a repressor
in other nonmuscle cell types. We show that the basic repressor motif located
near the COOH-terminal of IRF-2 is not active in muscle cells, but instead an
acidic region in the center of the molecule functions as a transactivating
domain. Although IRF-2 and VCAM-1 expression diminishes on adult muscle fiber,
they are retained on myogenic stem cells (satellite cells). These satellite cells
proliferate and fuse to regenerate muscle fiber after injury or disease. We
present evidence that VCAM-1 on satellite cells mediates their interaction with
alpha4beta1(+) leukocytes that invade the muscle after injury or disease. We
propose that VCAM-1 on endothelium generally recruits leukocytes to muscle after 
injury, whereas subsequent interaction with VCAM-1 on regenerating muscle cells
focuses the invading leukocytes specifically to the sites of regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2132685
PMID: 9490737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Biol Rep. 1998 Jan;25(1):1-12.

The integrated activities of IRF-2 (HiNF-M), CDP/cut (HiNF-D) and H4TF-2 (HiNF-P)
regulate transcription of a cell cycle controlled human histone H4 gene:
mechanistic differences between distinct H4 genes.

Aziz F(1), van Wijnen AJ, Vaughan PS, Wu S, Shakoori AR, Lian JB, Soprano KJ,
Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Maximal transcription of a prototypical cell cycle controlled histone H4 gene
requires a proliferation-specific in vivo genomic protein/DNA interaction
element, Site II. Three sequence-specific transcription factors interact with
overlapping recognition motifs within Site II: interferon regulatory factor IRF-2
(HiNF-M), the putative H4 subtype-specific protein H4TF-2 (HiNF-P), and HiNF-D
which represents a complex of the homeodomain protein CDP/cut, CDC2, cyclin A and
pRB. However, natural sequence variation in the Site II sequences of different
human H4 genes abolishes binding of specific trans-acting factors; the functional
consequences of these variations have not been investigated. To address the
precise contribution of H4 promoter factors to the level of H4 gene
transcription, we performed a systematic mutational analysis of Site II
transcriptional motifs. These mutants were tested for ability to bind each of the
Site II cognate proteins, and subsequently evaluated for ability to confer H4
transcriptional activity using chimeric H4 promoter/CAT fusion constructs in
different cell types. We also analyzed the effect of over-expressing IRF-2 on CAT
reporter gene expression driven by mutant H4 promoters and assessed H4
transcriptional control in cells nullizygous for IRF-1 and IRF-2. Our results
show that the recognition sequence for IRF-2 (HiNF-M) is the dominant component
of Site II and modulates H4 gene transcription levels by 3 fold. However, the
overlapping recognition sequences for IRF-2 (HiNF-M), H4TF-2 (HiNF-P) and CDP/cut
(HiNF-D) together modulate H4 gene transcription levels by at least an order of
magnitude. Thus, maximal activation of H4 gene transcription during the cell
cycle in vivo requires the integrated activities of multiple transcription
factors at Site II. We postulate that the composite organization of Site II
supports responsiveness to multiple signalling pathways modulating the activities
of H4 gene transcription factors during the cell cycle. Variations in Site II
sequences among different H4 genes may accommodate differential regulation of H4 
gene expression in cells and tissues with unique phenotypic properties.

PMID: 9540062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 2;273(1):194-9.

Cell cycle regulation of histone H4 gene transcription requires the oncogenic
factor IRF-2.

Vaughan PS(1), van der Meijden CM, Aziz F, Harada H, Taniguchi T, van Wijnen AJ, 
Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Histone genes display a peak in transcription in early S phase and are ideal
models for cell cycle-regulated gene expression. We have previously shown that
the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2) can activate
histone H4 gene expression. In this report we establish that a mouse histone H4
gene and its human homolog lose stringent cell cycle control in synchronized
embryonic fibroblasts in which IRF-2 has been ablated. We also show that there
are reduced mRNA levels of this endogenous mouse histone H4 gene in the
IRF-2(-/-) cells. Strikingly, the overall mRNA level and cell cycle regulation of
histone H4 transcription are restored when IRF-2 is reintroduced to these cells. 
IRF-2 is a negative regulator of the interferon response and has oncogenic
potential, but little is known of the mechanism of these activities. Our results 
suggest that IRF-2 is an active player in E2F-independent cell cycle-regulated
gene expression at the G1/S phase transition. IRF-2 was previously considered a
passive antagonist to the tumor suppressor IRF-1 but can now join other oncogenic
factors such as c-Myb and E2F1 that are predicted to mediate their transforming
capabilities by actively regulating genes necessary for cell cycle progression.

PMID: 9417064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Blood. 1997 Dec 15;90(12):4749-58.

Inhibition of interferon regulatory factor-1 expression results in predominance
of cell growth stimulatory effects of interferon-gamma due to phosphorylation of 
Stat1 and Stat3.

Sato T(1), Selleri C, Young NS, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD,
USA.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) is a potent inhibitor of hematopoiesis in vitro and 
has been implicated in the pathophysiology of human bone marrow failure
syndromes. IFN-gamma both inhibits cell cycling and induces expression of the
Fas-receptor, resulting in subsequent apoptosis of hematopoietic progenitor
cells. IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) mediates some of these suppressive effects
by activation of downstream inducible genes, such as double-stranded
RNA-activatable protein kinase and inducible nitric oxide synthase. However,
under certain experimental conditions, IFN-gamma appears to stimulate
proliferation of hematopoietic cells. Based on the hypothesis that
IFN-gamma-receptor triggering may activate diverse signaling cascades, we
designed experiments to determine which intracellular mechanisms (in addition to 
the IRF-1 transduction pathway) influence the biologic effects of IFN-gamma.
Using antisense technique, we inhibited the IRF-1-mediated pathway in KG1a cells 
stimulated with IFN-gamma. In contrast to the suppressive effects of IFN-gamma
observed in control cells, untreated and IFN-gamma-treated KG-1a cells that were 
transduced with retroviral vectors expressing IRF-1 antisense mRNA showed
enhanced proliferation. The increased growth rate was associated with decreased
levels of IRF-1 mRNA and protein but unchanged levels of IRF-2. We inferred that 
IFN-gamma could also activate a stimulatory transduction pathway that, under
specific conditions, may control the cellular response to this cytokine. The
family of Stat proteins is involved in signal transduction of hematopoietic
growth factors. We showed that, in KG-1a cells, IFN-gamma also induced
phosphorylation of Stat1 and Stat3, whereas p42 MAP kinase was phosphorylated
regardless of the presence of IFN-gamma. Using electrophoresis mobility shift
assays, IFN-gamma enhanced Stat1-Stat1 homodimer and Stat1-Stat3 heterodimer
formation, suggesting that, in addition to inhibitory signals mediated by IRF-1, 
IFN-gamma may activate proliferative signals by phosphorylation of Stat1 and
Stat3 proteins. The observations made in experiments with KG-1a cells were
confirmed in primary hematopoietic cells. After inhibition of the IRF-1 pathway
by transduction of an antisense IRF-1 retrovirus into human CD34+ cells,
IFN-gamma produced an aberrant stimulatory effect on hematopoietic colony
formation. Conversely, in control vector-transduced CD34+ cells, the typical
inhibitory response to IFN-gamma was seen. Our results indicate that inhibitory
cytokines such as IFN-gamma may exhibit diverse biologic effects depending on the
intracellular balance of transcriptional regulators, in turn influenced by the
activation and differentiation status of the target cells.

PMID: 9389691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Cell Physiol. 1997 Nov;173(2):128-30.

Transcription factors IRF-1 and IRF-2: linking the immune responses and tumor
suppression.

Taniguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

PMID: 9365509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 1997 Sep;24(11):1471-6.

[Interferon].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Hematology and Oncology, Hiroshima University.

Interferon (IFN) has anti-cell-proliferative activities. Some of the
interferon-stimulated gene (ISGs) products have important roles for controlling
cell proliferation and cell differentiation. Candidates for that kind of ISGs
involve PKR, IRF-1, IRF-2, 2'5' OAS, RNaseL, and ICSBP. The PKR phosphorylate
eIF2 alpha that leads to blocking of protein synthesis, mediates signal
transduction via NF-kappa B and/or probably IRF-1, and is also involved in
apoptosis. IRF-1 leads to apoptosis to prevent malignant transformation when a
cell undergoes initial oncogene activation, and controls cell proliferation by
balancing with IRF-2. 2'5' OAS and RNaseL system also has possibilities to have
those roles. ICSBP, one of the IRF family, has new findings from the knock-out
mouse. The mouse developed a hematopoietic abnormality which looks very similar
to human chronic myelogenous leukemia, indicating ICSBP has important roles in
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells.

PMID: 9309144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Sep 15;66(4):512-23.

Cell cycle-dependent modifications in activities of pRb-related tumor suppressors
and proliferation-specific CDP/cut homeodomain factors in murine hematopoietic
progenitor cells.

van Wijnen AJ(1), Cooper C, Odgren P, Aziz F, De Luca A, Shakoori RA, Giordano A,
Quesenberry PJ, Lian JB, Stein GS, Stein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Biochem 1998 Aug 1;70(2):288.

The histone H4 gene promoter provides a paradigm for defining transcriptional
control operative at the G1/S phase transition point in the cell cycle.
Transcription of the cell cycle-dependent histone H4 gene is upregulated at the
onset of S phase, and the cell cycle control element that mediates this
activation has been functionally mapped to a proximal promoter domain designated 
Site II. Activity of Site II is regulated by an E2F-independent mechanism
involving binding of the oncoprotein IRF2 and the multisubunit protein HiNF-D,
which contains the homeodomain CDP/cut, CDC2, cyclin A, and the tumor suppressor 
pRb. To address mechanisms that define interactions of Site II regulatory factors
with this cell cycle control element, we have investigated these determinants of 
transcriptional regulation at the G1/S phase transition in FDC-P1 hematopoietic
progenitor cells. The representation and activities of histone gene regulatory
factors were examined as a function of FDC-P1 growth stimulation. We find
striking differences in expression of the pRb-related growth regulatory proteins 
(pRb/p105, pRb2/p130, and p107) following the onset of proliferation. pRb2/p130
is present at elevated levels in quiescent cells and declines following growth
stimulation. By contrast, pRb and p107 are minimally represented in quiescent
FDC-P1 cells but are upregulated at the G1/S phase transition point. We also
observe a dramatic upregulation of the cellular levels of pRb2/p130-associated
protein kinase activity when S phase is initiated. Selective interactions of pRb 
and p107 with CDP/cut are observed during the FDC-P1 cell cycle and suggest
functional linkage to competency for DNA binding and/or transcriptional activity.
These results are particularly significant in the context of hematopoietic
differentiation where stringent control of the cell cycle program is requisite
for expanding the stem cell population during development and tissue renewal.

PMID: 9282329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 29;272(35):22154-62.

Synergism between multiple virus-induced factor-binding elements involved in the 
differential expression of interferon A genes.

Bragança J(1), Génin P, Bandu MT, Darracq N, Vignal M, Cassé C, Doly J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Régulation de l'Expression des Gènes Eucaryotes, CNRS, UPR 37, 
UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, Paris V, 45 rue des 
Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Comparative transfection analysis of murine interferon A4 and interferon A11
promoter constructs transiently transfected in mouse L929 and human HeLa S3 cells
infected with Newcastle disease virus showed that the second positive regulatory 
domain I-like domain (D motif), located between nucleotides -57 and -46 upstream 
of the transcription start site, contributes to the activation of virus-induced
transcription of the interferon (IFN)-A4 gene promoter by cooperating with the
positive regulatory domain I-like and TG-like domains previously described.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay performed with the virus-inducible fragments
containing these motifs indicated that the binding activity that we have denoted 
as virus-induced factor (Génin, P., Bragança, J., Darracq, N., Doly, J., and
Civas, A. (1995) Nucleic Acids Res. 23, 5055-5063) is different from
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3. It binds to the D motif but not to the
virus-unresponsive form of the D motif disrupted by a G-57 --> C substitution. We
show that the low levels of IFN-A11 gene expression are caused essentially by the
lack of two inducible enhancer domains disrupted by the A-78 --> G and the G-57
--> C substitutions. These data suggest a model taking account of the
differential regulation of IFN-A gene family members. They also suggest that
virus-induced factor may correspond to the primary transcription factor directly 
activated by virus that is involved in the initiation of IFN-A gene
transcription.

PMID: 9268360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Aug 8;1333(1):M9-17.

IRF-1: the transcription factor linking the interferon response and oncogenesis.

Taniguchi T(1), Lamphier MS, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo Hongo,
Japan. tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

PMID: 9294015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Aug 1;66(2):175-83.

Phosphorylation of the oncogenic transcription factor interferon regulatory
factor 2 (IRF2) in vitro and in vivo.

Birnbaum MJ(1), van Zundert B, Vaughan PS, Whitmarsh AJ, van Wijnen AJ, Davis RJ,
Stein GS, Stein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts Medical
Center, Worcester 01655, USA.

IRF2 is a transcription factor, possessing oncogenic potential, responsible for
both the repression of growth-inhibiting genes (interferon) and the activation of
cell cycle-regulated genes (histone H4). Surprisingly little is known about the
post-translational modification of this factor. In this study, we analyze the
phosphorylation of IRF2 both in vivo and in vitro. Immunoprecipitation of
HA-tagged IRF2 expressed in 32P-phosphate labelled COS-7 cells demonstrates that 
IRF2 is phosphorylated in vivo. Amino acid sequence analysis reveals that several
potential phosphorylation sites exist for a variety of serine/threonine protein
kinases, including those of the mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase family.
Using a battery of these protein kinases we show that recombinant IRF2 is a
substrate for protein kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), and casein kinase
II (CK2) in vitro. However, other serine/threonine protein kinases, including the
MAP kinases JNK1, p38, and ERK2, do not phosphorylate IRF2. Two-dimensional
phosphopeptide mapping of the sites phosphorylated by PKA, PKC, and CKII in vitro
demonstrates that these enzymes are capable of phosphorylating IRF2 at multiple
distinct sites. Phosphoaminoacid analysis of HA-tagged IRF2 immunoprecipitated
from an asynchronous population of proliferating, metabolically
phosphate-labelled cells indicates that this protein is phosphorylated
exclusively upon serine residues in vivo. These results suggest that the
oncogenic protein IRF2 may be regulated via multiple pathways during cellular
growth.

PMID: 9213219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Immunology. 1997 Jul;91(3):340-5.

Interferon-regulatory factors during development of CD4 and CD8 thymocytes.

Simon AK(1), Desrois M, Schmitt-Verhulst AM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie, INSERM-CNRS de Marseille Luminy, France.

Selection events in the thymus occur at the double-positive CD4+ CD8+ (DP)
developmental stage leading either to further differentiation of the CD4+ and
CD8+ lineages or to deletion. The interferon-regulatory factor IRF-1 has been
implicated in signalling for T-cell death and also in CD8+ thymic
differentiation. IRF-1 is an activator and IRF-2 a repressor of gene
transcription regulated by type 1 interferons (IFN). To evaluate the role of
IRF-1 and IRF-2 in the differentiation of CD4 and CD8 thymocytes, we analysed
their DNA-binding activity before and after antigenic stimulation at different
stages of thymic development and in peripheral T cells. Unseparated,
double-positive and single-positive thymocytes as well as peripheral T
lymphocytes from mice transgenic (tg) for a T-cell receptor (TCR), restricted
either by major histocompatibility complex class I or class II, were stimulated
by their nominal antigen. Our results demonstrate that the DNA-binding activity
of IRF-2 and, weakly, that of IRF-1 are inducible in total thymocytes in response
to antigen. There is no induction of IRF-1/IRF-2 binding activity at the
double-positive stage of thymic development in the MHC class II-restricted model 
whereas in the MHC class I-restricted model IRF-1/IRF-2 activity is induced
weakly. At the single-positive stage, antigen induces the IRF-1/IRF-2 DNA binding
in both CD4+ and CD8+ thymocytes, but not in mature lymphocytes from the
periphery. This pattern of expression suggests that IRF-1/IRF-2 binding
activities resulting from antigen stimulation are developmentally regulated. No
evidence for a selective role of IRF-1 in the development of the CD8+ lineage was
found, however.

PMCID: PMC1364001
PMID: 9301521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Leukemia. 1997 Jul;11(7):933-9.

Expression of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) genes and response to
interferon-alpha in chronic myeloid leukaemia.

Hochhaus A(1), Yan XH, Willer A, Hehlmann R, Gordon MY, Goldman JM, Melo JV.

Author information: 
(1)LRF Centre for Adult Leukaemia, Department of Haematology, Royal Postgraduate 
Medical School, London, UK.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRF) 1 and 2 are DNA-binding proteins which
control interferon (IFN) gene expression. IRF1 functions as an activator for IFN 
and IFN-inducible genes, whereas IRF2 represses the action of IRF1. Expression of
the two regulatory genes is itself IFN-inducible. Because therapeutic responses
of chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) patients to IFN-alpha may be determined by
intracellular levels of these two mutually antagonistic transcription factors, we
have devised a competitive reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) assay which provides an estimate of the ratio of IRF1 to IRF2 expression
in a given cell population. Analysis of peripheral blood leucocytes from 25
normal individuals showed that the IRF1:IRF2 ratio varied between 1.13 and 2.30
(mean +/- s.d. 1.49 +/- 0.33). Similar values were obtained for normal bone
marrow specimens, with no significant difference between CD34+ and CD34- cells.
In contrast, the IRF1:IRF2 ratio in leucocytes from CML patients showed a much
wider variation (0.53-5.11). Eleven out of 130 patients in chronic phase had
ratios above the normal range, whereas none of the 33 blast crisis samples had a 
ratio >2.5. Analysis of diagnostic specimens in 59 CML patients treated
subsequently with IFN-alpha showed a high IRF1:IRF2 ratio of 5.11 in one of two
patients who became complete responders; all the 53 patients with minimal or no
cytogenetic response had ratios below 2.5. In a separate series of 97 CML
patients studied after IFN-alpha therapy a highly significant correlation was
found between the IRF1:IRF2 ratio and both the cytogenetic and the molecular
response (ie low concentration of BCR-ABL transcripts) to treatment: 53 out of
115 prospectively analysed samples of good cytogenetic responders had ratios
above 2.0, as opposed to only 13 out of 91 samples from poor responders (P <
0.0001; chi2 test). We conclude that a high ratio of IRF1/IRF2 expression may be 
associated with good cytogenetic and molecular response to IFN-alpha in CML.

PMID: 9204971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cytokine. 1997 Jun;9(6):383-93.

Susceptibility to virus infection is determined by a Stat-mediated response to
the autocrine effect of virus-induced type I interferon.

Improta T(1), Pine R.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham NC 27710, USA.

Interferon (IFN) signalling appears to be the predominant pathway that leads to
the development of the host defence against virus. However, other mechanisms that
are IFN independent may also be involved. The Stat1 transcription factor is
specific for the IFN pathway and plays a central role in mediating many, if not
all, IFN-dependent biological responses. Viral infection of cells in the presence
or absence of Stat1 was studied to examine the role of IFN-dependent and
independent antiviral mechanisms. A lower virus yield measured by plaque assays
was observed following challenge with VSV, EMCV and NDV of cells in which either 
Stat1a or Stat1b was present compared to those lacking both forms of the Stat
protein. The more efficient antiviral response was abolished when cells were
infected with virus in the presence of IFN-neutralizing antibodies, suggesting
that a Stat-dependent pathway is activated following virus infection by
endogenously produced IFN. Virus-induced Stat protein translocation from the
cytoplasmic compartment, detected within 3 h of infection, and Stat-dependent
transcriptional activation of ISGF2 in response to virus challenge, were also
abolished by neutralizing type I IFN. Thus, susceptibility to virus infection can
be determined by the cell's ability to respond to autocrine IFN through the
Stat-mediated pathway of gene induction.

PMID: 9199872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 2;272(18):11952-8.

Interferon regulatory factor-1 up-regulates angiotensin II type 2 receptor and
induces apoptosis.

Horiuchi M(1), Yamada T, Hayashida W, Dzau VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
mhoriuch@bustoff.bwh.harvard.edu

The expression of the angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor is developmentally and
growth regulated. In cultured R3T3 cells, expression of this receptor is markedly
induced at the confluent state and with serum deprivation. In this study we
demonstrated that the removal of serum from culture media resulted in the
induction of apoptosis in these cells and the addition of angiotensin II further 
enhanced apoptosis. We have previously identified an interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) binding motif in the mouse AT2 receptor gene promoter region. In this
report, we observed that serum removal increased IRF-1 expression, with a rapid
and transient decrease of IRF-2. To prove that the changes in IRFs after serum
removal mediated apoptosis and up-regulated AT2 receptor, we transfected
antisense oligonucleotides for IRF-1 or IRF-2 into R3T3 cells and observed that
IRF-1 antisense oligonucleotide attenuated apoptosis and abolished the
up-regulation of AT2 receptor. IRF-2 antisense oligonucleotide pretreatment did
not affect the onset of apoptosis after serum removal; instead, it increased AT2 
receptor binding and enhanced angiotensin II-mediated apoptosis. Taken together, 
these results suggest that increased IRF-1 after serum starvation contributes to 
the induction of apoptosis and that increased IRF-1 up-regulates the AT2 receptor
expression after serum starvation, resulting in enhanced angiotensin II-mediated 
apoptosis.

PMID: 9115258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Mol Med (Berl). 1997 May;75(5):348-59.

Interferon regulatory factors: growth control and histone gene regulation--it's
not just interferon anymore.

Vaughan PS(1), van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Interferon-regulatory factors (IRFs) are a related family of proteins originally 
identified by their ability to bind a DNA sequence found in the beta-interferon
gene and many interferon-stimulated genes. Two well-studied members of this
family, IRF-1 and IRF-2, have antagonistic roles in interferon-beta gene
regulation: IRF-1 activates this gene, and IRF-2 represses the activation by
IRF-1, IRF-1 and IRF-2 have more recently been linked to growth control by
displaying tumor suppressor and oncogenic activities, respectively. A possible
explanation for the oncogenic activity of IRF-2 is the discovery that IRF-2 can
activate a histone gene that is functionally coupled to cell cycle progression.
This first report of native IRF-2 playing the role of activator of a gene
essential for growth may lead to the discovery of a more general involvement of
interferon regulatory factors in mediating growth control.

PMID: 9181476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 11;272(15):9785-92.

Phosphorylation events modulate the ability of interferon consensus sequence
binding protein to interact with interferon regulatory factors and to bind DNA.

Sharf R(1), Meraro D, Azriel A, Thornton AM, Ozato K, Petricoin EF, Larner AC,
Schaper F, Hauser H, Levi BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Technion, Haifa 32000,
Israel.

Two families of transcription factors mediate interferon (IFN) signaling. The
first family, signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs), is
activated within minutes of IFN treatment. Specific phosphorylation events lead
to their translocation to the nucleus, formation of transcriptional complexes,
and the induction of the second family of transcription factors termed interferon
regulatory factors (IRFs). Interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) 
is a member of IRF family that is expressed only in cells of the immune system
and acts as a transcriptional repressor. ICSBP binds DNA through the association 
with other transcription factors such as IRF-1 or IRF-2. In this communication,
the domain that is involved in protein-protein interactions was mapped to the
carboxyl terminus of ICSBP. This domain is also important for mediating
ICSBP-repressing activity. In vitro studies demonstrated that direct binding of
ICSBP to DNA is prevented by tyrosine (Tyr) phosphorylation. Yet,
Tyr-phosphorylated ICSBP can bind target DNA only through the association with
IRF-2 and IRF-1. This type of phosphorylation is essential for the formation of
heterocomplexes. Tyr-phosphorylated ICSBP and IRF-2 are detected in expressing
cells constitutively, and Tyr-phosphorylated IRF-1 is induced by IFN-gamma. These
results strongly suggest that like the STATs, the IRFs are also modulated by Tyr 
phosphorylation that affects their biological activities.

PMID: 9092512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1997 Apr;17(4):219-27.

Cloning of chicken interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) cDNA: expression and
mapping of the IRF-2 gene.

Marienfeld R(1), Nanda I, Zöller B, Schmid M, Rebbert M, Jungwirth C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

A cDNA clone encoding a member of the avian interferon regulatory factor (IRF)
family homologous to mammalian IRF-2 was isolated from cDNA library from
poly[rI:rC]-induced chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF). The deduced amino acid
sequence shows a characteristic DNA binding domain of 124 amino acids at the
amino-terminal end with 96.8% identity to human and 96% to mouse IRF-2.
Identities in the C-terminal part are 77.5% and 77%, respectively. Identity to
all other known members of the chicken IRF (Ch-IRF) family is distinctly lower.
In C32 cells, an IRF-2 mRNA of 2.4 kb is constitutively expressed in very low
amounts but is inducible by Ch-IFN in the absence or presence of cycloheximide.
The Ch-IRF-2 gene is a single copy gene and was mapped by fluorescence in situ
hybridization to the long arm of chromosome 4.

PMID: 9142651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Exp Med. 1997 Mar 3;185(5):921-31.

Crucial role of interferon consensus sequence binding protein, but neither of
interferon regulatory factor 1 nor of nitric oxide synthesis for protection
against murine listeriosis.

Fehr T(1), Schoedon G, Odermatt B, Holtschke T, Schneemann M, Bachmann MF, Mak
TW, Horak I, Zinkernagel RM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University Hospital, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Listeria monocytogenes is widely used as a model to study immune responses
against intracellular bacteria. It has been shown that neutrophils and
macrophages play an important role to restrict bacterial replication in the early
phase of primary infection in mice, and that the cytokines interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) are essential for
protection. However, the involved signaling pathways and effector mechanisms are 
still poorly understood. This study investigated mouse strains deficient for the 
IFN-dependent transcription factors interferon consensus sequence binding protein
(ICSBP), interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 or 2 for their capacity to
eliminate Listeria in vivo and in vitro and for production of inducible reactive 
nitrogen intermediates (RNI) or reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) in
macrophages. ICSBP-/- and to a lesser degree also IRF2-/- mice were highly
susceptible to Listeria infection. This correlated with impaired elimination of
Listeria from infected peritoneal macrophage (PEM) cultures stimulated with
IFN-gamma in vitro; in addition these cultures showed reduced and delayed
oxidative burst upon IFN-gamma stimulation, whereas nitric oxide production was
normal. In contrast, mice deficient for IRF1 were not able to produce nitric
oxide, but they efficiently controlled Listeria in vivo and in vitro. These
results indicate that (a) the ICSBP/IRF2 complex is essential for
IFN-gamma-mediated protection against Listeria and that (b) ROI together with
additional still unknown effector mechanisms may be responsible for the
anti-Listeria activity of macrophages, whereas IRF1-induced RNI are not limiting.

PMCID: PMC2196174
PMID: 9120398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Br J Haematol. 1997 Mar;96(3):566-75.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 induces the expression of the
interferon-stimulated genes.

Henderson YC(1), Chou M, Deisseroth AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, U.S.A.

The interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) is a positive transcriptional
regulatory protein which acts in the interferon signal transduction pathway to
activate the transcription of the type I interferon genes by binding to the PRDI 
response element. The aim of this study was to explore the role of IRF-1 in
regulating the expression of other interferon-stimulated genes in the interferon 
signal transduction pathway. A transient transfection assay was used to show that
IRF-1 induced the expression of interferon-stimulated genes. The induction was a 
direct result of IRF-1 binding to the promoters of the interferon-stimulated
response element (ISRE). The levels of endogenous mRNA of two
interferon-stimulated genes, 6-16 and 9-27, were increased in cells containing
increased levels of IRF-1. In addition, IRF-1 activates the expression of IRF-2, 
a negative regulator of the type I interferon genes themselves. Two sequences
were found in the IRF-2 promoter which were the binding sites for IRF-1.
Mutations in the oligonucleotide sequences of these sites could abolish the
binding of the IRF-1. These data suggested that IRF-1 not only plays an important
role in the induction of type I interferon genes, but also in the activation of
interferon-stimulated genes.

PMID: 9054665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Clin Invest. 1997 Feb 1;99(3):447-56.

Differential human multiple myeloma cell line responsiveness to interferon-alpha.
Analysis of transcription factor activation and interleukin 6 receptor
expression.

Jelinek DF(1), Aagaard-Tillery KM, Arendt BK, Arora T, Tschumper RC, Westendorf
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, 
USA. jelinek.diane@mayo.edu

Although IFN-alpha is commonly used as maintenance treatment for multiple myeloma
patients, its effectiveness is varied. In this study, we have used a panel of
IL-6 responsive myeloma cell lines that vary remarkably in responsiveness to
IFN-alpha. Three cell lines were growth arrested by IFN-alpha; however, IFN-alpha
significantly stimulated growth of the fourth cell line, KAS-6/1. Our studies
have focused on elucidating the mechanism of differential IFN-alpha
responsiveness. First, we have shown that IFN-alpha-stimulated growth of the
KAS-6/1 cells did not result from induction of autocrine IL-6 expression. Second,
analysis of Stats 1, 2, and 3 and IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2
activation failed to reveal differences between the IFN-alpha growth-arrested or 
growth-stimulated cells. Third, although IFN-alpha treatment of the IFN-alpha
growth-inhibited cell lines reduced IL-6 receptor (IL-6R) expression, IFN-alpha
also reduced KAS-6/1 IL-6R expression. Finally, although IFN-alpha treatment
reduced IL-6R numbers on each cell line, analysis of Stat protein activation
revealed that the receptors were still functional. We conclude that myeloma cell 
responsiveness to IFN-alpha is heterogeneous and that mechanisms of
IFN-alpha-mediated growth inhibition other than IL-6R downregulation must exist
in myeloma. Identification of these mechanisms may allow development of agents
that are more universally effective than IFN-alpha.

PMCID: PMC507818
PMID: 9022078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;17(2):873-86.

Constitutive activation of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear antigen 1 gene
transcription by IRF1 and IRF2 during restricted EBV latency.

Schaefer BC(1), Paulson E, Strominger JL, Speck SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) EBNA1 gene promoter active in the type I program of 
restricted viral latency was recently identified and shown to reside in the viral
BamHI Q fragment. This promoter, Qp, is active in a wide variety of cell lines
and has an architecture reminiscent of eukaryotic housekeeping gene promoters (B.
C. Schaefer, J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
92:10565-10569, 1995; B. C. Schaefer, J. L. Strominger, and S. H. Speck, Mol.
Cell. Biol. 17:364-377, 1997). Here we demonstrate by deletion analysis that the 
important cis-acting elements regulating Qp are clustered in a relatively small
region (ca. 80 bp) surrounding the site of transcription initiation. Immediately 
upstream of the site of initiation is a region which is protected from DNase I
digestion by crude nuclear extracts. Electrophoretic mobility shift analyses
(EMSA) employing probes spanning this region demonstrated the presence of two
major protein complexes. Deletion analysis of Qp demonstrated that at least one
of these complexes plays an important role in Qp activity. Evidence that
interferon response factor 2 (IRF2) is a major constituent of the most prominent 
EMSA complex and that IRF1 may be a minor component of this complex is presented.
Transfections into IRF1-/-, IRF2-/-, and IRF1,2-/- fibroblasts demonstrated that 
absence of both IRF1 and IRF2 reduced Qp activity to approximately the same
extent as mutation of the IRF-binding site in Qp, strongly implicating IRF2, and 
perhaps IRF1, in the regulation of Qp activity. Notably, transcription from Qp
was not inducible by either alpha or gamma interferon in EBV-negative B cells but
rather was shown to be constitutively activated by IRF1 and IRF2. This
observation suggests that IRF1 and IRF2 have a previously unrecognized role as
constitutive activators of specific genes. Additionally, data presented indicate 
that a protein complex containing the nonhistone architectural protein HMG-I(Y)
binds to the region identified as the major transcription initiation site for Qp.
This observation raises the possibility that HMG-I(Y)-induced DNA bending plays a
role in the initiation of transcription from Qp.

PMCID: PMC231814
PMID: 9001242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Microbiol Immunol. 1997;41(1):63-6.

Suppressed induction of 2-5AS in cells with HTLV-I is not associated with the
fluctuation of IFN-receptor, IFN-regulatory factors (IRF-1 and IRF-2) or STAT-1
alpha.

Yokosawa N(1), Indoh T, Kubota T, Yashiki T, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo University School of Medicine, Hokkaido,
Japan.

Some viruses seem to be capable of suppressing interferon (IFN)-induced
2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2-5AS) induction. Cells infected with human
T-lymphotropic virus type-I (HTLV-I) show different natures for the constitutive 
production of IFN-gamma or sensitivity to IFN. Poor induction of 2-5AS was found 
in IFN-gamma producer cells carrying HTLV-I (MT-1, MT-2 and SMT-1). On the other 
hand, in non- or low-producing cell lines of IFN-gamma such as HUT102 and OKM-2, 
significant activity of 2-5AS was induced by treatment with IFN-alpha. A
satisfactory level of IFN receptor was detectable in SMT-1 cells in spite of the 
poor induction of 2-5AS. There were no differences in either the interferon
regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) mRNA transcript or the level of STAT-1 alpha between 
SMT-1 and HUT102 cells. However, the transcription of IRF-1 mRNA was slightly
reduced in SMT-1 cells as compared with that of HUT102 cells.

PMID: 9087969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Immunol. 1996 Dec 1;157(11):5145-54.

A dominant negative mutant of an IFN regulatory factor family protein inhibits
both type I and type II IFN-stimulated gene expression and antiproliferative
activity of IFNs.

Thornton AM(1), Ogryzko VV, Dent A, Sharf R, Levi BZ, Kanno Y, Staudt LM, Howard 
BH, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 1999 Mar 1;162(5):3103.

Type I (alpha,beta) and type II (gamma) IFNs elicit antiproliferative and
antiviral activities through two distinct transcription pathways involving 1) IRF
family proteins and ISGF3, and 2) STAT1. We have employed a dominant negative
strategy to study the role of IRF family proteins in eliciting the biologic
activities of IFN. A truncated IRF protein retaining the DNA-binding domain (DBD)
of ICSBP (a member of the IRF family) was stably transfected into U937 monocytic 
cells. Clones expressing DBD had markedly reduced ISRE-binding activity and were 
defective in expressing several type I IFN-inducible genes. STAT1 was one such
type I IFN-inducible gene whose expression was also inhibited in DBD clones. As a
result, the expression of several IFN-gamma-inducible genes was also inhibited in
these clones, indicating functional coupling of the type I and type II IFN
transcription pathways. Furthermore, DBD clones grew more slowly than control
clones and were refractory to antiproliferative effects of both types of IFNs. We
found that IFN treatment of U937 cells leads to a G1 arrest and an increase in
underphosphorylated retinoblastoma gene product. However, IFN treatment did not
change the cell cycle profile, nor retinoblastoma gene product phosphorylation
state in DBD clones. These data indicate that expression of DBD disrupts cell
cycle regulatory mechanisms. Combined with the previously noted failure of DBD
clones to elicit antiviral activity, the present work shows that IRF family
proteins play an integral part in growth control activities of IFNs.

PMID: 8943426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Gene. 1996 Nov 14;179(2):237-44.

A promoter ISRE and dual 5' YY1 motifs control IFN-gamma induction of the IRG-47 
G-protein gene.

Gilly M(1), Damore MA, Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

The IRG-47 gene is the prototype for a new family of genes encoding guanine
nucleotide binding proteins (G-proteins) which are selectively induced in
different cell lineages in response to activation signals. The IRG-47 gene is
rapidly and transiently induced by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in cells of the B
lymphocyte lineage and in stromal cells and fibroblasts. Here we report features 
controlling the uninduced and IFN-gamma-induced expression of the IRG-47 gene.
The minimal IFN-gamma-inducible IRG-47 gene promoter is 96 bp long and contains a
TATA box and an ISRE motif with an internal IRF-1/IRF-2 motif. Mutation of the
ISRE motif abolishes IFN-gamma induction by the minimal promoter. Constitutively 
expressed IRF-2 and IFN-gamma-induced IRF-1 factors specifically bind to the
wild-type, but not the mutated ISRE motif. An upstream region containing two
tandemly repeated YY1 motifs represses the expression of the IRG-47 promoter in
uninduced cells and determines the magnitude of IRG-47 promoter activity in
IFN-gamma-induced cells. The IRG-47 minimal promoter has the same functional
features and organization as the IFN-gamma-inducible promoters of the unrelated
murine GBP G-protein multigene family.

PMID: 8972906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6313-24.

Interferon regulatory factors and TFIIB cooperatively regulate
interferon-responsive promoter activity in vivo and in vitro.

Wang IM(1), Blanco JC, Tsai SY, Tsai MJ, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) bind to the interferon-stimulated response
element (ISRE) and regulate interferon- and virus-mediated gene expression. IRF-1
acts as a transcriptional activator, while IRF-2 acts as a repressor. Here we
show that IRF-1 and IRF-2 bind to both cellular TFIIB, a component of the basal
transcription machinery, and recombinant TFIIB (rTFIIB) and that this
protein-protein interaction facilitates binding of IRFs to the ISRE. A functional
interaction between TFIIB and IRF was assessed by a newly established in vitro
transcription assay in which recombinant IRF-1 (rIRF-1) stimulated transcription 
specifically from an ISRE-containing template. With this assay we show that
rIRF-1 and rTFIIB cooperatively enhance the ISRE promoter in vitro. We found that
the activity of an ISRE-containing promoter was cooperatively enhanced upon
cotransfection of TFIIB and IRF-1 cDNAs into P19 embryonal carcinoma cells,
further demonstrating functional interactions in vivo. The cooperative
enhancement by TFIIB and IRF-1 was independent of the TATA sequence in the ISRE
promoter but dependent on the initiator sequence (Inr) and was abolished when P19
cells were induced to differentiate by retinoic acid treatment. In contrast,
cotransfection of TFIIB and IRF-1 into NIH 3T3 cells resulted in a dose-dependent
repression of promoter activation which occurred in a TATA-dependent manner. Our 
results indicate the presence of a cell type-specific factor that mediates the
functional interaction between IRFs and TFIIB and that acts in conjunction with
the requirement of TATA and Inr for promoter activation.

PMCID: PMC231634
PMID: 8887661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1996 Oct;87(10):inside front cover.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs); providing the molecular link between
cytokine action and host defense.

Schlessinger J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University Medical Center, New York, NY
10016, USA.

PMID: 8957056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 20;271(38):23445-51.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 directs transcription from the gp91phox promoter.

Luo W(1), Skalnik DG.

Author information: 
(1)Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Section of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana
46202-5225, USA.

Repressor elements in the gp91(phox) promoter are necessary to restrict
tissue-specific transcription to mature phagocytes. Deletion of these elements
leads to significant promoter activity in cell lines such as HEL and K562 that do
not normally express gp91(phox). The -100 to +12 base pair gp91(phox) promoter
region is sufficient to direct maximal de-repressed transcription in these cells.
However, promoter activity is dramatically decreased following a 16-base pair
truncation that deletes an interferon-stimulated response element. This element
interacts with IRF-1 and IRF-2, members of the interferon regulatory factor
family of transcription factors. In addition, this promoter region is bound by a 
factor with properties similar to BID, a DNA-binding protein that also interacts 
with three upstream sites within the gp91(phox) promoter. Transient transfection 
studies using mutated promoters indicate that both the IRF and BID binding sites 
are required for maximal gp91(phox) promoter activity. Overexpression of IRF-1 or
IRF-2 in K562 cells leads to transactivation of gp91(phox) promoter constructs,
which is dependent on the presence of an intact IRF binding site. IRF-2
predominates in macrophages that express the gp91(phox) gene as well as in HEL
and K562 cells. We conclude that IRF-2 and BID activate gp91(phox) promoter
activity in the absence of transcriptional repression.

PMID: 8798551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem J. 1996 Aug 1;317 ( Pt 3):697-706.

Identification of distal silencing elements in the murine interferon-A11 gene
promoter.

Roffet P(1), Lopez S, Navarro S, Bandu MT, Coulombel C, Vignal M, Doly J,
Vodjdani G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Régulation de l'Expression des Gènes Eucaryotes, UPR 37-CNRS,
UFR Biomédicale, Université, René Descartes, Paris, France.

The murine interferon-A11 (Mu IFN-A11) gene is a member of the IFN-A multigenic
family. In mouse L929 cells, the weak response of the gene's promoter to viral
induction is due to a combination of both a point mutation in the virus
responsive element (VRE) and the presence of negatively regulating sequences
surrounding the VRE. In the distal part of the promoter, the negatively acting
E1E2 sequence was delimited. This sequence displays an inhibitory effect in
either orientation or position on the inducibility of a virus-responsive
heterologous promoter. It selectively represses VRE-dependent transcription but
is not able to reduce the transcriptional activity of a VRE-lacking promoter. In 
a transient transfection assay, an E1E2-containing DNA competitor was able to
derepress the native Mu IFN-A11 promoter. Specific nuclear factors bind to this
sequence; thus the binding of trans-regulators participates in the repression of 
the Mu IFN-A11 gene. The E1E2 sequence contains an IFN regulatory factor
(IRF)-binding site. Recombinant IRF2 binds this sequence and anti-IRF2 antibodies
supershift a major complex formed with nuclear extracts. The protein composing
the complex is 50 kDa in size, indicating the presence of IRF2 or antigenically
related proteins in the complex. The Mu IFN-A11 gene is the first example within 
the murine IFN-A family, in which a distal promoter element has been identified
that can negatively modulate the transcriptional response to viral induction.

PMCID: PMC1217542
PMID: 8760352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biochem. 1996 Jul;120(1):160-9.

Autocrine amplification of type I interferon gene expression mediated by
interferon stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3).

Yoneyama M(1), Suhara W, Fukuhara Y, Sato M, Ozato K, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 have been implicated for the
virus-induced expression of the interferon-alpha and beta (type I IFN) genes.
However, recent gene disruption studies in mice suggested the presence of other
factor(s) interacting with overlapping promoter elements. In the present paper,
we describe the characterization of a DNA binding factor which is strongly
induced after virus infection and recognizes these promoter elements. After
extensive purification, the factor was revealed to be identical to IFN-stimulated
gene factor 3 (ISGF3), a transcription factor complex activated by IFN treatment.
ISGF3 binds to the promoter element of IFN-beta, positive regulatory domain I
(PRDI), with significantly higher affinity than IRF-1, 2, and mutational analysis
of PRDI showed that the gene expression and binding of ISGF3, but not of IRF-1,
2, are highly correlated. Furthermore, our functional analysis involving a
dominant negative inhibitor for ISGF3 activation and an anti-IFN neutralizing
antibody clearly demonstrated the presence of a positive feedback path way for
type I IFN genes mediated by ISGF3.

PMID: 8864859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Leuk Res. 1996 Jul;20(7):601-5.

Possible transforming activity of interferon regulatory factor 2 in
tumorigenicity assay of NIH3T3 cells transfected with DNA from chronic
myelogenous leukemia patients.

Futaki M(1), Inokuchi K, Hanawa H, Tanosaki S, Dan K, Nomura T.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Little is known about the transforming gene identified in the genomic DNA of
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) by the tumorigenicity assay. To detect a new
transforming gene of CML, we re-investigated the transforming activity of
interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and -2 genes in the tumorigenicity assay of 
NIH3T3 cells transfected with genomic DNA of leukemic cells from 15 patients with
CML (12 patients in the chronic phase, one in the blastic phase and two in both
phases). We detected the functionally active IRF-2 gene only in the tumor DNA
from two CML patients in the blastic phase. We did not detect integration of the 
IRF-1 gene in the DNA of any tumors derived from the CML patient samples, and
also we detected no expression of human IRF-1 mRNA. Thus, NIH3T3 cells may have
been transformed due to integration of the functionally active IRF-2 gene from
CML patients in the blastic phase. We surmise that there is a possibility that
the IRF-2 gene may be involved in the evolution of the blastic phase of CML.

PMID: 8795694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Blood. 1996 Jul 1;88(1):114-23.

Retinoic acid activates interferon regulatory factor-1 gene expression in myeloid
cells.

Matikainen S(1), Ronni T, Hurme M, Pine R, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Programme, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki,
Finland.

All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) is the drug of choice in the treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL). ATRA induces both in vitro and in vivo
differentiation of APL cells into mature granulocytes. However, the molecular
mechanisms involved in ATRA-dependent growth inhibition and cellular
differentiation are not presently understood. The NB4 cell line, which is derived
from the bone marrow of a patient with APL during relapse, can be used as a model
system to study the growth and differentiation of APL cells. Because interferon
(IFN) regulatory factors (IRF-1 and IRF-2) and other IFN-inducible gene products 
regulate cell growth, we analyzed the effects of ATRA on the expression of these 
genes. We show that ATRA directly activates IRF-1 gene expression, followed by
activation of IRF-2 and 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) gene expression
with slower kinetics. In addition to NB4 cells, ATRA also activated IRF-1 gene
expression in HL-60, U937, and THP-1 cells, which all respond to ATRA by growth
inhibition. A more than additive increase in IRF-1 gene expression was seen with 
ATRA and IFN-gamma in NB4 cells. ATRA did not activate nuclear factor kappa B or 
signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) activation pathways,
suggesting that an alternate mechanism is involved in IRF-1 gene activation. The 
ATRA-induced expression of IRF-1, an activator of transcription and repressor of 
transformation, may be one of the molecular mechanisms of ATRA-induced growth
inhibition, and the basis for the synergistic actions of ATRA and IFNs in myeloid
leukemia cells.

PMID: 8704165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1996 Jun;41(8 Suppl):1273-81.

[The function of the transcription factor, IRF family, in the interferon system].

[Article in Japanese]

Harada H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

PMID: 8741649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cancer Res. 1996 May 15;56(10):2417-21.

Identification of the lysyl oxidase gene as target of the antioncogenic
transcription factor, IRF-1, and its possible role in tumor suppression.

Tan RS(1), Taniguchi T, Harada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The transcriptional activator IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and its
antagonistic repressor IRF-2 are regulators of the IFN system. IRF-1 also
manifests tumor suppressive activity, and its inactivation could contribute to
the development of human hematopoietic malignancies. Here, we report the
identification of the lysyl oxidase gene as a target gene of IRF-1. An IRF
response element was identified in the lysyl oxidase gene promoter. We also
demonstrate that the transformed phenotype of ras-expressing embryonic
fibroblasts with a null mutation in the IRF-1 allele could be suppressed by the
expression of the lysyl oxidase cDNA, implicating its potential role in tumor
suppression. Thus, the regulation of the lysyl oxidase gene by IRF-1 could
contribute to the multistep process of malignant transformation.

PMID: 8625321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Immunol. 1996 May 1;156(9):3107-10.

Differential dysregulation of nitric oxide production in macrophages with
targeted disruptions in IFN regulatory factor-1 and -2 genes.

Salkowski CA(1), Barber SA, Detore GR, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Recent studies have reported that IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) regulates
nitric oxide (NO.) production in murine macrophages (M phi). Since IRF-2
recognizes the same consensus sequence as IRF-1, we postulated that IRF-2 may
also regulate NO.. Therefore, the ability of M phi from INF-2 homozygous
(IRF-2-/-) and heterozygous (IRF-2+/-) knockout mice to produce NO. following LPS
and/or IFN-gamma stimulation was compared with the responses of IRF-1-/-,
IRF-1+/-, and C57BL/6+/+ M phi. IRF-2-/- M phi produced less LPS-induced NO2-
than IRF-2+/- or C57BL/6 M phi. LPS and IFN-gamma synergized to increase NO2-
production from IRF-2-/- M phi to approximately 50% of IRF-2+/- and C57BL/6
levels. Unexpectedly, IRF-2-/-, IRF-2+/- and C57BL/6 M phi produced comparable
levels of inducible NO synthase mRNA in response to treatment with LPS and
IFN-gamma. IRF-1-/- M phi produced barely detectable NO2- and low, but
detectable, inducible NO. synthase mRNA in response to IFN-gamma and LPS. These
results indicate that IRF-1 and IRF-2 differ in their mechanism of NO. regulation
and that IRF-2 regulates inducible NO. synthase post-transcriptionally.

PMID: 8617930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Immunol. 1996 Apr 1;156(7):2451-7.

IFN-gamma induces the kappa intron enhancer via an IFN-stimulated response
element.

Damore MA(1), Omori SA, Wall R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Insitute, University of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

IFN-gamma is a potent inducer of Ig kappa light chain gene transcription in 70Z/3
pre-B cells, but the mechanism of this induction has not been elucidated. The
kappa intron enhancer contains a sequence closely resembling the IFN-stimulated
response element (ISRE). We have determined that the kappa intron enhancer is
IFN-gamma inducible in 70Z/3 cells and that the ISRE is required for this
induction. The kappa intron ISRE specifically bound IFN response factor-1 (IRF-1)
and the constitutively expressed IRF-2. This ISRE is a multifunctional motif that
also binds the LPS-inducible factor kappaBF-A and is located within the kappaBS
region, which confers B cell specific activity to this enhancer. However, since
the expression of IRF-1 is not restricted to B cells, it must not be sufficient
for the induction of kappa transcription. Furthermore, in the pre-B cell line
38B9, which is representative of an earlier stage in pre-B cell development than 
the 70Z/3 cell line, the kappa intron enhancer was not induced by IFN-gamma
despite the activation of IRF-1. These findings suggest that IFN-gamma activation
of kappa gene transcription during B cell maturation may be developmentally
controlled by elements that restrict the activity of the ISRE within the context 
of the intron enhancer.

PMID: 8786304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Br J Haematol. 1996 Mar;92(3):595-603.

Induction of interferon regulatory factors 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase, P68
kinase and RNase L in chronic myelogenous leukaemia cells and its relationship to
clinical responsiveness.

Fischer T(1), Aman J, van der Kuip H, Rudolf G, Peschel C, Aulitzky WE, Huber C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Internal Medicine III, The Johannes
Gutenberg University School of Medicine, Mainz, Germany.

The genes crucially determining the therapeutic response of chronic myelogenous
leukaemia (CML) to interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) are unknown. Recently, two
independent IFN-alpha signalling pathways were identified: the classic pathway
mediates induction of 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase (2-5 OAS), p68 kinase and
IFN regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2), whereas the alternate pathway leads to
activation of IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1). We investigated whether deficient 
or imbalanced expression of components of these two pathways is associated with
resistance of CML cells to antiproliferative action of IFN alpha/beta.
Constitutive and IFN-induced transcript levels of IFN-dependent genes in
mononuclear cells, granulocytes, monocytes, lymphocytes and CD34+ cells of
chronic-phase CML and blast crisis patients were assessed by Northern blot
techniques and were correlated with subsequent clinical responses to IFN therapy.
Our results demonstrated that IFN-alpha or -beta treatment in vitro and in vivo
leads to an enhanced expression of IRF-1, IRF-2. RNase L, p68 and 2-5 OAS which
was independent of the degree of cellular differentiation and clonal evolution of
CML. Neither the magnitude of induction of these genes nor the IRF-1/IRF-2 mRNA
balance differed between chronic-phase CML patients responding or failing
IFN-alpha therapy. These results indicate that failure of IFN-alpha treatment is 
not due to defects in mRNA induction of the above-mentioned candidate genes for
the direct antiproliferative response to IFN type I.

PMID: 8616023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Microbiol Immunol. 1996;40(10):777-81.

Investigation of IFN type-I receptor and IFN regulatory factor expression
relating to induction of 2', 5'-oligoadenylate synthetase in cells persistently
infected with the mumps virus.

Fujii N(1), Yokosawa N, Ishida S, Shirakawa S, Kubota T, Indoh T, Fujinaga K,
Yashiki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Hokkaido, Japan.

Poor induction of interferon-induced 2', 5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2-5AS)
activity has been demonstrated in cells persistently infected with the mumps
virus or human T-lymphotropic virus type-I (HTLV-I). The suppression of 2-5AS
induction is the result of the repression of 2-5AS gene expression at the
transcription level. In a general way, after the binding of interferon-alpha
(IFN-alpha) to cell surface-specific receptors, expression of 2-5AS gene is
thought to be regulated by some transacting factors, IFN-regulatory factors
(IRF-1 and IRF-2) and the IFN-stimulated gene factor (ISGF-3, a complex
consisting of STAT-1 alpha, STAT-2 and p48). To clarify the cause of the
suppression mechanism(s), fluctuation in the number of IFN receptors and the
levels of mRNAs in both IRF-1 and IRF-2 were examined in cells persistently
infected with the mumps virus (FLMT and KBMT). There were few differences in the 
number of IFN receptors and the level of IRF-2 mRNA between persistently infected
cells and uninfected control cells. After the treatment of cells with IFN, a
slight reduction of IRF-1 mRNA was found in persistently infected cells as
compared with that of the uninfected control cells.

PMID: 8981353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Neuroimmunol. 1995 Dec 31;63(2):157-62.

Interferon regulatory factor-2 physically interacts with NF-kappa B in vitro and 
inhibits NF-kappa B induction of major histocompatibility class I and beta
2-microglobulin gene expression in transfected human neuroblastoma cells.

Drew PD(1), Franzoso G, Carlson LM, Biddison WE, Siebenlist U, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Diseases and
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Most neural cells constitutively lack major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I and beta 2-microglobulin gene expression. Cytokines and viruses may,
however, induce expression of these genes in some neural cells, and this
correlates with factor binding to the NF-kappa B and interferon stimulated
response elements of these genes. Here, we demonstrate that NF-kappa B is capable
of inducing MHC class I and beta 2-microglobulin gene expression when transiently
co-transfected into CHP-126 neuroblastomas, and that IRF-2 represses this
induction. Interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2) repression of MHC class I and
beta 2-microglobulin gene expression in CHP-126 neuroblastomas may demonstrate a 
mechanism by which virus persists in neural cells. We show here that IRF-2
physically interacts in vitro with NF-kappa B. This interaction may contribute to
the repression of the expression of these genes. Our demonstration that IRF
family members, in addition to IRF-2, physically interact in vitro with NF-kappa 
B (p50 and p65), provides a general mechanism by which these transcription
factors may, in concert, regulate the expression of a variety of genes involved
in immune responses in the brain.

PMID: 8550813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Blood. 1995 Nov 1;86(9):3373-80.

Hematopoietic inhibition by interferon-gamma is partially mediated through
interferon regulatory factor-1.

Sato T(1), Selleri C, Young NS, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD
20892-1652, USA.

Biologic responses to cytokines are mediated by intracellular pathways involving 
induction of signaling and metabolic cascades. Interferon (IFN) regulatory
factor-1 (IRF-1) is a major transcription factor induced not only by IFN-gamma
but also by other cytokines including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha).
Possible IRF-1 binding sequence elements have been located in the promoter
regions of several genes, including p53, inducible nitric oxide synthase, and
cyclin D1. IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha can inhibit hematopoiesis in vitro and have
been implicated in the pathophysiology of bone marrow (BM) failure. We
investigated whether the inhibitory effects of these cytokines were
intracellularly mediated through the expression of IRF-1 or -2 in target cells.
In total BM cells, IRF-1 mRNA expression increased after stimulation with
IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha; the stronger effect was observed with IFN-gamma. In
contrast, IRF-2 mRNA expression was constitutive and not altered by cytokine
stimulation. By gene amplification, low levels of IRF-1 mRNA were present in
unstimulated, highly purified CD34+ cells; on exposure to IFN-gamma and
TNF-alpha, amplified IRF-1 mRNA showed a much stronger signal than control. When 
CD34+ cells were treated with IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha, IRF-1 antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) partially reversed the suppressive effects on CD34+
cell-derived colony formation by IFN-gamma but not those by TNF-alpha. In
parallel experiments, IRF-1 antisense ODN decreased both IRF-1 protein and mRNA
expression. The effects of ODN were sequence-specific and
concentration-dependent. These results suggest that the inhibitory hematopoietic 
effects of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha are mediated by different pathways. For
IFN-gamma, IRF-1 is involved in the activation of cellular genes responsible for 
IFN-gamma suppressive effects.

PMID: 7579440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 1995 Oct;32(5):235-9.

IRF-1 and IRF-2 as regulators of the interferon system and cell growth.

Taniguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Interferons (IFNs) are families of cytokines which have been discovered and
extensively characterized in the context of host defense against viral
infections. We have discovered two structurally related transcription factors,
Interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2. These two factors, however,
function not only as regulators of the IFN system, but are also key transcription
factors in the regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis. These studies uncover a
complex gene transcription network, by which the fate of cellular responses are
determined depending on how the IRF transcription factors function in conjunction
with other factors, and on the promoters of distinct genes under different
conditions of the cells.

PMID: 8713742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nature. 1995 Sep 28;377(6547):362-5.

Activation of a cell-cycle-regulated histone gene by the oncogenic transcription 
factor IRF-2.

Vaughan PS(1), Aziz F, van Wijnen AJ, Wu S, Harada H, Taniguchi T, Soprano KJ,
Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

The human histone H4 gene FO108 is regulated during the cell cycle with a peak in
transcription during early S phase. The cell-cycle element (CCE) required for H4 
histone activation is a sequence of 11 base pairs that binds a protein factor in 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays that has been designated histone nuclear
factor M (HiNF-M). Here we report the purification of HiNF-M, and show it to be a
protein of relative molecular mass (M(r)) 48K that is identical to interferon
(IFN) regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2), a negative transcriptional regulator of the
IFN response. Recombinant IRF-2 (as well as the related protein IRF-1 (ref. 5))
binds the CCE specifically and activates transcription of this H4 histone gene.
IRF-2 has been shown to have oncogenic potential, and our results demonstrate a
link between IRF-2 and a gene that is functionally coupled to DNA replication and
cell-cycle progression at the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 7566094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Sep 11;23(17):3539-46.

5' upstream sequences of MyD88, an IL-6 primary response gene in M1 cells:
detection of functional IRF-1 and Stat factors binding sites.

Harroch S(1), Gothelf Y, Revel M, Chebath J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

Transcription regulatory elements have been analyzed in upstream sequences of an 
Interleukin-6 (Il-6) primary response gene, MyD88. MyD88 2.3 kb mRNA is strongly 
and persistently induced in the course of myeloleukemic M1 cells differentiation 
with Il-6. MyD88 cDNA sequences were found in a region of 12 kb of mouse genomic 
DNA. Using Il-6 treated M1 cell RNAs, two transcription start sites have been
localized, approximately 100 bp upstream from the 5' end of the cloned cDNA. We
sequenced 1.4 kb of 5' genomic DNA including the first exon. In 5' of mRNA
transcription start site, MyD88 nucleotidic sequence is 85% identical to 5'
complementary sequences of the rat 3'-ketoacetyl CoA thiolase gene, over 1.2 kb. 
A DNA element conferring Il-6-inducible transcription to reporter genes, and
localized 30 bp upstream of MyD88 first RNA start site, contains overlapping
binding sites for cytokine activated transcription factors Stat and for the
Interferon Regulatory Factor-1 and -2 (IRF-1 and IRF-2). In vitro binding assays 
showed that attachment of Stat factors to this element early in Il-6 treatment
requires tyrosine kinase activation. IRF1, an activator of transcription, is also
induced to bind to this sequence at later times. A model of persistent activation
of MyD88 gene through these two types of factors is proposed.

PMCID: PMC307235
PMID: 7567467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 25;270(34):20225-30.

The growth-dependent expression of angiotensin II type 2 receptor is regulated by
transcription factors interferon regulatory factor-1 and -2.

Horiuchi M(1), Koike G, Yamada T, Mukoyama M, Nakajima M, Dzau VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Falk Cardiovascular Center, Stanford
University School of Medicine, California 94305-5246, USA.

Angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor is abundantly and widely expressed in fetal 
tissues but present only in restricted tissues in the adult such as brain and
atretic ovary. This receptor is speculated to be involved in tissue growth and/or
differentiation. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of growth-regulated AT2
receptor expression, we cloned the mouse AT2 receptor genomic DNA and studied its
promoter function in mouse fibroblast-derived R3T3 cells, which express AT2
receptor in the confluent, quiescent state but very low levels of the receptor in
actively growing state. Promoter/luciferase reporter deletion analysis of AT2
receptor in R3T3 cells showed that the putative negative regulatory region is
located between the positions -453 and -225, which plays an important role in the
transcriptional control of AT2 receptor gene expression along with the cell
growth. We identified the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) binding motif in
this region using DNase foot-printing analysis and demonstrated that IRF binding 
oligonucleotide treatment increased the AT2 receptor expression in growing R3T3
cells but not in confluent cells. Furthermore, by antisense treatment, we
demonstrated that IRF-2 attenuated the AT2 receptor expression in both growing
and confluent R3T3 cells, whereas IRF-1 enhanced AT2 receptor expression in the
confluent cells only. Consistent with this result, gel mobility shift assay
demonstrated that growing R3T3 cells exhibited only IRF-2 binding, whereas
confluent cells exhibited both IRF-1 and IRF-2 binding. Furthermore, we observed 
using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction that the IRF-1 mRNA
expression was more abundant in confluent cells than growing cells, whereas IRF-2
expression did not change with R3T3 cell growth. We conclude that, in confluent
cells, the enhanced expression of IRF-1 antagonizes the IRF-2 effect and
increases the AT2 receptor expression. We speculate that these transcriptional
factors influence cell growth in part by regulating AT2 receptor expression.

PMID: 7650042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Oncogene. 1995 Aug 3;11(3):537-44.

Transcription factor IRF-2 exerts its oncogenic phenotype through the DNA
binding/transcription repression domain.

Nguyen H(1), Mustafa A, Hiscott J, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Sir Mortimer B Davis Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal, Quebec.

The Interferon Regulatory Factors-1 and -2 (IRF-1 and IRF-2) play a
transcriptional role in the regulation of the IFN-beta gene as well as other
immunoregulatory genes. IRF-1 serves as a transcriptional activator whereas IRF-2
acts as an antagonistic transcriptional repressor. IRF-1 and IRF-2 also play
opposing functional roles in cell growth regulation, and are implicated as a
potential antioncogene and oncogene, respectively. To analyse the relationship
between DNA binding/transcriptional repression and oncogenic transformation,
NIH3T3 cells expressing C-terminal deletions of IRF-2 were established and
assayed for transformation by saturation density analysis, anchorage independent 
growth in soft agar and tumor formation in nude mice. Cells expressing an IRF-2
protein of at least 160 N-terminal amino acids were transformed in vitro and
tumorigenic in vivo, thus mapping IRF-2 oncogenic activity to its DNA
binding/transcriptional repression domain. Overexpression of wild-type and
truncated IRF-2 proteins resulted in reduced IFN-beta mRNA levels following
induction by dsRNA. However, there was no effect of IRF-2 on IFN-beta
inducibility by Sendai virus infection, suggesting the involvement of multiple
IFN-beta induction pathways. In DNA binding assays, recombinant IRF-2 was found
to preferentially bind to the IFN-beta PRDI site compared to IRF-1. These studies
indicate that the transformed phenotype resulting from overexpression of IRF-2
may be due to constitutive engagement of the IRF-E recognition site, thus
preventing DNA binding and transactivation of putative tumor suppressor genes by 
the IRF-1 anti-oncogene.

PMID: 7630638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Eur J Immunogenet. 1995 Aug;22(4):311-22.

Immunoprinting excludes many potential susceptibility genes as predisposing to
early onset pauciarticular juvenile chronic arthritis except HLA class II and
TNF.

Epplen C(1), Rumpf H, Albert E, Haas P, Truckenbrodt H, Epplen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Ruhr University at Bochum, Germany.

DNA profiles (immunoprints) were generated for 120 patients suffering from early 
onset pauciarticular chronic arthritis (EOPA-JCA) and > 500 healthy controls
utilizing highly polymorphic microsatellites in the vicinity of immunorelevant
genes. Six T cell receptor (TCR) markers for the CD3D, TCRDVAJ, TEA, TCRBV6S1,
BV6S3, BV6S7 and BV13S2 genes were analysed. Furthermore markers for the cell
surface molecule CD40L, for cytokine genes (IL-1A, IL-2, IFN-alpha, FGF-alpha,
TNF-alpha), the chromosomal region of the IRF2 and the cytokine receptor gene
IL5RA were studied as well as two polymorphisms within the promotor region of the
TNF-alpha gene. Coding region polymorphisms were evidenced indirectly by repeat
length variation or they were predicted from the microsatellite distribution
profiles and then confirmed by direct sequence analysis. Statistical evaluations 
were performed with respect to known predispositions, predominance of females (> 
80%) and HLA-DR and -DQ haplotypes. Cell surface molecules (TCR, CD40L, IL5RA) as
well as almost all cytokines (IL-1A, IFN alpha, FGFA, IRF2 region) were excluded 
as predisposing in our JCA panel. The TNF-alpha microsatellite alleles (GT)10-12 
contribute considerably to manifestation of the disease, in HLA-DRB1*11(12)
individuals (RR = 12.8). The TNF-alpha allele is not found in linkage
disequilibrium with HLA-DRB1*11(12) and may be present on either chromosome 6.
Thus, a novel susceptibility factor probably within the TNFA/TNFB gene region has
been identified via linkage with the TNF-alpha microsatellite allele. Apparently 
complex compositions of the genetic background rather than single genes provide
the precondition for manifestation of the autoimmune disease EOPA-JCA.
Immunoprinting unravels the variability of the immunological genome via the
semi-directed microsatellite approach efficiently.

PMID: 7495783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Jul 21;762:342-55; discussion 355-6.

Interleukin-6: effects on tumor models in mice and on the cellular regulation of 
transcription factor IRF-1.

Revel M(1), Katz A, Eisenbach L, Feldman M, Haran-Ghera N, Harroch S, Chebath J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

PMID: 7545371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Immunobiology. 1995 Jul;193(2-4):263-7.

NF-Y, IRF-2, and C/EBP proteins are involved in regulation of human IL-4 gene
expression.

Li-Weber M(1), Davydov IV, Krammer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Tumorimmunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

PMID: 8530153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. FEBS Lett. 1995 Feb 13;359(2-3):184-8.

Secondary structure and folding topology of the DNA binding domain of interferon 
regulatory factor 2, as revealed by NMR spectroscopy.

Uegaki K(1), Shirakawa M, Harada H, Taniguchi T, Kyogoku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Japan.

The secondary structure elements of the DNA-binding domain of mouse interferon
regulatory factor 2 [IRF-2(113)] were determined by heteronuclear
multidimensional NMR spectroscopy. The sequential NOE connectivities, amide
proton exchange rates, and 3JHN alpha coupling constants indicated the presence
of three alpha-helical regions and four short beta-strands connected through
relatively long loops. The long range NOEs indicated the four strands form an
antiparallel beta-sheet and the three alpha-helices form a bundle on the sheet.
The arrangement of the secondary structure elements and the overall folding
topology resemble those of the DNA binding domains of bacterial activator CAP,
heat shock transcription factors, and fork-head proteins, although there is no
sequence homology among them.

PMID: 7867795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Infect Immun. 1995 Feb;63(2):601-8.

Differential expression of interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1), IRF-2, and
interferon consensus sequence binding protein genes in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-responsive and LPS-hyporesponsive macrophages.

Barber SA(1), Fultz MJ, Salkowski CA, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of
the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814-4788.

Macrophages secrete interferon (IFN), as well as other cytokines, following
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. The interferon regulatory factors (IRFs)
comprise a family of DNA-binding proteins that have been implicated in the
transcriptional regulation of IFN and certain IFN-inducible genes. We therefore
characterized basal and LPS-inducible levels of IRF-1, IRF-2, and interferon
consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) mRNA in LPS-responsive macrophages and
compared the expression of these genes in macrophages that typify two murine
models of LPS hyporesponsiveness. In the first model, the LPS-hyporesponsive
phenotype of the C3H/HeJ mouse is genetically determined and maps to the Lps
locus on mouse chromosome 4. In the second model, normally LPS-responsive
macrophages acquire a transient LPS-hyporesponsive phenotype following a prior
exposure to LPS, a phenomenon referred to as "endotoxin tolerance." Using reverse
transcription PCR, we detected basal levels of IRF-1 mRNA in LPS-responsive
(Lpsn) macrophages that were approximately 15 times higher than those found in
LPS-hyporesponsive (Lpsd) macrophages. Conversely, Lpsd macrophages expressed
basal levels of IRF-2 mRNA that were approximately 18 times higher than those
expressed in Lpsn macrophages. LPS stimulation resulted in a dose- and
time-dependent accumulation of IRF-1, IRF-2, and ICSBP mRNA only in Lpsn
macrophages. Cycloheximide inhibited the accumulation of LPS-stimulated IRF-2 and
ICSBP mRNA, but not IRF-1 mRNA, thus designating IRF-1 an immediate-early,
LPS-inducible gene. Finally, macrophages rendered tolerant to endotoxin expressed
elevated but nonmaximal mRNA levels for all three transcription factors that are 
not reinduced upon secondary challenge with LPS. Thus, the IRFs may represent yet
an additional molecular pathway in the complex response to LPS.

PMCID: PMC173039
PMID: 7822029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Biol Res. 1995;28(4):283-90.

Expression of interferons-alpha and -beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and
transcription factors, IRF-1 and IRF-2, in leukocytes induced during interferon
production.

Lopez-Ocejo O(1), Herrera A, Herrera L, De la Fuente J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Research, Havana, Cuba.

Analysis of gene expression in peripheral blood lymphocytes is of special
interest because it could reflect physiological conditions. We have examined the 
expression and compared the relative amounts of specific mRNAs for interferons
(IFN-alpha and IFN-beta), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interferon 
regulatory factors (IRF-1 and IRF-2) from interferon primed and Sendai virus
induced peripheral blood leukocytes. Results obtained showed that IRF-1 was
highly inducible by IFN treatment, IFN-alpha, TNF-alpha and IRF-2 were weakly
induced by IFN treatment, and IFN-beta was not inducible by priming the cells
with recombinant human IFN-alpha 2b. The IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, IRF-2 and TNF-alpha
transcripts increased upon viral infection. The IRF-1 mRNA was rapidly induced by
IFN treatment and decreased after Sendai virus infection. Our results show that, 
in peripheral blood lymphocytes, IFN-alpha and -beta genes have a different
response to IFN induction, thus suggesting different regulatory mechanisms for
IFN induction of type I IFN genes in peripheral blood lymphocytes.

PMID: 9251759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1995;121(9-10):516-20.

Regulation of the interferon system and cell growth by the IRF transcription
factors.

Taniguchi T(1), Harada H, Lamphier M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

Induction of gene transcription in response to extracellular stimuli constitutes 
an essential aspect of host defense mechanisms. Interferons (IFN) are families of
cytokines that have been discovered and extensively characterized in the context 
of host defense against viral infections. In elucidating the mechanism of
transcriptional induction of the IFN genes by viruses, we have discovered two
structurally related transcription factors, Interferon regulatory factor 1
(IRF-1) and IRF-2. These two factors, however, function not only as regulators of
the IFN system, but are also key transcription factors in the regulation of cell 
growth and apoptosis. Thus, these studies uncover a complex gene transcription
network in which the fate of cellular responses is determined by how the IRF
transcription factors function in conjunction with other factors on the promoters
of distinct genes under different conditions of the cells.

PMID: 7559730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Immunol. 1994 Nov 1;153(9):4122-33.

The role of NF-Y and IRF-2 in the regulation of human IL-4 gene expression.

Li-Weber M(1), Davydov IV, Krafft H, Krammer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.

Activity of the IL-4 promoter was shown to be regulated by multiple cis-acting
elements. In this study, two additional regulatory elements, a CCAAT element and 
a 15-nucleotide element homologous to the IFN- and virus-stimulation response
element (ISRE), were identified in the human promoter region at -195 to -172. The
ISRE-homologous sequence was shown to interact with two nuclear proteins, IRF-2, 
a transcriptional repressor of the IFN genes, and an NF-1-like factor. Mutations 
of the ISRE site increased overall IL-4 promoter activity twofold, suggesting a
possible negative role of IRF-2 in the regulation of IL-4 transcription. The
CCAAT element was found to interact with NF-Y, a nuclear factor essential for
expression of MHC class II genes. Mutations of the CCAAT element at -195 to -172 
resulted in a substantial decrease of IL-4 promoter activity. Furthermore, NF-Y
was also found to bind to the previously described NF-ATp binding site of the
IL-4 promoter (-79 to -62, originally described as "P element"), and the
previously described P-binding complex NF-P was shown to contain NF-Y. These
findings suggest that NF-Y may play an important role in the regulation of IL-4
gene expression.

PMID: 7930616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 28;269(43):27059-65.

A truncated form of the IRF-2 transcription factor has the properties of a
postinduction repressor of interferon-beta gene expression.

Whiteside ST(1), King P, Goodbourn S.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United
Kingdom.

The interferon-beta promoter binding protein, IRF-2, is proteolytically processed
during induction by double-stranded RNA to leave an N-terminal fragment that can 
still bind to DNA. An N-terminal fragment that corresponds to the
induction-specific product has a higher affinity for the promoter and is a more
potent repressor of interferon-beta transcription than the full-length precursor.
The kinetics of production of the cleavage product is slower than that of
activation of interferon-beta transcription. These results suggest that cleavage 
of IRF-2 functions to generate a postinduction repressor of interferon-beta
expression.

PMID: 7929448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 1;269(26):17542-9.

Mutational analysis of interferon (IFN) regulatory factors 1 and 2. Effects on
the induction of IFN-beta gene expression.

Lin R(1), Mustafa A, Nguyen H, Gewert D, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Abe Stern Cancer Research Laboratory, Lady Davis Institute for Medical
Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital Montreal, Quebec Canada.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 are structurally similar
but functionally distinct transcription factors that bind to the positive
regulatory domains I and III (PRDI/III) within the human IFN-beta promoter. To
begin structure-function analysis of IRF-1 and IRF-2, the regulatory potential of
carboxyl-terminal deletion mutants was analyzed by co-transfection studies in
human cells and was correlated with DNA binding capacity. Transcriptional
repression by IRF-2 was contained within the first 125 amino-terminal amino acids
and correlated directly with IRF-2 DNA binding; deletion to a protein of 100
amino acids resulted in loss of repression and IRF-2 DNA binding. Thus, the
carboxyl terminus appears dispensible for trans-repression. Hybrid constructs
which fuse the DNA binding domain of IRF-1 and IRF-2 to the trans-activation
domain of NF-kappa B p65 were also generated; both IRF-1/p65 and IRF-2/p65
chimeras were strong transcriptional activators. IRF-2-mediated repression was
also dominant over trans-activation by these fusion proteins. The
trans-activation region of IRF-1 resides in the carboxyl terminus, primarily
carboxyl-terminal to amino acid 250. Mutation of three potential casein kinase II
phosphorylation sites within the IRF carboxyl terminus failed to identify an
essential site that contributes to IRF-1 trans-activation potential.

PMID: 8021262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 24;91(11):5046-50.

Molecular interactions between interferon consensus sequence binding protein and 
members of the interferon regulatory factor family.

Bovolenta C(1), Driggers PH, Marks MS, Medin JA, Politis AD, Vogel SN, Levy DE,
Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Coligan JE, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Interferon (IFN) consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) is a transcription
factor expressed mostly in the cells of the immune system. ICSBP belongs to the
IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family, which also includes IRF-1, IRF-2, and the
IFN-alpha-stimulated gene factor 3 gamma (ISGF3 gamma). We show here that ICSBP
forms a complex with IRF-1 or IRF-2 both in vivo and in vitro and, in the
presence or absence of the target DNA, with the IFN-stimulated response element
(ISRE). Further, electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that this interaction
greatly enhances the otherwise very low binding affinity of ICSBP to the ISRE. We
show, on the other hand, that ICSBP inhibits binding of the IFN-alpha-stimulated 
gene factor 3 gamma to the ISRE. Through these interactions ICSBP is likely to
exert complex modulatory functions in the regulation of IFN-stimulated genes.

PMCID: PMC43928
PMID: 8197182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Oncogene. 1994 May;9(5):1423-8.

The oncogenic transcription factor IRF-2 possesses a transcriptional repression
and a latent activation domain.

Yamamoto H(1), Lamphier MS, Fujita T, Taniguchi T, Harada H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

IRF-1 and IRF-2 are two structurally related transcription factors originally
identified as regulators of the type I interferon (IFN) system. IRF-1 functions
as an activator whereas IRF-2 binds to the same cis-elements and can repress
IRF-1 action. More recently these two factors have been shown to act in a
mutually antagonistic manner to regulate cell growth; overexpression of the
repressor IRF-2 leads to cell transformation, whereas concomitant overexpression 
of IRF-1 leads to reversion. Previous studies have identified DNA-binding domains
in IRF-1 and IRF-2 and an activation domain in IRF-1. In the present study we
show that IRF-2 also possesses a transcriptional repression domain in its
carboxyl terminal region. We further observe that a LexA-IRF2 fusion can inhibit 
the function of an activator positioned nearby in the promoter. Thus, repression 
by IRF-2 may involve both competition with IRF-1 for binding to the promoter as
well as the 'silencing' of nearby activators. Furthermore, we demonstrate the
presence of a latent activation domain in the central region of IRF-2 and
speculate that IRF-2 may contribute to gene activation under certain conditions.

PMID: 8152803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. EMBO J. 1994 Apr 15;13(8):1942-9.

Induction by interleukin-6 of interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) gene
expression through the palindromic interferon response element pIRE and cell
type-dependent control of IRF-1 binding to DNA.

Harroch S(1), Revel M, Chebath J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

The effects of interleukin-6 (IL-6) on interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1)
gene expression were studied in B-hybridoma B9 cells which are growth-stimulated 
by IL-6 and breast carcinoma T47D cells which are growth-inhibited. IL-6 induced 
the production of IRF-1 mRNA and protein in both cell types, but IRF-1 binding
activity to its target DNA sequence was induced only in T47D cells. With B9
cells, there was no IRF-1 binding but instead strong constitutive binding of the 
IRF-2 repressor, indicating that binding of IRF-1 to DNA is an important
regulatory step. The IRF-1 gene promoter element, palindromic IFN-response
element (pIRE), was found to respond to IL-6 with high efficiency as compared
with IFN-gamma or IFN-beta. On this palindromic TTC...GAA sequence, two protein
complexes (pIRE-a and pIRE-b) were induced within minutes by IL-6. pIRE-b is
similar to the main complex induced by IFN-gamma and contains the Stat91 protein.
pIRE-a predominantly induced by IL-6 is a slowly migrating complex which does not
contain Stat91 and has low affinity for IFN-gamma activated sequence (GAS)-type
sequences. Comparison of the relative effects of IL-6 and IFN-gamma shows that
pIRE enhancers are differently regulated than GAS elements. Distinct
transcription complexes, forming in ratios dependent on the inducer, help explain
how various cytokines sharing effects through Stat91 on related enhancers can
produce specific patterns of gene expression. Activation of the pIRE-a factors
defines a novel transcriptional activity of IL-6 in epithelial and lymphoid
cells.

PMCID: PMC395035
PMID: 8168491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;8(4):456-68.

Multiple regulatory elements are required to direct trophoblast interferon gene
expression in choriocarcinoma cells and trophectoderm.

Leaman DW(1), Cross JC, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia 65211.

Interferon-tau (IFN tau) is produced exclusively by the trophectoderm during the 
peri-implantation stage of pregnancy in ruminant ungulate species. Human
choriocarcinoma cells (Jar) stably transfected with 1.8 kilobases of promoter
from a bovine IFN tau gene ahead of a human GH (hGH) reporter gene constitutively
synthesize hGH, but expression is not increased further by exposure to Newcastle 
disease virus. This and earlier experiments suggest that the transcriptional cues
regulating IFN tau expression are distinct from those operating on other type I
IFN genes. Transient transfection experiments reveal that two distinct promoter
regions are required for full constitutive expression: one proximal (to position 
-126), which directs basal expression, and a more distal promoter region
(positions -280 to -400), which acts as an enhancer. Nuclear extracts prepared
from ovine conceptuses during the period of IFN tau expression interact with the 
proximal promoter region (positions -34 to -126) to form several complexes of
high electrophoretic mobility. Although nucleotide sequence motifs potentially
capable of binding the transcription factor IRF-1 are present in this region,
IRF-1 does not transactivate the IFN tau gene. The distal part of the promoter
contains only one region (-322 to -358) that forms a complex with these conceptus
nuclear extracts. Both proximal and distal gel shift patterns become dramatically
different when IFN tau gene expression ceases, perhaps reflecting the appearance 
of transcriptional repressors. Together these experiments support the conclusion 
that the control of IFN tau gene expression is very different from that of other 
type I IFN genes and that trophoblast-specific expression depends upon distal as 
well as proximal promoter regulatory elements.

PMID: 8052267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 18;269(7):5279-87.

Human interferon regulatory factor 2 gene. Intron-exon organization and
functional analysis of 5'-flanking region.

Cha Y(1), Deisseroth AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030.

Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2) is a transcriptional regulatory protein
that terminates interferon beta expression initiated by interferon regulatory
factor 1. In this study, we isolated the genomic DNA for human IRF-2 gene,
determined the intron-exon structure of the human IRF-2 gene, mapped the major
transcription initiation site, identified a number of potential regulatory
elements in the 5'-flanking region, and localized the IRF-2 gene on human
chromosome 4. The IRF-2 promoter region contains a CpG island, with several GC
boxes, a putative NF-kappa B-binding site, and a CAAT box, but no TATA box. When 
the promoter region was linked with a heterologous reporter gene, we found that
the promoter region is inducible by both interferons (interferon-alpha and
-gamma) and interferon regulatory factor 1. The region which induced these
inductions was identified as being confined to 40 nucleotides 5' to the major
transcriptional initiation site by testing a series of clones with truncated
promoter of IRF-2. This region contains elements which are shared with the
transcriptional enhancers of other genes including interferon regulatory factor
1, interferon beta, and interferon-inducible genes. These data suggest that
interferon regulatory factor 1 not only triggers the activation of the interferon
signal transduction pathway, but also may play a role in limiting the duration of
this response by activating the transcription of IRF-2.

PMID: 8106512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1500-9.

Structure and regulation of the human interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and 
IRF-2 genes: implications for a gene network in the interferon system.

Harada H(1), Takahashi E, Itoh S, Harada K, Hori TA, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 are structurally similar
DNA-binding factors which were originally identified as regulators of the type I 
interferon (IFN) system; the former functions as a transcriptional activator, and
the latter represses IRF-1 function by competing for the same cis elements. More 
recent studies have revealed new roles of the two factors in the regulation of
cell growth; IRF-1 and IRF-2 manifest antioncogenic and oncogenic activities,
respectively. In this study, we determined the structures and chromosomal
locations of the human IRF-1 and IRF-2 genes and further characterized the
promoters of the respective genes. Comparison of exon-intron organization of the 
two genes revealed a common evolutionary structure, notably within the exons
encoding the N-terminal portions of the two factors. We confirmed the chromosomal
mapping of the human IRF-1 gene to 5q31.1 and newly assigned the IRF-2 gene to
4q35.1, using fluorescence in situ hybridization. The 5' regulatory regions of
both genes contain highly GC-rich sequences and consensus binding sequences for
several known transcription factors, including NF-kappa B. Interestingly, one IRF
binding site was found within the IRF-2 promoter, and expression of the IRF-2
gene was affected by both transient and stable IRF-1 expression. In addition, one
potential IFN-gamma-activated sequence was found within the IRF-1 promoter. Thus,
these results may shed light on the complex gene network involved in regulation
of the IFN system.

PMCID: PMC358505
PMID: 7507207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Immunogenetics. 1994;39(3):168-77.

Characterization of a novel IRF-1-deficient mutant cell line.

Lim SP(1), Hui KM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National University of Singapore.

The transcriptional activation of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
class I genes by both type I (alpha/beta) and II (gamma) interferons (IFNs) has
been extensively studied, and it has been shown that the upregulation of several 
DNA-binding proteins is critical for this process. In our laboratory, we
introduced the mouse H-2Kb gene into the AKR mouse leukaemia cell line K36.16 to 
effect the generation of tumor-specific immunity. Individual clones were selected
and studied. Whereas the MHC class I genes in most of the clones obtained could
be stimulated by interferons, one of the clones obtained, clone Kb-S27, failed to
be induced, or was at best poorly induced by IFN-alpha/beta and -gamma. Both the 
exogenous H-2Kb and the endogenous H-2Dk genes behaved in the same manner and
were not stimulated by IFNs. The lack of response to IFNs by clone Kb-S27 also
resulted in its resistance to the antiproliferative effects of IFNs. This lack of
IFN-induction by clone Kb-S27 was not simply due to a change in its surface
interferon receptors. Gel-retardation assay and northern blot analysis both
demonstrated the lack of induction of the IRF-1 DNA-binding factor in clone
Kb-S27. In addition, northern blot analysis showed that the IRF-2 gene expression
in clone Kb-S27 was upregulated when compared with the other IFN-inducible
clones.

PMID: 7506233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 15;90(24):11568-72.

Transcriptional regulation of HLA-A and -B: differential binding of members of
the Rel and IRF families of transcription factors.

Girdlestone J(1), Isamat M, Gewert D, Milstein C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Medical Research
Council Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

HLA-A and -B transplantation antigens can be expressed differentially at the
basal level and in response to interferons (IFNs). To determine which DNA control
elements and nuclear factors are responsible for these differences, HLA-A and -B 
upstream regulatory regions were used in expression and mobility-shift analyses. 
The HLA-A enhancer was found to contain two Rel (KBF/NF-kappa B) binding motifs, 
while the HLA-B enhancer has only one and is transactivated less well by
overexpression of the NF-kappa B p65 subunit. On the other hand, the HLA-B IFN
response element mediates a much stronger induction by IFNs and has a higher
affinity for IRF-1 and -2, which are transcription factors implicated in the
regulation of major histocompatibility complex class I genes. These results
suggest a molecular basis for the way in which HLA-A and -B loci have adapted to 
be differentially expressed and to respond to different sets of cytokine signals.

PMCID: PMC48025
PMID: 8265591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cell. 1993 Oct 8;75(1):83-97.

Targeted disruption of IRF-1 or IRF-2 results in abnormal type I IFN gene
induction and aberrant lymphocyte development.

Matsuyama T(1), Kimura T, Kitagawa M, Pfeffer K, Kawakami T, Watanabe N, Kündig
TM, Amakawa R, Kishihara K, Wakeham A, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen Institute, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1), a transcriptional activator, and its
antagonistic repressor, IRF-2, were originally identified as regulators of the
type I interferon (IFN) system. We have generated mice deficient in either IRF-1 
or IRF-2 by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells. IRF-1-deficient fibroblasts
lacked the normally observed type I IFN induction by poly(I):poly(C), while they 
induced type I IFN to similar levels as the wild type following Newcastle disease
virus (NDV) infection. In contrast, IRF-2-deficient fibroblasts showed
up-regulated type I IFN induction by NDV infection. A profound reduction of TCR
alpha beta+CD4-CD8+ T cells in IRF-1-deficient mice, with a thymocyte
developmental defect, reveals a critical role for IRF-1 in T cell development.
IRF-2-deficient mice exhibited bone marrow suppression of hematopoiesis and B
lymphopoiesis and mortality following lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
infection.

PMID: 8402903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4531-8.

Recognition DNA sequences of interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2,
regulators of cell growth and the interferon system.

Tanaka N(1), Kawakami T, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2 were originally identified
as transcription factors involved in the regulation of the IFN system. IRF-1
functions as a transcriptional activator, while IRF-2 represses IRF-1 function.
More recently, evidence has been provided that IRF-1 and IRF-2 manifest
antioncogenic and oncogenic properties, respectively, and that loss of one or
both of the IRF-1 alleles may be critical for the development of human
hematopoietic neoplasms. Both factors show a high degree of structural similarity
in their N-terminal DNA-binding domains, and previous studies suggested that
IRF-1 and IRF-2 bind to similar or identical cis elements within type I IFN
(IFN-alpha and -beta) and IFN-inducible genes. However, the exact recognition
sequences of these two factors have not yet been determined; hence, the spectrum 
of the IRF-responsive genes remains unclear. In this study, we determined the DNA
sequences recognized by IRF-1 and IRF-2, using a polymerase chain
reaction-assisted DNA-binding site selection method. We report that sequences
selected by this method and the affinities for each sequence were virtually
indistinguishable between IRF-1 and IRF-2. We confirm the presence of two
contiguous IRF recognition sequences within the promoter region of the IFN-beta
gene and of at least one such sequence in all of the IFN-inducible genes
examined. Furthermore, we report the presence of potential IRF sequences in the
upstream region of several genes involved in cell growth control.

PMCID: PMC360068
PMID: 7687740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Jun 15;214(3):617-26.

The interferon-stimulable response elements of two human genes detect overlapping
sets of transcription factors.

Parrington J(1), Rogers NC, Gewert DR, Pine R, Veals SA, Levy DE, Stark GR, Kerr 
IM.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratories, London, England.

We have previously reported three types of DNA-protein complexes, formed
specifically with the interferon-stimulable response elements (ISRE) in the 5'
flanking DNA of the interferon-inducible 6-16 and 9-27 genes, a type-I
interferon-inducible early complex involving factor E (ISGF3), M and G complexes 
induced more slowly in response to type-I and type-II interferons, respectively
and C1/C2, a constitutive complex(s). Similar complexes have been reported by
others. The operationally defined band-shift complexes M, G and C1/C2 are shown
here to be heterogeneous and to differ in their factor content, depending on the 
ISRE probe. With a 9-27 ISRE probe the M, G and C1/C2 complexes all contain the
gamma subunit of ISGF3, which is present constitutively but is induced in
response to IFN-alpha (to yield M) or IFN-gamma (to yield G). In contrast, a 6-16
ISRE probe forms band-shift complexes with IFN-alpha-inducible and
IFN-gamma-inducible IRF1 and IRF2. With a 6-16 ISRE probe, therefore, M and G
each correspond to two complexes which co-migrate in band-shift assays, one
corresponding to IRF1, the other to IRF2. With this probe, the constitutive
complex C1/C2 corresponds predominantly to IRF2. Consistent with this, IRF1 and
IRF2 have lower affinity for the 9-27 ISRE than the 6-16 ISRE, whereas the
reverse is true for E (ISGF3) and its gamma subunit. Relatively small differences
in affinity appear sufficient to determine whether or not a band-shift complex is
detected. In the case of IRF1 and IRF2, the different affinities for the 6-16 and
9-27 probes are dominated by a dinucleotide sequence in the centre of the
14-nucleotide 'core' ISRE. In contrast, preferential binding of E (ISGF3) by the 
39-nucleotide 9-27 ISRE-containing sequence, although ISRE dependent, appears to 
be mediated by sequences 3' of the 'core' ISRE. Accordingly, these complexes can 
be simultaneously assayed using a hybrid probe consisting of the 5' flanking
region and 'core' ISRE sequences from the 6-16 gene and sequences immediately 3' 
of the 'core' 9-27 ISRE sequence. No evidence was obtained for a modulatory role 
in factor binding for a pseudo-ISRE sequence close to ISRE in the 9-27 gene. The 
precise roles of IRF1 and IRF2 in the induction of IFN-beta and the control of
interferon-inducible gene expression remain to be established.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7686487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 1993 Apr 25;268(12):9092-7.

Interleukin-6 activates and regulates transcription factors of the interferon
regulatory factor family in M1 cells.

Harroch S(1), Gothelf Y, Watanabe N, Revel M, Chebath J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

Activation of (2'-5') A synthetase gene expression in interleukin-6
(IL-6)-treated myeloleukemic M1 cells correlates with protein binding to the
interferon response sequence enhancer (IRS). A new interferon response sequence
complex, F6, is induced by IL-6 independently of interferon and is identified
here as comprising the interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) and IRF-2, by use
of specific antibodies in DNA mobility shift assays with probes containing IRF
binding sites. IRF-1 and IRF-2 have, respectively, positive and negative
transcriptional effects on interferon-beta and interferon-inducible genes. In the
IL-6-treated M1or cells, IRF-1 binding is activated early and maximally at 1 h,
whereas the onset of IRF-2 binding is delayed. In a cell variant M1res, where
(2'-5') A synthetase is no more induced, IRF-2 binding is constitutive, and IRF-1
binding is not seen before or after IL-6 treatment. In sensitive M1or cells, IL-6
rapidly induces IRF-1 mRNA, but in M1res cells, IRF-1 mRNA is constitutively high
and not changed by IL-6. IRF-2 mRNA levels are also constitutive and not
inducible by IL-6 even in M1or cells. The dissociation between induction of mRNAs
and of protein binding observed suggests that the activity of the IRF proteins is
regulated by IL-6. Transcripts of a third member of the IRF gene family, ICSBP,
encoding a protein known to act as repressor, were found to be strongly
down-regulated by IL-6. The rapid activation of IRF-1 and the modulation of the
other transcription factors of this family may play a role in the early phase of 
IL-6 action on the M1 cells.

PMID: 8473349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Science. 1993 Feb 12;259(5097):971-4.

Anti-oncogenic and oncogenic potentials of interferon regulatory factors-1 and
-2.

Harada H(1), Kitagawa M, Tanaka N, Yamamoto H, Harada K, Ishihara M, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), a transcriptional activator, and IRF-2,
its antagonistic repressor, have been identified as regulators of type I
interferon and interferon-inducible genes. The IRF-1 gene is itself
interferon-inducible and hence may be one of the target genes critical for
interferon action. When the IRF-2 gene was overexpressed in NIH 3T3 cells, the
cells became transformed and displayed enhanced tumorigenicity in nude mice. This
transformed phenotype was reversed by concomitant overexpression of the IRF-1
gene. Thus, restrained cell growth depends on a balance between these two
mutually antagonistic transcription factors.

PMID: 8438157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Protein Eng. 1993 Feb;6(2):195-200.

Characterization of the DNA binding domain of the mouse IRF-2 protein.

Uegaki K(1), Shirakawa M, Fujita T, Taniguchi T, Kyogoku Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Japan.

The DNA binding domain of the interferon regulatory factor-2 protein (IRF-2) has 
been produced and characterized. alpha-chymotrypsin digestion of the purified
IRF-2 protein bound to a synthetic binding site yields a peptide fragment of 14 K
in molecular weight. N-terminal analysis of this peptide fragment showed that its
sequence is the same as that of the intact IRF-2. A peptide fragment of
approximately 14 K, IRF-2(113), which corresponds to the N-terminal 113 amino
acids of the intact IRF-2 protein, has been expressed in a functional form in
Escherichia coli. The first methionine was processed during the expression and
the purified IRF-2(113) thus contains 112 amino acids. DNase I footprinting and
gel retardation assaying showed that IRF-2(113) binds to a synthetic DNA having
the consensus binding site and to the upstream regulatory sequence of the
IFN-beta gene as intact IRF-2 does. These results showed that this peptide
fragment, IRF-2(113), may be a good material for investigation of the DNA binding
domain of IRF-2 and of the DNA-protein interaction.

PMID: 8475044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):588-99.

Interferon consensus sequence-binding protein, a member of the interferon
regulatory factor family, suppresses interferon-induced gene transcription.

Nelson N(1), Marks MS, Driggers PH, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We previously isolated a cDNA clone encoding interferon consensus
sequence-binding protein (ICSBP), a member of the interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) family, that binds to the interferon (IFN)-stimulated response element
(ISRE) of many IFN-regulated genes. In this investigation, we studied the
functional role of ICSBP by transient cotransfection of ICSBP cDNA with
IFN-responsive reporter genes into the human embryonal carcinoma cell line
N-Tera2. These cells were shown not to express ICSBP or IRF-2, thus allowing
functional analysis of transfected cDNAs. Cotransfection of ICSBP into cells
treated with retinoic acid or any of the IFNs (alpha, beta, or gamma) repressed
expression of a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter driven by the major
histocompatibility complex class I gene promoter. Similarly, ICSBP repressed
expression of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporters driven by the ISREs of 
the 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase, guanylate-binding protein, and ISG-15 genes 
in IFN-treated cells. The repression was dependent on the presence of the ISRE in
the reporter. Deletion analysis showed that the putative N-terminal DNA binding
domain of ICSBP by itself is capable of mediating the repression. Using the same 
cotransfection conditions as for ICSBP, a similar repression of these reporters
was observed with IRF-2. Finally, ICSBP repressed the IRF-1-mediated induction of
major histocompatibility complex class I and IFN-beta reporters in the absence of
IFN or retinoic acid. Taken together, these results suggest that ICSBP is a
negative regulatory factor capable of repressing transcription of target genes
induced by IFN, retinoic acid, or IRF-1.

PMCID: PMC358938
PMID: 7678054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Interferon Res. 1992 Dec;12(6):445-8.

Double-stranded RNA and interferon-alpha induce transcription through different
molecular mechanisms.

Decker T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Molecular Biology, Hannover, Germany.

Double-stranded (ds) RNA stimulates the synthesis of several mRNAs known to be
induced by type I interferons (IFNs). In this report, it is shown that the
IFN-alpha stimulated genes (ISGs) 15, 54, 56, and GBP are transcriptionally
induced by dsRNA. Transcriptional stimulation occurred in the presence of the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX), indicating that inducibility was
directly mediated by dsRNA through the action of preformed proteins. ISGF-3, the 
protein complex mediating primary transcriptional induction of ISGs by IFN-alpha,
was not activated by dsRNA in the presence of CHX. Additionally, DNA-binding
activity of ISGF-2/IRF-1, a protein involved in the regulation of the IFN-beta
gene and ISGs, did not correlate with dsRNA-induced transcriptional induction of 
ISGs. This suggests that dsRNA and IFN-alpha induce ISGs through different
molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 1289412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Interferon Res. 1992 Dec;12(6):425-30.

Identification of a new interferon-alpha/beta-inducible DNA-binding protein that 
interacts with the regulatory element A of 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase ME-12 
gene.

Yan C(1), Tamm I.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

A new interferon (IFN)-stimulated response factor (ISRF) has been identified in
nuclear extracts of IFN-alpha/beta-treated murine BALB/c-3T3 fibroblasts by the
mobility-shift electrophoresis assay. The factor, ISRF-2, displays murine
2',5'-oligoadenylate (2-5A) synthetase ME-12 gene 5' regulatory element A
specificity and differs from the previously described IFN response element
B-specific factor ISRF-1 in several aspects. ISRF-2 is restricted to the nucleus,
whereas ISRF-1 exists in the cytoplasm and translocates into the nucleus upon
treatment of cells with IFN-alpha/beta. The ionic strength requirement of ISRF-2 
for maximal DNA-binding activity is lower than that of ISRF-1. The DNA-binding
activity of ISRF-2, but not that of ISRF-1, is markedly suppressed by Mg2+. In
common with ISRF-1, the phosphorylated form of ISRF-2 appears to be required for 
DNA-binding activity. A model is proposed for the mechanism whereby murine
IFN-alpha/beta regulates 2-5A synthetase ME-12 gene expression.

PMID: 1289410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Aug;12(8):3325-36.

Inducible processing of interferon regulatory factor-2.

Palombella VJ(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138.

PRDI-BFc and PRDI-BFi are proteins that bind specifically to a regulatory element
required for virus induction of the human beta interferon (IFN-beta). PRDI-BFc is
a constitutive binding activity, while the PRDI-BFi binding activity is observed 
only after cells are treated with inducers such as virus or poly(I).poly(C) plus 
cycloheximide or in some cells by cycloheximide alone. In this paper we report
that PRDI-BFc is interferon regulatory factor-2 (IRF-2), a known transcriptional 
repressor. In addition, we find that PRDI-BFi is a truncated form of IRF-2,
lacking approximately 185 C-terminal amino acids. Thus, PRDI-BFi appears to be
generated by inducible proteolysis. Although the affinity of PRDI-BFc/IRF-2 for
the IFN-beta promoter does not appear to be affected by the removal of C-terminal
amino acids, the ability of PRDI-BFi to function as a repressor in cotransfection
experiments is significantly less than that of intact IRF-2. Studies have shown
that IRF-2 can block the activity of the transcriptional activator IRF-1, which
also binds specifically to the IFN-beta gene promoter. Thus, the inducible
proteolysis of IRF-2 may be involved in the regulation of the IFN-beta gene or of
other genes in which the ratio of IRF-1 to IRF-2 can affect the level of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC364579
PMID: 1630448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nihon Rinsho. 1992 Aug;50(8):1845-53.

[Function, molecular structure and gene expression of interferons].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida I(1), Azuma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Asahikawa Medical College.

Interferon is a key substance of the cytokine network, and is functioning not
only as the virus inhibitory factor, but also as the factor for differentiation, 
development, and homeostasis of animals, including man. The molecular structure, 
induction mechanisms, interaction with receptor, and antiviral action mechanisms 
of IFN were reviewed. 1. Molecular structure of IFN IFNs are now divided into 4
types--alpha, beta, gamma, omega--according to antigenicities of IFN proteins,
and to base sequence of their genes. The omega type was established officially on
1990 by the Nomenclature Committee of International Society for Interferon
Research (ISIR). Also, the genes for HuIFNs were named as follows; HuIFN-A for
HuIFN-alpha, HuIFN-B for HuIFN-beta, HuIFN-G for HuIFN-gamma, and HuIFN-W for
HuIFN-omega. Nevertheless, the names of Type I IFN and Type II IFN are still
valuable, since members of Type I IFN, alpha, beta, and omega, are similar in
their molecular structures, and they share the common receptor (Type I IFN
receptor), on the other hand, HuIFN-gamma (the only one member of Type II IFN)
has different characteristics from the other IFNs, and binds to its specific
receptor (Type II IFN receptor). However, it has been reported that both
N-terminal and C-terminal of IFN protein of all types, participate in the binding
of IFN to its receptor. 2. Induction mechanism of IFN. The factors, IRF-1 and
IRF-2, were found to play an important role in IFN induction.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED 
AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1279237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Jul;12(7):3273-87.

Overlapping and CpG methylation-sensitive protein-DNA interactions at the histone
H4 transcriptional cell cycle domain: distinctions between two human H4 gene
promoters.

van Wijnen AJ(1), van den Ent FM, Lian JB, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655.

Transcriptional regulation of vertebrate histone genes during the cell cycle is
mediated by several factors interacting with a series of cis-acting elements
located in the 5' regions of these genes. The arrangement of these promoter
elements is different for each gene. However, most histone H4 gene promoters
contain a highly conserved sequence immediately upstream of the TATA box (H4
subtype consensus sequence), and this region in the human H4 gene FO108 is
involved in cell cycle control. The sequence-specific interaction of nuclear
factor HiNF-D with this key proximal promoter element of the H4-FO108 gene is
cell cycle regulated in normal diploid cells (J. Holthuis, T.A. Owen, A.J. van
Wijnen, K.L. Wright, A. Ramsey-Ewing, M.B. Kennedy, R. Carter, S.C. Cosenza, K.J.
Soprano, J.B. Lian, J.L. Stein, and G.S. Stein, Science, 247:1454-1457, 1990).
Here, we show that this region of the H4-FO108 gene represents a composite
protein-DNA interaction domain for several distinct sequence-specific DNA-binding
activities, including HiNF-D, HiNF-M, and HiNF-P. Factor HiNF-P is similar to
H4TF-2, a DNA-binding activity that is not cell cycle regulated and that
interacts with the analogous region of the H4 gene H4.A (F. LaBella and N.
Heintz, Mol. Cell. Biol. 11:5825-5831, 1991). The H4.A gene fails to interact
with factors HiNF-M and HiNF-D owing to two independent sets of specific
nucleotide variants, indicating differences in protein-DNA interactions between
these H4 genes. Cytosine methylation of a highly conserved CpG dinucleotide
interferes with binding of HiNF-P/H4TF-2 to both the H4-FO108 and H4.A promoters,
but no effect is observed for either HiNF-M or HiNF-D binding to the H4-FO108
gene. Thus, strong evolutionary conservation of the H4 consensus sequence may be 
related to combinatorial interactions involving overlapping and interdigitated
recognition nucleotides for several proteins, whose activities are regulated
independently. Our results also suggest molecular complexity in the
transcriptional regulation of distinct human H4 genes.

PMCID: PMC364541
PMID: 1620129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Apr 11;20(7):1531-8.

Identification of novel factors that bind to the PRD I region of the human
beta-interferon promoter.

Whiteside ST(1), Visvanathan KV, Goodbourn S.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Treatment of cells with virus or synthetic double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) leads to
the transient transcriptional activation of the beta-interferon gene. Genetic
analysis has revealed that the 5' regulatory sequence responsible for this
induction contains multiple positive and negative elements. One of these,
Positive Regulatory Domain I (PRD I), has been shown to bind the
positively-acting transcription factor IRF-1. In this study we show that this
element is inducible under conditions where IRF-1 cannot be detected, suggesting 
that additional cellular factors are involved in the induction process. To
investigate the existence of such factors we have analysed the range and
properties of PRD I-binding activities present in HeLa cells. In addition to the 
repressor protein IRF-2, several novel factors can bind to PRD I in uninduced
cells: two of these have properties consistent with a role in negative
regulation; levels of two others increase upon priming, and may be alternative
candidates for activators. Upon induction we also observe a novel factor whose
appearance does not depend upon de novo protein synthesis, and which appears to
be a truncated form of IRF-2. The potential involvement of these factors in
regulating the beta-interferon gene is discussed.

PMCID: PMC312234
PMID: 1579446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 25;19(16):4421-8.

Activation of IFN-beta element by IRF-1 requires a posttranslational event in
addition to IRF-1 synthesis.

Watanabe N(1), Sakakibara J, Hovanessian AG, Taniguchi T, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Expression of the Type I IFN (i.e., IFN-alpha s and IFN-beta) genes is
efficiently induced by viruses at the transcriptional level. This induction is
mediated by at least two types of positive regulatory elements located in the
human IFN-beta gene promoter: (1) the repeated elements which bind both the
transcriptional activator IRF-1 and the repressor IRF-2 (IRF-elements; IRF-Es),
and (2) the kappa B element (kappa B-E), which binds NF kappa B and is located
between the IRF-Es and the TATA box. In this study we demonstrate that a promoter
containing synthetic IRF-E, which displays high affinity for the IRFs can be
efficiently activated by Newcastle disease virus (NDV). In contrast, such
activation was either very weak or nil when cells were treated by IFN-beta or
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), despite the fact they both efficiently
induce de novo synthesis of the short-lived IRF-1 in L929 cells. In fact,
efficient activation of the IRF-E apparently requires an event in addition to de 
novo IRF-1 induction, which can be elicited by NDV even in the presence of
protein synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide. Moreover, efficient activation of the
IRF-E by NDV is specifically inhibited by the protein kinase inhibitor,
Staurosporin. Hence our results suggest the importance of IRF-1 synthesis and
post-translational modification event(s), possibly phosphorylation for the
efficient activation of IRF-Es, which are otherwise under negative regulation by 
IRF-2.

PMCID: PMC328629
PMID: 1886766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1991 Jun;3(3):467-73.

Signal transduction and gene control.

Karin M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla 92093.

Extracellular signals regulate gene expression by triggering signal transduction 
cascades that result in the modulation of transcription factor activity. This is 
most commonly achieved by changes in the phosphorylation state of these nuclear
proteins. Phosphorylation affects transcription factor activity at several
distinct levels. It can modulate their intracellular localization by controlling 
the association with other proteins, have both negative and positive effects on
their DNA-binding activity, and modulate the activity of their transcriptional
activation domains. In addition to phosphorylation, protein-protein interactions 
also have an important role in mediating a crosstalk at the nuclear level between
different signalling pathways.

PMID: 1832548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Rinsho Ketsueki. 1991 Apr;32(4):301-6.

[Cellular responses by cytokines--gene regulation in the IFN system].

[Article in Japanese]

Taniguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University.

Interferon (IFNs), as a class of antiviral cytokines, are also known as "negative
growth regulators," they inhibit the growth of a variety of normal and malignant 
cells. Normally, Type I IFNs (i.e. IFN-alpha, -beta) are not induced, but viruses
and a number of other cytokines transiently activate the IFN genes. In order to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of cellular responses by viruses and
cytokines, we have identified two nuclear factors, IRF-1 and IRF-2, both bind to 
the regulatory cis-elements of IFN and IFN-responsive genes. The genes encoding
IRF-1 and IRF-2, have been cloned and extensively characterized. The IRF cDNA
expression studies in factor-negative cells have revealed IRF-1 and IRF-2 to
function as transcriptional activator and repressor, respectively. In normal
cells, the IRF genes are subject to induction through stimuli such as viruses and
cytokines including IFNs per se. The findings provide evidence for the presence
of an elaborate network of cytokines system wherein the IRFs play a crucial role 
for the cytokine-mediated cellular responses.

PMID: 1712401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Cell. 1990 Oct 19;63(2):303-12.

Absence of the type I IFN system in EC cells: transcriptional activator (IRF-1)
and repressor (IRF-2) genes are developmentally regulated.

Harada H(1), Willison K, Sakakibara J, Miyamoto M, Fujita T, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Interferons (IFNs) are a heterogeneous family of cytokines that exhibits multiple
biological activities. Upon viral infection, expression of type I IFNs (i.e.,
IFN-alpha and IFN-beta) is induced in a variety of differentiated cells but not
in cells of embryonal origin. IRF-1 and IRF-2, which bind to the same
cis-elements within the promoters of type I IFN and IFN-inducible MHC class I
genes, were identified previously. Here we demonstrate that the expression of
both IRF and IFN genes is developmentally regulated in mouse EC cells; these
genes become functional only after cell differentiation. Furthermore,
cDNA-directed IRF-1 produced in undifferentiated but not differentiated EC cells 
efficiently activates the transfected IFN-alpha and IFN-beta and endogenous
IFN-alpha genes, whereas IRF-2 represses the IRF-1 effects. These findings
emphasize the dual function of the IRF-responsive cis-elements as positive and
negative regulators, since they can be occupied by transcriptionally active or
inactive IRF molecules. This type of regulatory mechanism might operate in other 
cytokine systems.

PMID: 2208287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nucleic Acids Res. 1989 Oct 25;17(20):8372.

Sequence of a cDNA coding for human IRF-2.

Itoh S(1), Harada H, Fujita T, Mimura T, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

PMCID: PMC334978
PMID: 2813069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cell. 1989 Aug 25;58(4):729-39.

Structurally similar but functionally distinct factors, IRF-1 and IRF-2, bind to 
the same regulatory elements of IFN and IFN-inducible genes.

Harada H(1), Fujita T, Miyamoto M, Kimura Y, Maruyama M, Furia A, Miyata T,
Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Viral infections commonly induce expression of type I interferon (IFN) genes. The
induction is transient and involves transcriptional activation wherein a positive
factor, IRF-1, binds to upstream regulatory cis elements. In the present study we
report the isolation of a cDNA encoding a novel factor, termed IRF-2, that
interacts with the same nucleotide sequence elements as IRF-1. Both genes are
inducible not only by virus but also by IFN. Unlike IRF-1, IRF-2 does not
function as an activator; rather, it suppresses the function of IRF-1 under
certain circumstances. Our results suggest that transcription of the IFN and
IFN-inducible genes is regulated by two similar trans-acting factors that
apparently compete for the same cis-acting recognition sequences, but which have 
opposite effects.

PMID: 2475256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


